

----- Page 1 (native) -----
THEORETICAL REVIEW
Optimizing performance through intrinsic motivation
and attention for learning: The OPTIMAL theory
of motor learning
Gabriele Wulf1 & Rebecca Lewthwaite2,3
Published online: 29 January 2016
# Psychonomic Society, Inc. 2016
Abstract Effective motor performance is important for sur-
viving and thriving, and skilled movement is critical in many
activities. Much theorizing over the past few decades has fo-
cused on how certain practice conditions affect the processing
of task-related information to affect learning. Yet, existing
theoretical perspectives do not accommodate significant re-
cent lines of evidence demonstrating motivational and atten-
tional effects on performance and learning. These include re-
search on (a) conditions that enhance expectancies for future
performance, (b) variables that influence learners’ autonomy,
and (c) an external focus of attention on the intended move-
ment effect. We propose the OPTIMAL (Optimizing
Performance through Intrinsic Motivation and Attention for
Learning) theory of motor learning. We suggest that motiva-
tional and attentional factors contribute to performance and
learning by strengthening the coupling of goals to actions.
We provide explanations for the performance and learning
advantages of these variables on psychological and neurosci-
entific grounds. We describe a plausible mechanism for ex-
pectancy effects rooted in responses of dopamine to the antic-
ipation of positive experience and temporally associated with
skill practice. Learner autonomy acts perhaps largely through
an enhanced expectancy pathway. Furthermore, we consider
the influence of an external focus for the establishment of
efficient functional connections across brain networks that
subserve skilled movement. We speculate that enhanced ex-
pectancies and an external focus propel performers’ cognitive
and motor systems in productive “forward” directions and
prevent “backsliding” into self- and non-task focused states.
Expected success presumably breeds further success and helps
consolidate memories. We discuss practical implications and
future research directions.
Keywords Motivation . Attentional focus . Self-efficacy .
Positive affect . Dopamine . Motor performance
Skilled movement is fundamental to surviving and thriving in
the world and the basis as well for many of the highest human
endeavors and cultural achievements, from sport to art to music.
How people learn and relearn movement skills has been ad-
dressed from a number of disparate scientific perspectives and
levels of analysis, including behavioral, social cognitive, neuro-
physiological, and neurocomputational. In part, differences in
assumptions, scientific terminology and philosophy, as well as
methodological approaches have made scholarly
rapprochement challenging, but we see the end goal of optimiz-
ing motor learning as important. We suggest that it may be
valuable to bring recent insights from various approaches to-
gether to identify a coherent way forward that can result in
optimized learning from humans’ earliest encounters with new
motor skills to the lifelong development of motoric expertise.
It is typically considered time to look afresh at dominant
theories in a field when the accumulating evidence suggests
that old frameworks cannot account for substantial new in-
sights and data. We contend that such a circumstance exists
with respect to the state of motor learning theory. With respect
to the need to refresh and align perspectives on motor learning
Gabriele Wulf and Rebecca Lewthwaite contributed equally to this work.
* Gabriele Wulf
gabriele.wulf@unlv.edu
1
Department of Kinesiology and Nutrition Sciences, University of
Nevada, Las Vegas, NV 89154-3034, USA
2
Rancho Los Amigos National Rehabilitation Center, Downey, CA,
USA
3
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414
DOI 10.3758/s13423-015-0999-9

----- Page 2 (native) -----
theories, we posit that a substantial body of knowledge has
accumulated with respect to behavioral evidence on intrinsic
forms of motivational influences as well as the focus of
movers’ attention and its effects on motor performance and
learning. None of these literatures has a home within prevail-
ing theoretical approaches, yet they have had substantial play
within the empirical realm. Where and how might they (and
other related research) fit our conceptions of important influ-
ences on human motor performance and learning?
Furthermore, there have been continuing advances beyond
origins in animal models in neuroscience, including content
related to human social, cognitive, affective, and motor neu-
roscience. These advances include insights into brain structure
and function, network connectivity, neuromodulators of brain
activity, mechanisms of neuroplasticity, and in methodology
(Braver, Krug, Chiew, Kool, Westbrook, Clement et al.,
2014). Moreover, beyond its connections to neuroscience,
psychological science (and sport psychology) provide impor-
tant experimental, observational, and qualitative perspectives
on especially longer-term influences on skilled motor behav-
ior that should inform theories that purport to explain real-
world and sustainable motor learning. With such an expansion
of available insights, we think it is time to begin to explore a
richer blend of findings from these different scholarly tradi-
tions to contribute to our ability to influence movement learn-
ing in the many domains of human endeavor where it is cru-
cial or desirable. The collective lines of behavioral research
can provide perspectives on influences and mechanisms of
human motor performance and learning beyond what can eas-
ily be accomplished in a neuroimaging scanner, heightening
insights into the ecological validity of that work. Furthermore,
the breadth of experimental manipulations regarding positive
motivational influences on learning may suggest ways to ex-
pand upon the heavy use of extrinsic rewards in studying
neural systems with roles in learning. That being said, we note
that our anchoring perspective is in human motor behavior per
se, as it can be studied experimentally with classical phases of
skill acquisition and learning in the forms of retention and
transfer tests for motor skill.
Need for a new perspective
While the popularity of various factors or practice conditions
that affect motor learning (e.g., variable versus constant prac-
tice, random versus blocked practice, augmented feedback,
movement observation, self-controlled practice) has changed
over the years, what has been fairly consistent across different
lines of research is the interpretation of how these factors
affect learning. Stemming from earlier models of humans as
computer-like processors of information (Broadbent, 1958;
Sternberg, 1969), factors influencing motor learning have
been viewed almost invariably from a motivationally neutral
information-processing perspective. The view that motor
learning is enhanced by practice conditions that make infor-
mation processing more difficult and effortful has dominated
the discourse in the motor learning literature (Guadagnoli &
Lee, 2004; Lee, Swinnen, & Serrien, 1994; Schmidt & Bjork,
1992). While the task-related informational functions of aug-
mented feedback, model presentations, or variable or random
practice, etc. are likely important, it has become clear that
motivational (e.g., social-cognitive, affective) factors associ-
ated with various practice conditions have an important influ-
ence on learning as well (Lewthwaite & Wulf, 2010a, 2012).
Theoretical perspectives (Salmoni, Schmidt, & Walter, 1984;
Schmidt, 1975) that consider no more than temporary motiva-
tional influences are not able to capture and adequately ex-
plain the entirety of influences on motor behavior, including
perhaps some of the most important ones.
Given the considerable advances in our understanding of
motor skill learning over the past few decades, a new theory
that encompasses new findings—some of which are the result
of new methodologies—is needed. Therefore, in the present
paper, we propose a theory of motor learning that takes into
account the social-cognitive–affective–motor nature of “mo-
tor” behavior (Lewthwaite & Wulf, 2010a): The OPTIMAL
(Optimizing Performance Through Intrinsic Motivation and
Attention for Learning) Theory. Before outlining this new
theory, we discuss the intertwined nature of motor, cognitive,
affective, and sociocultural influences on performance. We
then review findings that point to strong motivational and
attentional focus impacts on motor learning. Next, we describe
the OPTIMAL theory, which takes into account those new
insights, as a new perspective on motor learning. The founda-
tion of our theory is motor behavior. That is, we are less
concerned with skills that have a strong cognitive or
decision-making component (i.e., learning “what”; see
Shmuelof & Krakauer, 2011). Rather, of concern is primarily
the learning of “how” to bring about the coordinated or skilled
control of (complex) movement, for which the quality of
movement execution is of primary importance (Shmuelof &
Krakauer, 2011). Certainly, the acquisition of skilled move-
ment would allow for more effective integration with strategic
and interactive decisions relevant to natural contexts of
motoric achievement.
Social-cognitive-affective-motor behavior
Human behavior, including motor behavior, is embedded in a
cultural context, with norms and stereotypes about appropri-
ate or expected activities for certain age, gender, or ethnic
groups (Stone, Lynch, Sjomeling, & Darley, 1999). Motor
behavior is observable and often performed publicly, that is,
in a social context. The presence of another person, or other
persons, may provide reassurance (e.g., rehabilitation
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414
1383

----- Page 3 (native) -----
alongside another person who has experienced a stroke) or
conjure pressure to perform well, and exert facilitating or im-
peding influences, respectively. Similarly, cognitions or
thoughts can speed (e.g., focusing on the intended movement
effect) or slow motor learning (e.g., focusing on movement
coordination) (Wulf, 2013). For instance, a novice windsurfer
who is already a proficient surfer will have confidence in her
ability to acquire the skills necessary for windsurfing. Beyond
the transfer of balance-related skills, this confidence will like-
ly reduce self-related concerns and cognitions, allowing her to
focus on achieving the task goal and maintaining her balance
despite perturbations from wind and water, or being watched
by others. The experience of success may create positive ex-
pectations that, in turn, may further contribute to her learning
progress.
The influence of a person’s mindset on his or her perfor-
mance can be observed easily in situations in which complex
motor skills are performed, such as sports. Choking under
pressure (Beilock, 2011) or flow states (Csikszentmihalyi,
1990) are well-known phenomena that have been linked to
the performer’s state of mind. In the former case, concerns,
worries, or nervousness in challenging situations can result in
a downward spiral of poor performance, ensuing conscious
control attempts and self-regulatory activities, and further per-
formance decrements. In the latter case, high confidence in
one’s abilities can produce the effortlessness, automaticity,
and task focus seen in effective high-level performance. Is
there a principal difference in how a performer’s mindset in-
fluences performance at an advanced or high skill level and in
the early stages of learning? Is confidence simply a “side
effect” of expertise, or can confidence-enhancing measures
facilitate learning in beginners? Is conscious control of
movements detrimental to efficiency of expert perfor-
mance but necessary, or even desirable, in novices? Or
can methods that promote automaticity early enhance
learning in the long-term?
It has become clear that the view of humans as processors
of neutral information does not capture the breadth or variety
of influences on motor behavior. The OPTIMAL theory builds
on the premise that motor learning cannot be understood with-
out considering the motivational (e.g., social-cognitive and
affective) and attentional influences on behavior. We contend
these influences on the performance and learning of motor
skills are similar across human learners, though perhaps am-
plified or dampened within individuals. Presumably not coin-
cidentally, certain motivational factors, in particular those that
underlie intrinsic motivation or which satisfy fundamental
psychological needs (Deci & Ryan, 2000, 2008; Ryan &
Deci, 2000), have been found to affect performance and learn-
ing in domains beyond movement (Hagger, Sultan,
Hardcastle, & Chatzisarantis, 2015; Taylor, Jungert, Mageau,
Schattke, Dedic, Rosenfield et al., 2014). We argue that those
needs must be met, or at least not be threatened, in order to
optimize motor learning. Broadly speaking, variables that en-
hance expectancies for future performance success—includ-
ing those that satisfy the psychological need for competence
(i.e., experiencing oneself as capable and competent)—have a
beneficial effect on motor skill learning. Also, learner
autonomy (i.e., the need to actively participate in determining
one’s own behavior) appears to influence optimal learning.
Furthermore, an external focus of attention, or a concentration
on the intended movement effect, enhances motor perfor-
mance and learning (Wulf, 2013).
Motivation
Motivation can be a broad and inclusive term for factors
influencing and encompassing the energization, direction,
and intensity of behavior. It is not surprising then that the
words motivation and motor [learning, behavior, perfor-
mance] share the same Latin root, movere (to move). Thus,
many variables—from social and other environmental condi-
tions to internal thoughts and processes, and affective re-
sponses—can initiate or alter the direction and intensity of
ongoing behavior. These motivational influences can be im-
plicit (subliminal, primed) (Aarts, Custers, & Marien, 2009;
Chartrand & Bargh, 2002; Ferguson & Bargh, 2004; Radel,
Sarrazin, & Pelletier, 2009) or explicit in nature. Within the
history of the study of human motivation, a number of theo-
retical perspectives elevate cognitions and conditions
pertaining to expectations for the future as well as perceptions
of autonomy to prominent motivational positions. That is, we
act when future prospects provide a sense that positive out-
comes will occur, and perhaps particularly when we believe
we will be the agents who bring these positive outcomes to
fruition. It is therefore perhaps not surprising that conditions
that enhance learners’ performance expectancies (see next
subsection, “Enhanced Expectancies”) or support their need
to feel autonomous (see “Autonomy” section) facilitate motor
learning.
Enhanced expectancies
Expectations carry personal histories of experiences forward
in time into new contexts to allow preparation for future
events. Critically, expectations are not motivationally neutral;
they anticipate rewarding properties of significance to fulfill-
ing organismic needs and desires (Schmidt, Braun, Wager, &
Shohamy, 2014). Expectations or expectancies have had
prominent roles in both psychological (e.g., expectancy-
value theory, Feather, 1982; self-efficacy theory, Bandura,
1977) and neuroscientific (e.g., reward prediction error;
Schultz, 1998, 2000) theorizing for decades. While lack of
confidence may detract from movement fluidity or automatic-
ity, circumstances that enhance learners’ expectations of future
1384
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414

----- Page 4 (native) -----
performance success can potentiate even more success, im-
provement, and learning (Rosenqvist & Skans, 2015). The con-
cept of expectancies is used here to refer to a range of forward-
directed anticipatory or predictive cognitions or beliefs about
what is to occur. These encompass self-efficacy and outcome
expectations (Bandura, 1977), including placebos (Wager &
Atlas, 2015), as well as signals predicting extrinsic rewards
(Fiorillo, Newsome, & Schultz, 2008; Schultz, 2000). Because
we focus on volitional movement, often occurring without the
involvement of others, the form of expectation particularly per-
tinent to motor learning and performance in its individual ex-
pression is self-efficacy expectations. Self-efficacy expectations
are relevant directly to the performer and the quality of the
movements she or he can produce. Ostensibly, relevant expec-
tations for the same movement task performed in different con-
texts (e.g., throwing a javelin in ideal environmental conditions
versus in a windstorm) may involve differing impacts of self-
efficacy versus outcome expectancies, depending upon the per-
former’s control over the ultimate relevant outcome. We apply
the term “confidence” as well to self-efficacy expectations. We
further acknowledge that these terms may apply in the sense of
collective or team efficacy (Feltz, Short, & Sullivan, 2008),
although we do not develop those arguments in the present
paper. Importantly, we presume that expectations are among
the motivational variables that can exert influence through im-
plicit means (e.g., stereotype threats, goals), although delibera-
tive, explicit, forms of these variables were originally described
(Bandura, 1977; Deci & Ryan, 1985).
Self-efficacy is an individual’s situation-specific confi-
dence or prospective sense that he or she will be able to effect
the actions that bring about task outcomes (Bandura, 1977,
1997). Past success experiences, or lack thereof, are the main
theoretical determinants of self-efficacy (Bandura, 1977;
Lamarche, Gammage, & Adkin, 2011; Tzetzis, Votsis, &
Kourtessis, 2008). Confidence has been recognized as a pre-
dictor of performance (Feltz, Chow, & Hepler, 2008; Moritz,
Feltz, Fahrbach, & Mack, 2000; Rosenqvist & Skans, 2015),
and importantly, self-efficacy resulting from success experi-
ences during the practice of a motor task is predictive of per-
formance on subsequent tests of motor learning (Pascua,
Wulf, & Lewthwaite, 2015; Stevens, Anderson, O’Dwyer, &
Williams, 2012; Wulf, Chiviacowsy, & Cardozo, 2014) or
performance (Rosenqvist & Skans, 2015).
Findings from a number of lines of research provide con-
verging evidence for the effectiveness of practice conditions
that enhance learners’ performance expectancies. Some of
these findings come from investigations into the effects of
positive feedback, including social-comparative feedback
and self-modeling. Other studies have provided evidence of
improved performance or learning by, for instance, reducing
perceived task difficulty, defining success liberally or in pos-
itive normative terms, alleviating learners’ concerns, or
influencing how ability is conceptualized.
Positive feedback
While feedback plays an important role in any learning pro-
cess, the predominant view of augmented feedback in the
motor learning literature is that it provides the learner with
information about his or her performance relative to the task
goal (cf. guidance hypothesis; Salmoni et al., 1984). An un-
derappreciated function of feedback in the motor learning lit-
erature has been its influence on the performer’s motivational
state. In a series of recent studies, providing learners with
feedback after “good” trials, compared with “poor” trials, re-
sulted in more effective learning (Badami, VaezMousavi,
Wulf, & Namazizadeh, 2012; Chiviacowsky & Wulf, 2007;
Chiviacowsky, Wulf, Wally, & Borges, 2009; Saemi, Porter,
Ghotbi-Varzaneh, Zarghami, & Maleki, 2012; Saemi, Wulf,
Varzaneh, & Zarghami, 2011). In those studies, feedback
about task performance was given after blocks of trials.
However, it was provided for only half of the trials in each
block. Unbeknownst to the participants, they were given feed-
back about either their most or least accurate trials in that
block. Groups that received feedback on the more accurate
trials demonstrated more effective learning on retention tests
without feedback. Thus, feedback emphasizing successful per-
formance, while ignoring less successful attempts, benefited
learning. Feedback after good trials has also been found to in-
crease perceptions of competence (Badami, VaezMousavi, Wulf,
& Namazizadeh, 2011; Saemi et al., 2011) and self-efficacy
(Badami et al., 2012; Saemi et al., 2012). The conviction that
one is doing well, and the confidence in being able to perform
well in the future, or their correlates such as positive affect, are
conditions consistent with optimal performance and learning.
Social-comparative feedback
Providing individuals with normative information, such as the
average performance scores of other learners, is a potent basis
for evaluating one’s own competence. Experimentally, social-
comparative information is typically provided in addition to
veridical feedback about the learner’s own performance
(Ávila, Chiviacowsky, Wulf, & Lewthwaite, 2012;
Lewthwaite & Wulf, 2010b; Wulf, Chiviacowsky, &
Lewthwaite, 2010, Wulf et al., 2012). Studies have demonstrat-
ed that motor learning is enhanced by (false) positive feedback,
suggesting more effective performance or greater improvement
than average, compared with negative feedback that indicates
poorer performance relative to others, or even no social-
comparative feedback (control conditions). In one study
(Lewthwaite & Wulf, 2010b), participants who were given nor-
mative feedback suggesting that their performance on a balance
task was better than average (“better” group) demonstrated
more effective learning on a delayed retention test without
feedback than did participants who were led to believe that their
performance was worse than average (“worse” group).
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414
1385

----- Page 5 (native) -----
Interestingly, a control group that was not provided normative
feedback showed performance and learning similar to that of
the worse group. Positive normative feedback also produced
qualitative differences in movement control, with participants
exhibiting greater automaticity and efficiency in motor control
than participants who received negative or no normative feed-
back. Similarly, in studies concerned with performance rather
than learning, increases in movement efficiency resulting from
positive social-comparative feedback were observed. Stoate,
Wulf, and Lewthwaite (2012) found that favorable feedback
enhanced running efficiency in experienced runners, in addition
to reducing perceptions of effort. A study by Hutchinson,
Sherman, Martinovic, and Tenenbaum (2008) showed greater
tolerance for sustained effort in a continuous force production
task, increased self-efficacy, and lower perceived exertion as a
function of positive normative feedback compared with both
negative feedback and control conditions.1
Positive normative feedback has been found to increase per-
ceived competence (Ávila et al., 2012), reduce concerns and
nervousness about performance and ability (Wulf et al., 2012,
Experiment 1), increase satisfaction with performance and mo-
tivation to learn (Wulf, Lewthwaite, & Hooyman, 2013), and
increase positive affect (Stoate et al., 2012). In contrast, nega-
tive feedback (and perhaps control) conditions seem to trigger
thoughts about the self and resulting self-regulatory activities
that hamper learning of the primary task. For example, in a
study by Wulf, Lewthwaite, and Hooyman (2013), participants
learning a balance task who received negative normative feed-
back, demonstrated defensive, self-enhancing reactions to the
self-related threat that was reflected in increased signature size
over the course of practice. Signature size change has been
interpreted as reflecting an implicit mechanism to regulate anx-
iety and negative affect resulting from threats to self-esteem,
and increased signature sizes are seen as a sign of implicit self-
esteem compensation (Rudman, Dohn, & Fairchild, 2007).
Self-modeling
In a few studies, the effects of edited video feedback about
learners’ best performance (so-called self-modeling) were
compared with video feedback about their actual or average
performance, no video feedback (Clark & Ste-Marie, 2007),
or verbal instructions (Ste-Marie, Vertest, Rymal, & Martini,
2011). Interestingly, learners who watched the edited videos
that showed their best swimming strokes or trampoline skills
demonstrated enhanced learning relative to other groups. In
addition, self-modeling resulted in greater intrinsic motivation
and satisfaction with performance (Clark & Ste-Marie, 2007).
These findings are consistent with the beneficial performance
and learning effects of positive social-comparative feedback
and its motivational consequences.
Perceived task difficulty
There are also more subtle and less expensive ways of enhancing
expectancies to facilitate performance and learning than giving
false feedback, editing videotapes (self-modeling), or providing
rewards. In one study, older adults (average age: 64 years)—who
may have concerns when expected to demonstrate abilities, such
as balance, that supposedly decline with age (Hughes, Geraci, &
De Forrest, 2013)—were informed, before practicing a novel
balance task, that “active and experienced persons like (them)”
typically did well on that task (Wulf et al., 2012, Experiment 2).
Compared with not receiving this information (control group),
this simple statement resulted in increased self-efficacy and su-
perior learning. Thus, the general comment on a peer group’s
performance presumably made the novel and relatively challeng-
ing balance task appear less daunting and alleviated concerns
older adults may have had, elevating self-efficacy relative to a
control group. Performance and learning were also facilitated.
Setting criteria that purportedly indicate good performance,
but that can be reached relatively easily, can also raise
learners’ expectancies. Using a visuo-motor adaptation task,
Trempe, Sabourin, and Proteau (2012) found that visuomotor
adaptation was enhanced when participants were given a rel-
atively easy objective or goal—and thus experienced more
success during practice—relative to participants who were
given a more difficult goal. As shown in Figure 1, a group
with an easy goal (24-hour easy-objective) outperformed a
group with a difficult goal (24-hour difficult-objective) when
1 Of course, experimental use of false social-comparative feedback,
though revealing of learners’ needs for a sense of competence, is not
recommended for direct application.
Fig. 1 Errors on a visuomotor adaptation task in the study by Trempe,
Sabourin, and Proteau (2012). When given an easy goal in session 1 (24-
hour easy objective group), enhanced learning was seen 24 hours later
(session 2). Thus, rather than actual performance during session 1, the
subjective experience of success facilitated memory consolidation. Note.
From “Success modulates consolidation of a visuomotor adaptation
task,” by Trempe, Sabourin, and Proteau, 2012, Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 38, p. 56
1386
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414

----- Page 6 (native) -----
both groups were retested 24 hours after the practice phase.
The 24-hour easy-objective group also outperformed two oth-
er groups that performed the second session after 5 minutes.
Thus, when memory consolidation had a chance to take place
(24-hour groups), the success experienced during practice
manifested itself in enhanced learning. Interestingly, this was
the case even though the actual performance of the 24-hour
easy-objective group did not differ from that of the other
groups in the first session. Conversely, providing performers
with a criterion for good performance that is difficult to reach
can impair learning. Palmer, Chiviacowsky, and Wulf (2016)
provided non-golfers with instructions that putting within
smaller or larger concentric circles surrounding a target would
constitute “good” golf putts. The group for whom the larger
circle was identified putted more accurately in practice and in
24-hour retention and transfer tests than did the group with the
higher standard or more conservative (smaller circle) defini-
tion of success. Chiviacowsky, Wulf, and Lewthwaite (2012)
demonstrated that learners practicing a coincident-timing task,
who were informed that errors within a very small bandwidth
(4 ms) constituted good performance, showed less effective
learning than those with a comparatively large error band-
width (30 ms), or those who had not been given a criterion
(control group). Self-efficacy was degraded in the 4-ms group
as well.
Performance expectancies can be influenced by beliefs or
suggestions that certain aids or devices will assist performance,
by optical illusions, and sometimes superstition (Ashor, 2011;
Damisch, Stoberock, and Mussweiler, 2010; Calin-Jageman &
Caldwell, 2014). For example, believing that a putter used to
belong to a professional golfer was found to enhance putting
accuracy (Lee, Linkenauger, Bakdash, Joy-Gaba, & Proffitt,
2011). In a series of experiments using both motor (e.g., golf
putting) or cognitive tasks (e.g., solving anagrams), Damisch,
Stoberock, and Mussweiler (2010) demonstrated that supersti-
tion—for instance, believing in “lucky” golf balls or the effec-
tiveness of lucky charms—enhanced performance relative to
control conditions. In some of those experiments, self-efficacy
was assessed before the task was performed and was found to
be increased when a lucky charm was present as opposed to
absent. Moreover, performance was mediated by self-efficacy
(but see Calin-Jageman & Caldwell, 2014, for a failure to rep-
licate some of the superstition findings).
Optical illusions affecting the perceived size of the hole can
influence accuracy in golf putting. As demonstrated by Witt,
Linkenauger, and Proffitt (2012), when the golf hole appeared
larger because it was surrounded by small circles, participants
produced more successful putts than when the hole was
surrounded by larger circles and therefore appeared smaller
(Ebbinghaus illusion). In a follow-up study, Chauvel, Wulf,
and Maquestiaux (2015) assessed participants’self-efficacy as
a function of perceived hole size and used a retention test to
determine to what extent the performance-enhancing effects
were relatively permanent and independent of the presence of
the optical illusions. Both self-efficacy and learning (i.e., re-
tention performance without optical illusions) were enhanced
in the group that practiced with a perceived larger hole com-
pared with a group that experienced a smaller-looking hole
(Figure 2). Thus, the benefits of enhanced expectancies due
to the apparently larger hole during practice extended to the
learning of this task. Overall, it is striking how easily perfor-
mance and learning, across task domains, can be affected by
performers’ expectancies.
Hypnosis also may have the capacity to increase expectan-
cies (Barker, Jones, & Greenlees, 2010), which in turn may
lead to performance or learning enhancements. In one study,
even a brief (10-minute) hypnotic intervention improved
throwing accuracy (Jalene & Wulf, 2014). A group that
underwent a hypnosis session, which had as a central theme
the suggestion that a focus on the target would enhance accu-
racy, showed greater throwing accuracy on 10-minute and 1-
week retention tests than a control group that simply received
instructions informing them about the benefits of a focus on
the target.
Interestingly, suggestions that one is doing well do not have
to be related to one’s motor performance per se. For example,
instilling the belief in individuals that they are likely to
a) 
b)  
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
1
2
3
4
5
1
Deviation (cm)
Blocks of 10 trials
Perceived small hole
Perceived large hole
Retention
Practice
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Before practice
After practice
Before ret.
Self-efficacy
Perceived small hole
Perceived large hole
Fig. 2 Golf putting performance (a) and self-efficacy (b) of the groups
for which the hole was surrounded by large circles (perceived small hole)
or small circles (perceived large hole) during practice. The apparently
larger hole increased self-efficacy before and after practice, and
enhanced learning (i.e., retention performance). Note. From “Enhanced
expectancies resulting from visual illusions can facilitate sport skill
learning,” by Chauvel, Wulf, and Maquestiaux, 2015, Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, p. 720
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414
1387

----- Page 7 (native) -----
perform well in a certain category of situations (e.g., pressure)
can result not only in a higher perceived situational ability but
also in enhanced performance. In one study, enhancing per-
formers’ expectancies for generic performance under pressure
increased their throwing accuracy relative to the control con-
dition (McKay, Lewthwaite, & Wulf, 2012). That is, motor
performance was enhanced simply by suggesting to per-
formers that they were likely to do well under pressure.
Conceptions of ability
Individuals’ conceptions of abilities—that is, their views of abil-
ities as reflecting a fixed capacity versus being amenable to
change with practice (Dweck, 1999)—can affect not only their
motivation to practice but also influence performance and learn-
ing more directly (Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007;
Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Jourden, Bandura, & Banfield, 1991;
Mangels, Butterfield, Lamb, Good, & Dweck, 2006; Wulf &
Lewthwaite, 2009). In general, people who believe that (motor)
abilities are relatively fixed (so-called entity theorists), tend to be
more concerned with proving their ability, and they perceive
errors or negative feedback as a threat to the self, because they
reveal a limited capacity or lack of ability. In contrast, people
who assume that abilities are changeable or malleable (so-called
incremental theorists) tend to focus more on learning and im-
proving their performance on a given task. They are less threat-
ened by feedback indicating errors or poor performance, and
they confront difficulties by increasing their effort.
Conceptions of ability can be influenced, often relatively
easily, by task instructions or performance feedback. Those
that promote an entity theory tend to induce concerns about
performance or abilities being measured—with important
consequences for actual performance, learning, and motiva-
tion. For both types of theorists, violations of patterns of ex-
pected results have affective and motivational consequences
(Plaks & Stecher, 2007). Children’s conceptions of ability for
movement-relevant tasks were affected by even subtle differ-
ences in the wording of feedback (Chiviacowsky & Drews,
2014; Cimpian, Arce, Markman, & Dweck, 2007). In
Cimpian and colleagues’ study, 4-year-old children who per-
formed a drawing task were given feedback implying that
performance reflected an inherent ability (“You are a good
drawer”) or the effort invested in a particular picture (“You
did a good job drawing”). When confronted with mistakes
later, children who had received feedback that induced an
entity as opposed to an incremental theory, showed dimin-
ished motivation and more negative self-evaluations.
Chiviacowsky and Drews (2014, Experiment 1), examined
children’s motor performance and learning as a function of
manipulated beliefs about the nature of ability. Ten-year-old
children kicking soccer balls at a target received feedback
promoting an entity (“You are a great soccer player”) or in-
cremental theory (e.g., “Those kicks were very good”) in the
first phase of the study. In a second phase, they were given
negative feedback (i.e., shots purportedly being “not very ac-
curate”). After the negative feedback, participants in the for-
mer condition demonstrated degraded kicking accuracy rela-
tive to the latter condition.
Ability conceptions can also influence adults’ motivation
and motor performance or learning. Jourden et al. (1991) in-
formed one group of participants that a pursuit rotor task they
were about to perform, which required tracking a moving cur-
sor with a stylus, represented a learnable skill. Participants in
that group showed greater self-efficacy, more positive affective
self-reactions, greater interest in the task, and greater
improvement across trials than did participants who were led
to believe that the apparatus measured their natural capacity for
processing dynamic information. Wulf and Lewthwaite (2009)
examined whether instructionally induced conceptions of abil-
ity would have more permanent (i.e., learning) effects. The
learning of a balance task (stabilometer) was indeed enhanced
by instructions depicting performance on the task as an acquir-
able skill rather than something that reflected an inherent ability
for balance. The acquirable-skill group showed greater im-
provement in balance performance across retention trials, as
well as greater automaticity in the control of their movements
(i.e., frequency of movement adjustments) than did the
inherent-ability group. Control group participants without
ability-related instructions demonstrated similar performance
and learning as the inherent-ability group and therefore were
less effective and efficient than participants who viewed the
task as a learnable skill. Drews, Chiviacowsky, and Wulf
(2013) found similar effects in 6-, 10-, and 14-year-old chil-
dren. Children of all age groups showed less effective learning
of a throwing task when the instructions given before the prac-
tice phase suggested that performance was a reflection of an
inherent ability rather a function of practice.
Conceptions of abilities may affect the extent to which peo-
ple frame and interpret performance fluctuations as successes
and failures, which may in turn influence motor performance
and learning. Some support for this notion comes from a study
by Wulf, Lewthwaite, and Hooyman (2013). Using a
stabilometer balance task, these authors found that instructions
inducing an entity theory led to an increase in participants’
nervousness before and while balancing (during practice), as
well as more thoughts about their performance and ability, and
a greater focus on body movements (during retention and trans-
fer). Individuals who see task performance as a reflection of an
inherent ability presumably approach practice situations with a
certain degree of apprehension (low expectations) that hinders
the learning process. This also may be the case for performers
whose concerns are not alleviated by information about the
malleability of skills (control conditions). In contrast, individ-
uals who believe that skills are acquirable are more likely to
approach a task as an opportunity to improve, and to see errors
as temporary and as being part of learning.
1388
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Extrinsic rewards
If rewards are experienced as an index of performance effec-
tiveness, intrinsic motivation and personal performance ex-
pectancies are likely enhanced (Eisenberger, Pierce, &
Cameron, 1999). Importantly, rewards appear to exert their
effects via expectation rather than receipt. That is, it is the
anticipation of reward (broadly defined) or reward prediction
error (Schultz, 2000, 2013) that places this form of enhanced
expectancies within our consideration here.
A few human behavioral studies have examined the effects
of extrinsic rewards on motor behavior and learning. Those
behavioral studies corroborate the findings reviewed above
for other approaches to enhancing expectancies. For instance,
the prospect of a monetary incentive has been shown to im-
prove movement performance in persons with Parkinson’s dis-
ease (Kojovic, Mir, Trender-Gerhard, Schneider, Pareés,
Edwards et al., 2014; Kühn, Brücke, Hübl, Schneider, Kupsch,
Eusebio et al., 2008) and to increase force production in healthy
participants (Pessiglione, Schmidt, Draganski, Kalisch, Lau,
Dolan et al., 2007). Abe and colleagues (Abe et al., 2011) found
that a group receiving monetary rewards for good performance
on a tracking task during practice showed more effective learn-
ing than a group that was punished for poor performance (by
having money deducted) or a control group. Interestingly, all
groups demonstrated similar performances immediately after
the practice phase. However, 6 hours later, the rewarded group
outperformed the other two groups and, in contrast to the
punished and control groups, even showed performance gains
after 24 hours and 30 days.
Positive affect
Positive affect is likely to accompany most experiences that
produce enhanced expectancies for valued outcomes. One
would expect heightened positive affect with desired outcomes
including performance success, satisfaction of fundamental
psychological needs, and extrinsic reward. In most cases, pos-
itive affect and positive cognitions would likely be co-effects of
the same positive events or experiences. Anticipation of posi-
tive affect may be one relevant form of enhanced expectancies
with the potential to influence performance and learning.
Research directed at the impact of positive affect on cognitive
processes has documented increased cognitive flexibility and
creativity (cognitive performance) effects (Ashby, Isen, &
Turken, 1999; Dreisbach & Goschke, 2004; Lyuborminsky,
King & Diener, 2005). Distinct from performance-generated
positive affect, Ridderinkhof and colleagues (Ridderinkhof,
van Wouwe, Band, Wylie, Van der Stigchel, van Hees,
Buitenweg et al., 2012) found that positive mood inductions
benefited cognitive processing in persons with Parkinson’s dis-
ease. Participants showed increased positive affect after
watching a Charlie Chaplin slapstick film clip and enhanced
performance on a subsequent decision-learning task. By its
nature, to anticipate positive affect is to anticipate a pleasant
and rewarding experience. It also is conceivable that the
expression of or invitation for positive affect enhanced
the participants’ sense of agency and thus expectations
of positive outcomes (Gentsch & Synofzik, 2014; see
“Autonomy” section).
To our knowledge, there has been no claim that positive
affect itself uniquely indexes dopamine release; expectations
of other desirable cognitive experiences also are associated with
dopaminergic response. Berridge (2007) contends that dopa-
mine is not associated with the hedonic “liking” of rewards,
but rather with the “wanting” of rewards, which might suggest
that positive affect per se, unrelated to performance-associated
positive emotional reactions, may in itself be rewarding but not
be the driver of a large range of rewarding effects on perfor-
mance and learning (but see Ridderinkhof et al., 2012).
Interim summary: enhanced expectancies
Human beings appear to have a propensity to prefer positive
information about themselves, such as positive feedback about
their performance (Chiviacowsky & Wulf, 2007) or physical
fitness, athleticism, health, and physical attractiveness
(Ennigkeit & Hänsel, 2014). While these preferences may sim-
ply imply a preference for states of positive over negative affect
without performance implications, they may reflect people’s
(implicit) knowledge of the beneficial consequences of this
type of feedback for motivation, performance, and learning.
As reviewed above, within the motor learning domain evidence
from various lines of research indicates that enhancing perfor-
mance expectancies facilitates learning. Findings of enhanced
self-efficacy, increased task interest or satisfaction with one’s
performance, reduced concerns about one’s performance or
abilities, and greater positive affect, support the notion that
the observed learning benefits are mediated by motivational
factors. It is also worth noting that, when control conditions were
included – for example, in studies using social-comparative feed-
back (Lewthwaite & Wulf, 2010b), providing information about
the performance of peers (Wulf et al., 2012), or inducing con-
ceptions of ability (Wulf & Lewthwaite, 2009)—learning also
was suboptimal. These findings suggest that control condi-
tions are not, in fact, “neutral” (or at least not affirmatively
positive). Experimental settings after all are public places and
as such presumably induce worries about one’s performance
or abilities being observed, measured, and compared with
those of others—leading to less-than-optimal learning.
Mechanisms for enhanced expectancy effects
Interest in expectancy-performance relationships has long
been prominent in social and sport psychology. Heightened
expectations result from performance accomplishments
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414
1389

----- Page 9 (native) -----
(Bandura, 1977), but expectations have also been experimen-
tally and prospectively linked to motor performance (Feltz,
Chow, & Hepler, 2008; Hutchinson et al., 2008; Moritz
et al., 2000; Neiss, 1989; Wulf et al., 2012).
Prospectively, expectancies for personal performance ap-
pear to serve a task-readying function. We would be merely
reactive, and not proactive, without predictive and probability-
based mechanisms that prepare us for action. Self-efficacy
expectations influence goals set and generate goal setting
(Theodorakis, 1995; Locke & Latham, 2006). Perceptions of
self-efficacy are related to affective self-reactions and related
self-regulatory activity (Bandura & Jourden, 1991; Jourden,
Bandura, & Banfield, 1991; Themanson, Pontifex, Hillman,
& McAuley, 2011). Task enjoyment (Hutchinson et al., 2008)
and positive affect as assessed by the Positive and Negative
Affect Schedule (PANAS; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988)
also have been related to conditions that enhance expectancies
(Stoate et al., 2012). However, it is not known whether these
cognitive and affective impacts are co-effects or integral as-
pects of a confident state of mind. Self-efficacy or confidence
is more than just a consciously experienced perception or
belief in one’s own situation-specific capabilities. The affec-
tive feeling or sense of confidence is likely coincident with the
self-percept or cognition of confidence. Watson and Clark
(1999) included the affective dimension of self-confidence
(self-assured) in the expanded version of the Positive and
Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS-X). The generation of
positive affect by the cognition of confidence may trigger
affective consequences relevant to performance and learning.
Beyond goal setting and positive affect with enhanced expec-
tancies, a number of other preparatory-like effects of expectan-
cies have emerged (Rowe, Eckstein, Braver, & Owen, 2008).
For example, expectancies can influence performance through
proactive effects on effort expenditure (Fiorio, Andani, Marotta,
Classen, & Tinazzi, 2014; Hutchinson et al., 2008) and on per-
ception (Abrams & Weidler, 2015; Chauvel et al., 2015;
Piedimonte, Benedetti & Carlino, 2015; Witt, South, &
Sugovic, 2014). Perception, rather than being a pure reflection
of objective sensory reality, incorporates perceivers’ assess-
ments of their own and relevant others’ abilities (Linkenauger,
Witt, Stefanucci, Bakdash, & Proffitt, 2009; Witt et al., 2014).
Perceived task demands, therefore, can in effect be altered be-
cause of a performer’s confidence in his or her capabilities
(Chauvel et al.) or in a placebo’s effect (Piedimonte et al.).
Action-specific perception may serve as preparation for task
performance, potentially sustaining focus on achievable ele-
ments and reducing concern about abilities to meet demands,
thus freeing up self-regulatory resources for performance.
Movement-system readying occurs through pre-movement
excitation or inhibition of neuromuscular systems relevant to
upcoming movement execution. These, including the
corticospinal tract, have been recently attributed to expectations
(Arias, Robles-García, Espinosa, Corral-Bergantiños,
Mordillo-Mateos, Grieve et al., 2014; Mooshagian, Keisler,
Zimmermann, Schweickert, & Wassermann, 2015; van
Elswijk, Kleine, Overeem, & Stegeman, 2007). Similarly, sup-
pression of activity related to unanticipated response options
has been found (Klein, Petitjean, Olivier, & Duque, 2014).
Expectancies can affect attention and cognition. Expectations
can influence working memory, long-term memory, and atten-
tional capture, biasing them toward expected stimuli (Bollinger,
Rubens, Zanto, & Gazzaley, 2010; Jiao, Du, He & Zhang, 2015;
Shomstein & Johnson, 2013). Themanson and colleagues stud-
ied the relationship of self-efficacy to task-related attention pro-
cesses in the context of flanker task performance (Themanson,
Hillman, McAuley, Buck, Doerksen, Morris, et al., 2008;
Themanson & Rosen, 2015). Higher self-efficacy was associated
with greater attention to task error cues (Themanson et al., 2008)
and greater response accuracy during task execution with faster
reaction time (RT) during more difficult or incongruent task
conditions (Themanson & Rosen, 2015).
Within the set of “enhanced expectancy” variables we dis-
cuss, outcome expectations and external rewards provide the
majority of the direct evidence of dopaminergic mediation
(Lidstone, Schulzer, Dinelle, Mak, Sossi, Ruth et al., 2010;
Wager & Atlas, 2015). Outcome expectancies are central in
the placebo response in which individuals expect that pharma-
cological and other interventions will lead to beneficial out-
comes (Ashor, 2011; de la Fuente-Fernandez, 2009; Lidstone
et al., 2010; Wager & Atlas, 2015). Outcome expectations for
clinical improvement were altered for individuals with mild to
moderate levels of Parkinson disease (PD) by verbal informa-
tion concerning the probability of receiving an effective phar-
macological treatment for their PD symptoms (Lidstone et al.,
2010). Four groups of participants received information indi-
cating that they had a 25%, 50%, 75%, or 100% chance of
receiving levodopa (a dopamine agonist commonly prescribed
for PD). All groups received a placebo. The group led to
believe they had a strong but not certain (75%) expectation
of levodopa receipt experienced dopamine release in their
ventral and dorsal striata consistent with their measured
dopamingeric responses to actual levodopa.
High performance expectancies, as described above, ap-
pear to prepare the mover for successful movement through
diverse effects at cognitive, motivational, neurophysiological,
and neuromuscular levels—ensuring that goals are effectively
coupled with desired actions. In the moments when action is
planned and executed, higher performance expectancies may
also serve as a buffer or protection against responses that
would detract from optimal performance, such as
nonbeneficial alternate responses, including off-task activity
(Jiao et al., 2015; Zahodne, Nowinski, Gershon, & Manly,
2015) or self-referential thinking. The dual role of enhanced
expectancies for goal-action coupling—maintaining a focus
on the task goal and preventing or reducing a self-focus (or
other off-task activity)—is indicated in the schematic of the
1390
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414

----- Page 10 (native) -----
OPTIMAL theory in Figure 3. Of course, the obverse may be
true: low personal expectations for a positive outcome may
activate conflicting responses or act in the manner of a self-
invoking trigger (see section on “External Focus of Attention”;
McKay, Wulf, & Lewthwaite, 2015), inviting potentially task-
incompatible concerns, anxiety, negative affective reactions, and
neuromuscular activity, necessitating resource deployment to
self-regulation and recovery. Conceptually at least, it also is
possible to hold such high expectations that preparation and
attention to the task at hand seem superfluous and concentration
and commitment may suffer (Feltz & Wood, 2009).
Desirable experiences and outcomes produce psychologi-
cal recognition, in the form of positive cognitions (e.g., effi-
cacy and outcome expectations) and associated positive affec-
tive responses. A common substrate to consciously or sublim-
inally registered conditions that signal success, enhance ex-
pectations of extrinsic rewards, support psychological-
biological fundamental needs including competence, autono-
my, and social-relatedness (Baumeister & Leary, 1995; Deci
& Ryan, 2008; Leotti, Iyengar, & Ochsner, 2010; White,
1959), and create positive affect, or several of the above
(Koepp, Gunn, Lawrence, Cunningham, Dagher, Jones
et al., 1998) may be the elicitation of a response in the
dopamingeric system. While the expectation of reward has
received particular attention as a trigger for a dopamine re-
sponse (Schultz, 2013), other related cognitive-affective states
are supported as well (Schultz, 2010). These triggers and
states include novelty and other violations of expectations
(Costa, Tran, Turchi, & Averbeck, 2014; Duzel, Bunzeck,
Guitart-Masip, & Duzel, 2010; Murty & Adcock, 2014), ac-
tive video game play (Koepp et al., 1998), stress (Lighthall,
Gorlik, Schoeke, Frank, & Mather, 2013), and risk (Schultz,
2010). In the neuroscience tradition that stems from origins in
animal work, extrinsic rewards, such as food, water, and mon-
ey, have been predominant in the study of dopamine re-
sponses. Importantly, as noted by Schultz, “Although rewards
have objective, physical, and chemical properties, their value
is defined by the needs of the individual decision maker and
thus intrinsically subjective.… The data suggest that both sub-
jective perception and physical presence of a stimulus are
necessary to evoke dopamine responses, whereas physical
presence alone is insufficient” (Schultz, 2013, pp. 231-232).
Dopaminergic systems subserve brain activity relevant to
motor, cognitive, and motivational functioning and include
the mesocortical, mesolimbic (often combined into the
mesocorticolimbic), and nigrostriatal dopamingeric systems
(Nieoullon & Coquerel, 2003; Wise, 2004). The mesolimbic
dopaminergic system is associated with the reward or motiva-
tion system (a component of the salience network; Menon,
2015, see later section on “Goal-action coupling: a common
mechanism for motivational and attentional effects on motor
performance and learning”) and is centered in the subcortical
ventral striatum that includes the nucleus accumbens, ventral
tegmental area, and globus pallidus. The nigrostriatal dopami-
nergic system, centered in the dorsal striatum, has been associated
with working memory and motor system functions, such as motor
planning and response selection. Importantly, the latter system
receives projections from the former (Draganski,B., Kherif, F.,
Kloppel, S.,Cook, P. A.,Alexander,D.C., Parker et al., 2008;
Schmidt, Lebreton, Clery-Melin, Daunizeau, & Pessiglioni,
2012; Yin, Ostlund, Balleine, 2008), which may interact with
the motor system, including the primary motor cortex, via other
direct and indirect pathways (Hosp, Pekanovic, Rioult-Pedotti, &
Luft, 2011). We should note that the identification of a potential
common denominator in dopaminergic response, however, does
not negate recognition of the complexity of neurophysiological
influences on performance and learning (Boureau & Dayan,
2011; Lancaster, Heerey, Mantripragada, & Linden, 2015).
While dopamine neurons predominantly signal some man-
ner of positive reward and expected success is therefore im-
portant, a smaller set of dopamine neurons is responsive to
negative signals. Occasional risks to expected rewards (i.e.,
challenge) can transiently dampen the extant levels of reward-
related dopamine but amplify the impact of subsequent
Fig. 3 Schematic of the OPTIMAL theory
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414
1391

----- Page 11 (native) -----
positive (but not negative) cues, strengthening the learning
effect (Schultz, 2010, 2013). It is conceivable that the poten-
tiating effect of success with challenge on the strength of the
resultant dopamine response may give rise to a variety of
beneficial learning and memory effects often attributed to
challenge or task difficulty per se (Lee, Swinnen, & Serrien,
1994). Behaviorally, as well, challenge or stress may alert
learners to increase effort and attention to the task,
improving performance. A number of disparate but
intriguing effects also point to the potency of success with
challenge, particularly over challenge alone. For example,
Finn and Miele (2015) found that test takers preferred longer
tests of difficult math problems with starting or ending sets of
moderately difficult (successful) items to shorter tests of the
same difficult math problems only. Interestingly, in the hippo-
campus, learning, but not training per se, rescues or increases
the survival of newly generated cells into differentiated neu-
rons to the extent that the learning experience is new, effortful,
and importantly successful (Shors, 2014).
Autonomy
Allowing individuals to exercise control over the environment
may not only satisfy a basic psychological need (Deci &
Ryan, 2000; 2008; White, 1959) but may be a biological ne-
cessity (Leotti & Delgado, 2011; Leotti, Iyengar, Ochsner,
2010). Studies with both humans (Tiger, Hanley, &
Hernandez, 2006) and other animals (Catania, 1975; Catania
& Sagvolden, 1980; Voss & Homzie, 1970) have shown that
both prefer an option leading to a choice than an option that
does not, even if this option results in greater effort or work—
suggesting the existence of an inherent reward with the exer-
cise of control (Karsh & Eitam, 2015; Leotti & Delgado,
2011). Along the same lines, Eitam, Kennedy, and Higgins
(2013) demonstrated that human motivation is dependent on
(the perception of) one’s actions having effects on the envi-
ronment. Even if the effects of one’s actions are trivial, intrin-
sic motivation is enhanced if the performer has control over
those effects (termed Control Effect Motivation by Eitam
et al.). Conditions that provide an opportunity for choice
may be motivating, because they indicate that one will be able
to control upcoming events.
Consistently, studies in the motor learning literature
have shown that giving the learner control over certain
aspects of the practice conditions enhances motor skill
learning (for reviews, see Sanli, Patterson, Bray, & Lee,
2013; Wulf, 2007b). Also, the type of instructional lan-
guage (i.e., autonomy-supportive, controlling) has been
found to have an impact on motor learning. Perhaps most
interestingly, giving learners choices—even it if they are
incidental to the task—can influence learning. These
findings are reviewed next.
Control over practice conditions
Learning benefits of self-control have been found for control in
the forms of the delivery of feedback, augmented task informa-
tion, use of assistive devices, movement demonstrations,
amount of practice, task order, etc. Studies examining effects
of self-controlled practice usually involve a yoking procedure,
in which each participant in a self-control group is paired with
another participant in a yoked group. A participant in the yoked
group receives feedback, for example, on the same trials as did
their counterpart in the self-control group. Thus, because the
frequency and timing of feedback delivery, etc. is controlled
for and identical for both groups, any group differences that
emerge on retention or transfer tests can be attributed to the fact
that one group had control over a certain variable, while the
other group did not.
Enhanced learning with self-controlled feedback has been
found with various movement tasks, including throwing tasks,
in which feedback was provided about movement form
(Janelle, Barba, Frehlich, Tennant, & Cauraugh, 1997) or the
accuracy of the throws (Chiviacowsky, Wulf, Laroque de
Medeiros, Kaefer, & Tani, 2008). Other researchers have found
learning advantages of self-controlled feedback for timing tasks
(Chen, Hendrick, & Lidor, 2002; Chiviacowsky & Wulf, 2002;
Patterson & Carter, 2010). Self-controlled concurrent feedback
has been shown to facilitate the learning of perceptual invari-
ants (i.e., adjusting walking speed when walking through vir-
tual opening and closing doors) (Huet, Camachon, Fernandez,
Jacobs, & Montagne, 2009) and landing a virtual aircraft (Huet,
Jacobs, Camachon, Goulon, & Montagne, 2009).
In situations in which learning the correct movement se-
quence is challenging (e.g., dance routines, sign language, ty-
pographical script), information or reminders about the move-
ment pattern to be executed are sometimes provided to the
learner. In a study using a Graffiti language learning task, which
involved entering symbols into a personal digital assistant when
prompted by the English-script cue, learners allowed to decide
when they wanted to view the correct pairing of the English cue
and respective symbol, as well as the viewing duration, before
entering the symbol, outperformed their yoked counterparts
(Patterson & Lee, 2010).
When learners are given control over the use of physical
assistive devices on balance tasks, learning was enhanced rela-
tive to the externally controlled use of those devices (yoked
conditions) (Chiviacowsky, Wulf, Lewthwaite, & Campos,
2012; Hartman, 2007; Wulf, Clauss, Shea, & Whitacre, 2001;
Wulf & Toole, 1999). For example, in one study participants
practiced a ski-simulator task and had, or did not have, the
opportunity to decide on which trials to use poles that were
placed on the floor to help them maintain their balance (Wulf
& Toole). The participants in the self-controlled group showed
more effective learning, as measured by performance on a re-
tention test without the poles, than did their yoked counterparts.
1392
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414

----- Page 12 (native) -----
In other studies (Chiviacowsky et al., 2012a; Hartman,
2007), learning to balance on a stabilometer platform was fa-
cilitated by holding a balance pole horizontally when the use of
that pole was chosen by the participants rather than imposed
upon them. This finding is particularly interesting because, in a
pilot study, Hartman did not find advantages to using the poles
for the learning of this task, suggesting that control over an
assistive device can have a beneficial effect on learning, even
if that device in and of itself is relatively ineffective.
Chiviacowsky and colleagues found similar learning benefits
of self-controlled pole use for persons with Parkinson’s disease.
Questionnaire results in that study revealed that participants
who were given a choice regarding the use of the pole felt less
nervous and were less concerned about their body positions.
Observational learning, that is, watching another performer
demonstrate a goal movement, is a commonly used and effec-
tive way of learning motor skills (for reviews, see Maslovat,
Hayes, Horn, & Hodges, 2010; Ong & Hodges, 2012). In a
study by Wulf, Raupach, and Pfeiffer (2005), participants
practiced a basketball jump shot, and a video of a skilled
model could either be requested by them or was provided to
them at the respective times during practice. After a 7-day
retention interval, the self-control group showed superior
movement form compared with the yoked group.
Instructional language
The way in which task instructions are worded—that is,
whether the language is autonomy-supportive or control-
ling—has been shown to influence motor learning
(Hooyman, Wulf, & Lewthwaite, 2014), perhaps through the
down-regulatory effect of cortisol on the brain’s reward cir-
cuitry (Montoya, Bos, Terburg, Rosenberger, & van Honk,
2014). Hooyman et al. followed up on a study by Reeve and
Tseng (2011), in which instructions related to a puzzle task
that was unsolvable in the time available led to differential
cortisol responses when they were worded in an autonomy-
supportive rather than controlling way. Hooyman and col-
leagues varied the way in which instructions for performing
a modified cricket bowling action were presented. Instructions
that gave the participant a sense of choice (i.e., autonomy-
supportive language) led to superior learning than those that
offered little option for how to execute the bowling action, etc.
(i.e., controlling language). As shown in Figure 4a, throwing
accuracy during both practice and retention was higher for the
group that received autonomy-supportive rather than control-
ling language instructions during practice.
Incidental Choices
Allowing learners to choose the extent of practice or the spacing
of practice trials has been found to lead to more effective learn-
ing than yoked control conditions (Post, Fairbrother, & Barros,
2011; Post, Fairbrother, Barros, & Kulpa, 2014). Letting partic-
ipants choose the order in which they wanted to perform balance
exercises resulted in more effective learning of those exercises
than not giving them this choice (Wulf & Adams, 2014). In a
case study with a professional kickboxer, letting him choose the
order of punches resulted in greater punching velocity and im-
pact forces than a prescribed order of punches (Halperin,
Chapman, Martin, & Wulf, 2015). In addition, choice of exer-
cise order can increase performers’ willingness to complete
more repetitions (Wulf, Freitas, & Tandy, 2014), which may
provide an additional indirect benefit to learning.
Importantly, even giving individuals choices that are inciden-
tal to the motor task has been demonstrated to have a positive
effect on the learning of that task (Lewthwaite, Chiviacowsky, &
Wulf, 2015). In one experiment, allowing participants to choose
the color of golf balls they were putting led to more effective task
learning than a yoked condition. Giving participants a choice of
ball color also has been found to increase the learning of a
throwing task (Wulf, Chiviacowsky, & Cardozo, 2014). In a
second experiment by Lewthwaite et al., the findings were even
more compelling: The learning of a balance task (stabilometer)
was enhanced in a group in which participants were given a
choice related to one of two tasks they would practice afterwards
and in which they were asked their opinion as to which of two
prints of paintings should be hung in the laboratory. That is,
relative to a yoked group that was simply informed of the second
task or the print to be hung, the choice group demonstrated more
effective retention performance on the balance task.
Interim summary: autonomy
As outlined above, providing learners with control, or
supporting their need for autonomy, has been found to enhance
learning in numerous studies. Independent of which factor the
learner is given control over—or whether this factor is even
related to the task to be learned—the learning benefits appear
to be very robust and generalizable to different tasks, age
groups, and populations. Its broad impact on motor learning
seems to suggest that autonomy support may exert its influence
in various ways. Many possible explanations have been sug-
gested for the learning benefits of granting learners control over
practice conditions. For example, it has been suggested that a
more active involvement of the learner in the learning process
promotes deeper processing of relevant information
(McCombs, 1989; Watkins, 1984; Chen & Singer, 1992); en-
courages error estimation (Chiviacowsky & Wulf, 2005); fos-
ters the use of self-regulation strategies (Kirschenbaum, 1984);
or that giving the learner control over the practice conditions
might be, in a general sense, more motivating (Bandura, 1993;
Boekaerts, 1996). Increased task interest (Lewthwaite et al.,
2015) and motivation to learn (Chiviacowsky, Wulf,
Lewthwaite, & Campos, 2012) when learners are given a choice
has indeed been found. Yet, we contend that the perception of
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414
1393

----- Page 13 (native) -----
autonomy has a more direct impact on learners’ motivational
state and, consequently, their motor control and learning.
Mechanisms for autonomy-support effects
Potential consequences of autonomy-supportive conditions in-
clude facilitation of performance (Karsh & Eitam, 2015;
Legault & Inzlicht, 2013) as well as the opportunity to enhance
perceptions of competence, self-efficacy, and sense of agency
(Chambon & Haggard, 2012). Legault and Inzlicht examined
in separate studies autonomous motivation (trait autonomy; see
also Ryan & Deci, 2000) and an autonomy-supportive condi-
tion as they affected the magnitude of the error-related negativ-
ity response to performance errors in Go/No-Go and Stroop
tasks requiring performance inhibition for accurate responding.
Autonomy was associated with greater self-regulatory respon-
siveness to task errors than controlling motivation and condi-
tions, and in meditational analysis, to better performance.
Indirect effects of autonomy-supportive conditions include
the opportunity to enhance expectations for performance.
Indeed, learners able to control the delivery of feedback, typ-
ically report asking for feedback when they assumed their
performance was relatively successful. Groups with self-
controlled feedback tend to receive feedback more after good
trials (i.e., with smaller errors) than after poor trials compared
with control groups (Chiviacowsky & Wulf, 2002;
Chiviacowsky, Wulf, Medeiros, Kaefer, & Tani, 2008;
Patterson & Carter, 2010; Patterson, Carter, & Sanli, 2011).
Thus, one reason for the effectiveness of self-controlled con-
ditions may be that they have the potential to enhance
learners’ self-efficacy (Wulf, Chiviacowsky, & Cardozo,
2014; Wulf, Chiviacowsky, & Drews, 2015). Support for this
notion also comes from a study in which learners’ perceptions
of competence in a self-controlled feedback condition were
thwarted by informing them that only performances within a
very small error range (i.e., 4 ms or less on an anticipation-
timing task) were considered successful (Chiviacowsky, Wulf,
& Lewthwaite, 2012). Compared with self-control groups that
were not provided a performance criterion or were given a
criterion that was easier to reach (30 ms), self-efficacy was
lower in that group and learning was degraded. Thus, when
given the opportunity, learners appear to use feedback as a
means to protect or enhance their perceptions of competence.
Similarly, the use of assistive devices (Chiviacowsky,
Wulf, Lewthwaite, & Campos, 2012; Hartman, 2007; Wulf
& Toole, 1999) or the ability to review solutions to problems
a) 
b) 
20
30
40
50
60
70
1
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
Deviation from target (cm)
Blocks of 10 trials
ASL
CL
Practice
Retention
Pre-test
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Day 1
Day 2
Self-eﬃcacy
ASL
CL
Fig. 4 Performance on a cricket bowling action task (i.e., target
deviations) (a) and self-efficacy (b) as a function of autonomy-
supportive (ASL) or controlling language (CL) instructions. Note. From
“Impacts of autonomy-supportive versus controlling instructional
language on motor learning,” by Hooyman, Wulf, and Lewthwaite,
2014, Human Movement Science, 36, p. 194-195
1394
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414

----- Page 14 (native) -----
before entering them (Patterson & Lee, 2010) may allow
learners to maintain or increase their self-efficacy. Some evi-
dence for a reduced self-focus (resulting from the presumed
increase in self-efficacy) comes from findings that partici-
pants, who were able to control their use of a balance pole
on the stabilometer task (Chiviacowsky, Wulf, Lewthwaite, &
Campos, 2012), reported being less nervous before a trial and
while balancing, compared with their yoked counterparts.
Furthermore, they indicated that they were less concerned
about the position of their body parts, suggesting that they
were less likely to adopt a self-focus.
Interestingly, self-efficacy can also be increased by
autonomy-supportive relative to controlling task instructions
(Hooyman et al., 2014, Reeve & Tseng, 2011). In Reeve and
Tseng’s study, using a puzzle-solving task, participants in the
autonomy-supportive group reported higher perceived com-
petence than did participants in either the neutral or control-
ling group (which did not differ from each other). Also, in the
Hooyman et al. study, self-efficacy was higher when partici-
pants learning a cricket bowling action were given instructions
that provided them with a sense of autonomy (or neutral in-
structions), compared with controlling instructions
(Figure 4b). Furthermore, in both studies, perceived autonomy
or choice was significantly correlated with self-efficacy. It
seems likely that autonomy-supportive conditions instill a
generalized sense of agency for learners that increases their
own confidence in being able to do well on a given task. Thus,
autonomy support directly affects performance and indirectly
contributes to goal-action coupling by enhancing performance
expectancies. These contributions are indicated by the arrows
from autonomy support in Figure 3.
One mechanism through which the assumption of height-
ened causality or sense of agency may occur is known as the
intentional binding effect (Haggard, Clark, & Kalogeras, 2002).
Intentional binding refers to the linking of an environmental
effect with the agent’s intent to produce it, an awareness that
occurs only when actions are volitional or intentional.
Intentional binding is affected by temporal contiguity of intent
and action (Haggard et al.) and is used as an index of a sense of
agency. Thus, when an effect occurs soon after the agent’s intent
and action, agency is expected and assumed. Sense of agency is
affected by exerted effort (Demanet, Muhle-Karbe, Lynn,
Blotenberg, & Marcel Brass, 2013), anticipated affect (Frith,
2014), perceived task success (Dewey, Seiffert, & Carr, 2010),
and ease of action selection such as occurs when stimulus and
response are compatible (Chambon & Haggard, 2012).
Given people’s psychological and presumably biological
need for autonomy (Deci & Ryan, 2000, 2008; Leotti et al.,
2010), controlling environments tend to induce stress (Reeve &
Tseng, 2011) and, presumably as a result, self-regulatory at-
tempts at controlling emotional responses. One consequence
of external control attempts can be behavior that is opposite
to the behavior that is desired (Stephens, Franks, Rook, Iida,
Hemphill, & Salem, 2013). Psychological stress and/or subse-
quent control attempts would be expected to take attentional
capacity away from the task and result in degraded learning.
Some evidence for negative emotional consequences in re-
sponse to a controlling environment comes from the study by
Reeve and Tseng. These authors measured cortisol levels as a
function of “teaching style” (i.e., autonomy-supportive, con-
trolling, or neutral instructions related to a puzzle-solving task).
Cortisol is considered a stress hormone, and increased levels
are thought to reflect coping processes in response to the stress
(Dickerson & Kemeny, 2004). Even though Reeve and Tseng
did not assess performance on the puzzle task, designed to be
unsolvable in the provided time, the controlling instructional
style increased salivary cortisol, whereas an autonomy-
supportive style decreased it relative to a neutral style. In a
subsequent study using a novel version of a cricket bowling
action, Hooyman et al. (2014) found that learning was en-
hanced with autonomy-supportive instructions (e.g., “…you
may want to cradle and deliver the ball in a windmill fashion
so the ball travels over the shoulder and not to an angle or to the
side.”) compared with controlling instructions (e.g., “…you
must cradle the ball so it travels in a circular pattern. At the
apex of the pitch the ball must be directly over the shoulder. Do
not throw it at a side angle.”), whereas a neutral-language con-
dition (“…cradle and swing the ball so it travels in a circular
fashion before it is released. Before the release of the ball, make
sure it travels over the shoulder.”) did not differ from either one.
These results lend support to the idea that learning is degraded
in situations that do not meet learners’ need for autonomy, in
part because self-regulatory activity in response to external
control attempts interferes with learning.
To this point, we have discussed a variety of “positive” mo-
tivational influences on motor performance and learning, includ-
ing intrinsic (perceived competence, self-efficacy, perceived
control) and extrinsic (external rewards, monetary incentives)
forms. We have not generally distinguished between these types
of motivation, in part, because the psychological and neurosci-
entific evidence does not yet identify consistent differences be-
tween forms of positive motivation, mediating mechanisms (e.g.,
dopamine), and performance outcomes. However, when addi-
tional dependent variables, such as whether or not participants
return to the task when they are free to do so (free choice behav-
ior), and task engagement are considered, some divergence in
effects occurs. In psychological science, the undermining impact
of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation, such as that demon-
strated when external rewards are provided after performance but
removed subsequently, is well known (Deci, Ryan, & Koestner,
1999; White & Sheldon, 2014). It is assumed to reflect the con-
trolling aspects of reward on behavior.
Recently, Murayama and colleagues demonstrated the
undermining effect of reward on subsequent free choice be-
havior and neural activation, finding more limited engagement
in the task and reduced activation in the anterior striatum,
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414
1395

----- Page 15 (native) -----
midbrain, and lateral prefrontal cortex following reward
(Murayama, Matsumoto, Izuma, & Matsumoto, 2010).
Thus, if outcomes beyond task performance are considered,
all “rewards” (and sources of enhanced expectations) may not
be equal. Further, as the autonomy studies suggest, there are
now a more substantial set of findings in which choice, per-
ceived control, and other forms of autonomy support produce
superior performance and/or learning than do control or yoked
conditions without choice (see also Murayama, Matsumoto,
Izuma, Sugiura, Ryan, Deci et al., 2015; Patall, Cooper, &
Robinson, 2008).
However, the undermining effect of extrinsic rewards is not
universal (Eisenberger, Pierce, and Cameron, 1999; Lutz,
Pedroni, Nadig, Luechinger, & Jäncke, 2012; Marsden, Ma,
Deci, Ryan, & Chiu, 2015). An additive impact of external
rewards and intrinsic motivation on performance and free
choice behavior can occur when rewards follow performance
standards that require higher levels of attention, effort, and
performance, and thus perhaps assist in the development of
greater perceived competence. Additive effects of the “re-
ward” of expectancies enhanced with positive social compar-
ison and autonomy support (Wulf, Chiviacowsky, & Cardozo,
2014), and of enhanced expectancies due to liberal definitions
of success with autonomy support (Chiviacowsky, Wulf, &
Lewthwaite, 2012) have also been found in motor learning.
The differentiation of effects of different forms of motivation
affecting enhanced expectancies is likely a fruitful target in the
near term for neuroscientific study.
External focus of attention
Attention may refer to task and environment monitoring,
scope or breadth of physical and other cues relevant to task
performance, the skill or ability to control concentration de-
spite conflicting inputs or distraction, as well as concentration
on content regarding particular movement-relevant cues. We
address the latter aspect of the attentional literature—what
learners should focus on to optimize learning. Experimental
evidence has amassed for the benefits of adopting an external
focus on the intended movement effect (e.g., on an implement)
relative to an internal focus on body movements (for reviews,
see Lohse, Wulf, & Lewthwaite, 2012; Marchant, 2011; Wulf,
2007a, 2013). Since the publication of the first study demon-
strating the advantages of an external focus for motor learning
(Wulf, Höß, & Prinz, 1998), many studies have followed. In
that original study, balance learning was found to be enhanced
when participants in an external focus group were instructed
to focus on the pressure exerted on the wheels of a ski-
simulator (Experiment 1) or the markers attached to a balance
platform (Experiment 2) as opposed to their feet (internal fo-
cus groups). What is particularly striking is that, in these and
subsequent studies, a one- or two-word difference in the
instructions (“your feet” vs. “the markers”) had differential
effects on learning. That is, instructions directing attention
away from one’s body parts or self and to the intended move-
ment effect have consistently been found to have an enhancing
effect on performance and learning—despite the similar infor-
mation content. The use of analogies may serve the same
purpose by directing attention to the production of a given
image (i.e., external focus), rather than body movements
(Liao & Masters, 2001; Wulf & Toole, 1999).
A person’s attentional focus often has a similar influ-
ence on performance during the practice phase when fo-
cus instructions are given, and learning, as measured by
retention or transfer tests. Therefore, a number of studies
have used within-participant designs to examine immedi-
ate effects of different attentional foci on performance. In
either case, enhanced performance or learning with an
external relative to an internal focus has been found for
various measures of movement effectiveness (e.g., accura-
cy in hitting a target, producing a certain amount of force,
maintaining a balance position) and efficiency (e.g., re-
duced muscular activity, oxygen consumption, heart rate).
As skilled performance is characterized by both high
levels of movement effectiveness and efficiency
(Guthrie, 1952), those findings provide evidence that an
external focus of attention effectively speeds the learning
process so that a higher skill level is achieved sooner
(Wulf, 2007a). Also, when learners adopt an external as
opposed to an internal focus, movement kinematics start
to resemble those typically seen at later stages of learning.
Movement effectiveness
Balance
A number of studies have used balance tasks to assess perfor-
mance and learning differences as a function of an external
versus internal focus. Balance has been shown to be enhanced
when the performer’s attention is directed externally to mini-
mizing movements of a balance platform (or markers attached
to it) as compared to being directed internally to movements of
their feet (Chiviacowsky, Wulf, & Wally, 2010; Jackson &
Holmes, 2011; McNevin, Shea, & Wulf, 2003; Shea & Wulf,
1999; Wulf, Weigelt, Poulter, & McNevin, 2003). Other tasks
have included standing still on other movable platforms
(Laufer, Rotem-Lehrer, Ronen, Khayutin, & Rozenberg,
2007; Rotem-Lehrer & Laufer, 2007) or an inflated rubber disk
(Wulf, Landers, Lewthwaite, & Töllner, 2009), or riding a
Pedalo (Totsika & Wulf, 2003). An external focus has also been
shown to yield more effective responses to perturbations
(Ducharme & Wu, 2015). When control conditions without
focus instructions were included (Landers, Wulf, Wallmann,
& Guadagnoli, 2005; Wulf et al., 1998, Experiment 1; Wulf,
Weigelt, Poulter, & McNevin, 2003, Experiment 2; Wulf,
1396
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414

----- Page 16 (native) -----
Landers, Lewthwaite, & Töllner, 2009), they yielded similar
performances as internal focus instructions, and both led to
inferior outcomes relative to external focus instructions.
Accuracy
Movement effectiveness as a function of attentional focus has
also been assessed by using outcome measures such as the
accuracy in hitting a target. Accuracy in hitting golf balls
has been demonstrated to be enhanced when performers were
asked to focus externally on the club motion or intended ball
trajectory (Bell & Hardy, 2009; Wulf & Su, 2007) rather than
on their arms (Wulf & Su) or wrists (Bell & Hardy). Accuracy
in throwing balls (Al-Abood, Bennett, Hernandez, Ashford, &
Davids, 2002; Chiviacowsky, Wulf, & Ávila, 2013; Zachry
et al., 2005), darts (Lohse, Sherwood, & Healy, 2010;
Marchant, Clough, & Crawshaw, 2007), or Frisbees (Ong,
Bowcock, & Hodges, 2010) also has been found to be im-
proved with an external focus.
In other studies, participants were asked to produce a cer-
tain amount of force while concentrating on the effector, such
as the hand, tongue (Freedman, Maas, Caligiuri, Wulf, &
Robin, 2007) or foot (Lohse, 2012; Lohse, Sherwood, &
Healy, 2011), or on the device against which the force was
exerted, such as a bulb or platform. For example, Lohse
trained participants to produce a certain percentage of their
maximum voluntary contraction (MVC) in a plantar flexion
task. Participants trained under the external focus condition
(focus on platform) were significantly more accurate by the
end of practice and on retention and transfer tests one week
later than the internal focus group (focus on foot).
Movement efficiency
A movement pattern is considered more efficient or econom-
ical if the same movement outcome is achieved with less en-
ergy expended. Direct measures of efficiency that have been
used in examinations of attentional focus effects include mus-
cular (electromyographic or EMG) activity, oxygen consump-
tion, and heart rate. In other studies, more indirect measures
such as maximum force production, movement speed, or en-
durance were used.
Muscular activity
EMG activity has been measured in studies using target-
oriented tasks such as free throw shooting in basketball
(Zachry et al., 2005) and dart throwing (Lohse, Sherwood,
& Healy, 2010). For example, in a study by Lohse et al., an
external focus on the flight of the dart not only improved
throwing accuracy relative to a focus on the hand, but also
resulted in reduced EMG activity in the antagonist triceps
muscle. Similar findings were obtained in a study by Zachry
et al.’s for basketball free throw shooting. These studies are
interesting as they demonstrate a possible association between
muscular activity and movement accuracy. It is also notewor-
thy that EMG activity was affected in muscle groups that
participants were not specifically instructed to focus on—
demonstrating that a performer’s attentional focus on one part
of the body can “spread” to other muscle groups, thus increas-
ing movement inefficiency at a more general level (see also
Wulf, Dufek, Lozano, & Pettigrew, 2010; Vance et al., 2004).
EMG activity has also been found to be lower when per-
formers were asked to focus on the weight they were lifting as
opposed to their arms or legs with which they were lifting the
weight, or in control conditions (Marchant, Greig, & Scott, 2008;
Vance, Wulf, Töllner, McNevin, & Mercer, 2004). Lohse, Healy,
and Sherwood (2011) found fewer co-contractions of agonist
and antagonist muscles with an external relative to an internal
focus on an isometric force production task, in addition to more
accurate force production (Figure 5) (see also Lohse &
Sherwood, 2012). Furthermore, an analysis of the power spectral
density of the EMG signal in the Lohse et al. (2011) study
demonstrated increases in the median power frequency—indi-
cating superfluous motor unit recruitment of larger motor units
within the muscles—when participants focused internally.
Maximum force production
Producing maximum forces requires optimal coordination
among and within muscles. Studies have demonstrated greater
maximum force production with an external relative to an
internal focus or control conditions, including tasks involving
isokinetic contractions (Marchant, Greig, & Scott, 2009),
maximum vertical jump height (Wulf & Dufek, 2009; Wulf,
Zachry, Granados, & Dufek, 2007; Wulf, Dufek, Lozano, &
Pettigrew, 2010), standing long-jump (Porter, Anton, & Wu,
2012; Porter, Ostrowski, Nolan, & Wu, 2010; Wu, Porter, &
Brown, 2012), or discus throwing (Zarghami, Saemi, & Fathi,
2012) (for a review, see Marchant, 2011). Interestingly, the
production of greater maximal forces with an external focus
also has been found to be associated with reduced muscular
activity (Marchant et al., 2009b; Wulf & Dufek, 2009; Wulf,
Dufek, Lozano, & Pettigrew, 2010).
Speed and endurance
Enhanced movement efficiency with an external focus is also
reflected in greater movement speed and endurance. For in-
stance, faster running times for an agility task (Porter, Nolan,
Ostrowski, & Wulf, 2010) or sprint starts (Ille, Selin, Do, &
Thon, 2013) were seen when participants adopted an external
focus (e.g., clawing the floor with the shoes), compared with an
internal focus (i.e., moving the legs and feet down and back as
quickly as possible). Also, oxygen consumption was reduced in
experienced runners when they focused externally (Schücker,
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414
1397

----- Page 17 (native) -----
Hagemann, Strauss, & Völker, 2009; Schücker, Anheier,
Hagemann, Strauss, & Völker, 2013). Similarly, swim times
were reduced in novices (Freudenheim, Wulf, Madureira, &
Corrêa, 2010) and experts (Stoate & Wulf, 2011) when they
focused on pushing the water back as opposed to pulling their
hands back. Marchant, Greig, Bullough, and Hitchen (2011)
demonstrated the benefits of an external focus on muscular en-
durance (i.e., increased number of repetitions) in trained indi-
viduals performing various weight lifting tasks. Finally,
Neumann and Brown (2013) gave different attentional focus
instructions to participants performing sit-ups. External focus
instructions resulted in reduced heart rate and EMG activity than
internal focus instructions, despite a larger range of motion.
Movement form
Aside from enhanced coordination within muscles (i.e., motor
unit recruitment) and between muscles (i.e., co-contractions),
there is accumulating evidence that an external focus also
facilitates coordination on a larger scale. Expert ratings
(Abdollahipour, Wulf, Psotta, & Palomo Nieto, 2015; Wulf,
Chiviacowsky, Schiller, & Ávila, 2010) as well as analyses of
movement kinematics (An, Wulf, & Kim, 2013; Christina &
Alpenfels, 2014; Lohse, Sherwood, & Healy, 2010; Parr &
Button, 2009; Southard, 2011; Wulf & Dufek, 2009) have
shown that movement form can be optimized with external
relative to an internal focus as well. For example, in novice
rowers, instructions directed at the blade (e.g., “Keep the
blade level during the recovery”) rather than the hands
(e.g., “Keep your hands level during the recovery”) led to
greater improvements in the technique, as evidenced by
various kinematic measures after a 7-week retention inter-
val (Parr & Button). Another study examined the effects of
attentional focus instructions on the learning of movement
form in novice golfers (An et al.). The instructions were
aimed at increasing the angle between the shoulders and
pelvis during the downswing—a characteristic of skilled
performance—that can be achieved by encouraging a for-
ward weight shift. External focus instructions to “push
against the left side of the ground” (for right-handed par-
ticipants) resulted in a greater increase in that angle than
did internal focus instructions to shift their weight to the
left foot, or no instructions (control group). Importantly,
the carry distance of the ball was increased by the external
focus instructions as well (Figure 6). Thus, a single exter-
nal focus instruction enhanced both movement form and
outcome in novices. A similar pattern of results was found
for experienced gymnasts (Abdollahipour et al.) who per-
formed a gymnastics skill (180-degree turn in the air).
Movement form (number of deductions) as well as move-
ment outcome (jump height) were enhanced by one in-
struction that promoted an external focus. Finally,
Christina and Alpenfels showed that experienced golfers
learned to change their swing path more effectively with
external rather than internal focus instructions. Overall, it is
clear that the performer’s attentional focus fundamentally
Fig. 5 EMG and force data of 3 representative participants from the
study by Lohse et al. (2011). The task involved pushing against a force
platform with the foot and producing 30% of the maximal force. Focusing
externally on the platform versus internally on the muscle (soleus)
producing the force led to very different results. Agonist and antagonist
activity was reduced and force production was more accurate with an
external focus. Note. From “Neuromuscular effects of shifting the focus
of attention in a simple force production task,” by Lohse, Sherwood, and
Healy, 2011, Journal of Motor Behavior, 43, p. 178
1398
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414

----- Page 18 (native) -----
affects movement coordination. An external focus on the
intended movement effect enhances all aspects of perfor-
mance, independent of skill level, task, age, or (dis)ability.
External focus promotes automaticity
The attentional focus effect has been explained with the
constrained action hypothesis (Wulf, McNevin, & Shea,
2001; Wulf, Shea, & Park, 2001), according to which an inter-
nal focus induces a conscious type of control—causing indi-
viduals to constrain their motor system by interfering with au-
tomatic control processes. In contrast, an external focus pro-
motes a more automatic mode of control by utilizing uncon-
scious, fast, and reflexive control processes. Several converging
lines of research support this notion. Evidence suggests that an
internal focus indeed leads to a constrained motor system, or
“freezing” of degrees of freedom (Vereijken, van Emmerik,
Whiting, & Newell, 1992), whereas an external focus seems
to “free” those degrees of freedom. Evidence includes correla-
tions between joint movements (Ford, Hodges, Huys, &
Williams, 2009) or joint moments (Wulf & Dufek, 2009) with
an internal but not external focus. An external focus on the
intended movement effect also appears to increase “functional
variability” (Loosch, 1995), which is typically seen in skilled
performers (e.g., dart throwers; Müller & Loosch, 1999). In
essence, it reflects compensatory corrections among various
effectors, with the results that variability in the movement out-
come is decreased. For example, in skilled dart players it was
observed that smaller release angles were compensated by
higher velocities of the dart, and vice versa (Loosch, 1995;
Wulf & Prinz, 2001). Lohse and colleagues (Lohse, Jones,
Healy, & Sherwood, 2014; Lohse, Sherwood, & Healy, 2010)
demonstrated that an external focus also leads to greater func-
tional variability than an internal focus.
Studies also have shown an association of external focus
instructions and various measures of automaticity. For example,
the attentional demands of the task have been shown to be
reduced when performers adopt an external rather than internal
focus (Kal, van der Kamp, and Houdijk, 2013; Wulf, McNevin,
& Shea, 2001). Using a probe reaction time paradigm, Wulf
a) 
b) 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Pre-test
1
2
3
4
Retention
Angle (deg)
Practice blocks
External
Internal
Control
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Pre-test
1
2
3
4
Retention
Angle (deg)
Practice blocks
External
Internal
Control
Fig. 6 Results of the study by An et al. (2013) in which different groups
of novice golfers hit golf balls under external focus, internal focus, or
control conditions (see text for more details). The pre-test and retention
test (after 3 days) included 10 trials, whereas the practice blocks included
25 trials each. The increase in the angle between shoulders and pelvis
during the downswing as well as the carry distance of the ball were
greatest in the external focus group. Note. From “Increased carry
distance and X-factor stretch in golf through an external focus of
attention,” by J. An, G. Wulf, and S. Kim, 2013, Journal of Motor
Learning and Development, 1, p. 6
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414
1399

----- Page 19 (native) -----
et al. found short reaction times with an external focus on a
balance task. Enhanced performance on a secondary task (i.e.,
faster reaction times) indicated reduced attention demands—or
greater automaticity—of the primary task. Probe reaction times
generally decreased across practice, indicating that attentional
demands decreased with experience. Importantly, shorter reac-
tion times for the external relative to the internal focus group
corroborated the view that an external focus speeds the learning
process by facilitating automaticity. Providing further support
for this notion, Kal et al. more recently demonstrated reduced
cognitive dual-task costs with an external relative to an internal
focus. Using a cyclic leg extension-flexion task, Kal et al. also
measured movement fluency (i.e., jerk) as well as movement
regularity (i.e., sample entropy) under external and internal fo-
cus conditions. Both fluency and regularity were enhanced with
an external focus, providing further evidence for greater auto-
maticity when an external focus is adopted.
In another line of evidence, analyses of the movement fre-
quency characteristics, particularly in balancing, have shown
higher-frequency movement adjustments for external com-
pared to internal focus participants (McNevin et al., 2003;
Wulf, McNevin et al., 2001; Wulf, Shea, & Park, 2001).
Higher frequencies are viewed as an indication of a more
automatic, reflex-type mode of control. This suggests that
learners who concentrated on markers on the balance platform
(external focus) utilized more, and faster, reflex loops operat-
ing at an automatic level, while those who focused internally
on their feet used more conscious, and slower, feedback loops.
Interestingly, placing the markers at a greater distance from
the feet resulted in even higher frequencies in responding, as
well as greater stability, than focusing on markers directly in
front of the feet (McNevin, Shea, & Wulf, 2003). This sug-
gested that movement effects that occur at a greater distance
from the body, or self—and are presumably more easily dis-
tinguishable from body movements—result in even greater
automaticity. This “distance” effect has been replicated with
other tasks, including hitting golf balls (Bell & Hardy, 2009),
dart throwing (McKay & Wulf, 2012), or the standing long
jump (Porter, Anton, & Wu, 2012).
Other lines of attentional focus research
A number of interventions, beyond an external focus instruc-
tional approach, have been developed in recent years that may
broadly be seen as aimed at providing the motor learner with a
beneficial attentional focus. Some of the more notable ones
include implicit learning (Masters & Poolton, 2012), the
quiet eye (Vickers, 1996), mindfulness training (Kee,
Chatzisarantis, Kong, Chow, & Chen, 2012), and self-talk
(Chang et al., 2014; Hardy, Begley, & Blanchfield, 2015).
We outline some commonalities and differences between the
assumptions underlying those approaches and the ones we
have put forward in this theory.
Since the early 1990s, Masters and his colleagues have
argued that movements should ideally be learned implicitly
rather than explicitly (Masters, 1992; Maxwell, Masters, &
Eves, 2000). Therefore, instructions should be kept to a min-
imum as they increase the likelihood that learners “reinvest”
acquired knowledge and engage in conscious control process-
es that interfere with the automatic execution of the move-
ment. Many aspects of motor skills can be and presumably
are learned implicitly, including regularities in environmental
stimuli and balance skills, and it has been shown that implicit
learning can be more effective than explicit learning (Green &
Flowers, 1991; Shea, Wulf, Whitacre, & Park, 2001; Wulf &
Schmidt, 1997). Indeed, the motor system’s remarkable coor-
dination capabilities seen with an external focus of attention
are presumably a reflection of the effectiveness of implicit
processes (Wulf, Höß, & Prinz, 1998). However, we question
the idea that learners should generally not be given instruc-
tions about the correct movement technique. It is unlikely that
knowledge per se is detrimental to performance. Rather it
appears critical that an appropriate external focus be adopted
in preparation for or during performance (Wulf, 2016). Thus,
it is not that the entire process must be implicit or explicit, but
that timely goal-action coupling is facilitated. If that coupling
is effected by an overt instruction, or by the nonconscious
recognition of a primed goal, both explicit and implicit con-
ditions can facilitate goal-action binding.
In another line of research, the so-called “quiet eye”—a final
visual fixation of at least 100 ms directed at a certain location or
target (e.g., golf ball, basketball hoop, bull’s eye) before move-
ment execution—has been shown to be associated with en-
hanced performance of tasks with specific targets (Moore,
Vine, Freeman, & Wilson, 2013; Vickers, 1996). Whereas var-
ious possible accounts of this phenomenon have been offered
(for a review, see Vickers, 2009), it seems likely that an external
attentional focus promoted by the visual focus on an external
object is at least partially responsible for the performance ef-
fects (Vine, Moore, Wilson, 2011, 2015). Aside from keeping
the attentional focus on a relevant aspect of the task (e.g., golf
ball), a visual focus on the target may also serve to “clear the
performer’s mind” (Vine, Moore, Wilson, 2015).
Mindfulness training may serve a similar “mind-clear-
ing” function. Mindfulness, a state of non-judgmental
awareness of the present moment (Brown & Ryan, 2003),
has been linked to reductions in stress and negative affect
(Taren, Gianaros, Greco, Lindsay, Fairgrieve, Brown et al.,
2015). Moreover, mindfulness training has been shown to
lead to improved decision making (Hafenbrack, Kinias, &
Barsade, 2013). Mindfulness training has been related to
enhanced balance performance resulting from greater au-
tomaticity in movement control (Kee et al., 2012).
Interestingly, after a mindfulness induction participants al-
so reported a greater use of an external focus of attention
compared with control group participants.
1400
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414

----- Page 20 (native) -----
Doll and colleagues (Doll, Hölzel, Boucard,
Wohlschläger, & Sorg, 2015) found evidence that 2 weeks
of mindfulness intervention focused on breath training (a
component of mindfulness training) in novices of this
technique was associated with increased functional con-
nectivity between the default mode network and the sa-
lience network (see section on “Goal-action coupling: a
common mechanism for motivational and attentional ef-
fects on motor performance and learning”). How this pat-
tern of increased connectivity might relate to other com-
ponents of mindfulness training and especially to motor
task performance will be important areas for future re-
search, and may distinguish this form of intervention for
motor performance and skill acquisition from external at-
tentional focus instructions with movement effect focus.
Wilson and colleagues recently identified a potential un-
intended consequence of mindfulness meditation—in-
creased susceptibility to false memories, possibly suggest-
ing that attention to some task-relevant foci could be im-
paired (Wilson, Mickes, Stolarz-Fantino, Evrard, &
Fantino, 2015). Thus, clearing the mind from distracting
or self-related thoughts may be helpful, but an affirmative
external focus on relevant movement effects may poten-
tially be even more beneficial.
Self-talk training has been used to assist athletes in sys-
tematizing their internal dialogues before performance.
Content of such self-talk regimen are often categorized as
motivational versus instructional or informational in nature,
although there are wide variations in the specific focus and
wording of self-talk statements. Hardy and colleagues found
that skilled Gaelic football players attempting free kicks with
their dominant and nondominant feet performed with greater
kicking accuracy with a motivational self-talk statement
(dominant limb) and equally well with motivational or in-
structional self-talk using their nondominant foot (Hardy
et al., 2015). Chang and colleagues examined novice high
school students performing a softball throw for accuracy
and distance, and motivational, instructional, and unrelated
(weather, pet’s and parents’ names, etc.) self-talk conditions
(Chang et al., 2014). Motivational self-talk was confidence-
directed in nature (“I can do it, I believe I can do it well,”
etc.). Instructional self-talk was a mixture of internal and
external attentional foci. Throwing for accuracy was better
for both motivational and instructional self-talk relative to
unrelated self-talk, and best for motivational self-talk when
the task was throwing for distance. Self-efficacy was en-
hanced in parallel with performance results. Self-talk research
has often incorporated self-efficacy theory but generally not
benefited by integration with the work on attentional focus
described previously (although Hardy et al., 2015 is an ex-
ception). Efforts to consider how to facilitate goal-action cou-
pling from positive motivational and external attentional ap-
proaches might optimize performers’ results.
Interim summary: attentional focus
Directing performers’ attention to the (environmental) effects
of their movements (external focus), rather than to the coordi-
nation of their body movements per se (internal focus), results
in more effective performance and learning. By facilitating
automaticity in movement control, an external focus generally
results in more effective performance (e.g., movement accu-
racy, balance, maximum force production) than does a coun-
terpart internal focus. Moreover, the enhanced outcome is
achieved with less effort, as indicated by reduced muscular
activity, heart rate, oxygen consumption, and so forth. Thus,
movement efficiency is enhanced as well. An external focus
of attention seems to be a precondition for optimal motor
performance. Interestingly, interviews have shown that, even
without explicit internal focus instructions, learners tend to
focus on movement form and body movements (Pascua,
Wulf, and Lewthwaite, 2015). This includes athletes (Guss-
West & Wulf, 2016; Porter, Wu, & Partridge, 2010; Stoate
et al., 2012). The reliability of the external focus benefits
across tasks, skill levels, age groups, or other individual
differences (Wulf 2007a, 2013) suggests that the necessity
of focusing on the intended movement effect to achieve
successful outcomes reflects a fundamental movement
principle.
Mechanisms for attentional focus effects
Why is an external focus integral to optimal motor perfor-
mance? We suggest that an external relative to an internal
focus plays a dual role by (a) directing attention to the task
goal and (b) reducing a focus on the self. Thus, an external
focus is an important contributor to goal-action coupling
(Figure 3). Furthermore, by reliably producing more success-
ful performance outcomes and ease of movement as noted
above, an external attentional focus contributes to enhanced
expectancies for positive outcomes (Pascua, Wulf, and
Lewthwaite, 2015; Shafizadeh, Platt, & Bahram, 2013;
Wulf, Chiviacowsky, & Cardozo, 2014) through mechanisms
described in earlier sections. In Figure 3, this influence is
represented by the arrow going from (improved) motor per-
formance to enhanced expectancies.
The ecological importance of an external focus can be il-
lustrated by this example: What does the mountain goat about
to jump across a chasm focus on? Presumably, it focuses on
the other side of the chasm to which it is jumping. Its motor
system seems to “know” what it has to do to achieve the
desired outcome. A skilled and confident human in a similar
situation might also let his or her motor system do its job and
successfully land on the intended spot. An external attentional
focus may be the intrinsic, “natural,” or default focus to move-
ment skills from which humans tend to stray over time—per-
haps “aided” by well-intended teaching or coaching, and
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414
1401

----- Page 21 (native) -----
thoughts and ideas about the best ways to produce valued
movement. It is hard to imagine other animals moving affir-
matively for food or survival with a constant internal conver-
sation regarding how to move their limbs most effectively.
Likely, they pursue their goals with purpose and action unim-
paired by digressions into self-reflection or concerns about
how to coordinate their muscles and joints.
One advantage of adopting a focus on the intended out-
come (e.g., landing location) may be that it directs concentra-
tion to the intended movement effect or task goal. Indeed, a
recent study by Russell, Porter, and Campbell (2014) showed
nicely that an external focus on the primary task (dart throw-
ing) was necessary to enhance performance, whereas an
external focus on a simultaneously performed secondary
task—which should have directed attention away from
the self—was not able to enhance performance (similar
to internal foci on either task). The consequence of focus-
ing on the intended effect is a coordination pattern that
resembles one that is typically seen at a more advanced
skill level—with a more efficient recruitment of motor
units, fewer co-contraction of agonists and antagonists
(Lohse & Sherwood, 2012), greater force output
(Marchant, Greig, & Scott, 2009), a “freeing” of the
body’s degrees of freedom (Wulf & Dufek, 2009; Wulf,
2013), increased functional variability (Lohse et al., 2014;
Wulf & Prinz, 2001), and generally increased movement
accuracy. How exactly the motor system accomplishes this
is perhaps one of most intriguing questions.
We have previously proposed the notion of a “self-invok-
ing trigger” (McKay, Wulf, Lewthwaite, & Nordin, 2015;
Wulf & Lewthwaite, 2010). According to this view, instruc-
tions that promote an internal focus by referring to body
movements provoke access to the self and result in “micro-
choking” episodes (Wulf & Lewthwaite, 2010), that is, wide-
spread, inefficient activation of the muscular system, disrup-
tion of automaticity, and the use of more conscious control
over ongoing movement. The result is a constrained move-
ment pattern which can be seen when a player “short-arms” a
free throw in basketball or when a golfer leaves a putt short.
While the self-invoking trigger idea is still somewhat specu-
lative, a study by McKay et al. (2015) provided initial evi-
dence consistent with this notion. In two experiments, asking
performers to reflect on their task-related experience resulted
in degraded performance (Experiment 1) or learning
(Experiment 2) relative to the control condition (Figure 7). A
study by Perreault and French (2015) provides additional pre-
liminary evidence for the self-invoking trigger hypothesis.
Children between the ages of 9 and 11 years practiced basket-
ball free-throws and were given internal- or external-focus
feedback. In response to the question about what they were
thinking at the conclusion of the experiment, those in the
internal focus group reported more self-evaluative content
(36–57%) than did participants in the external focus group
(7–21%). One advantage of adopting an external focus on
the intended outcome may be that it directs concentration
away from the self.
Self-referential processing appears to be a significant
aspect of the brain’s default mode of operation (Brewer,
Worhunskya, Gray, Tang, Weber, & Kober, 2011;
Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter, 2008). Brain imag-
ing studies have revealed the importance of the self in
humans and how easily it is accessed. Self-referential pro-
cessing has been shown to occur in brain structures at the
cortical midline, in particular the medial prefrontal cortex
(mPFC) (Amodio & Frith, 2006; Eisenberger, Lieberman,
& Satpute, 2005; for a review, see Northoff et al., 2006).
The mPFC seems to be linked to a variety of self-related
capacities that are maintained across space and time,
reflecting the self (Gallagher, 2000). This includes the rec-
ognition of one’s physical characteristics (Sugiura, Watanabe,
Maeda, Matsue, Fukuda, & Kawashima, 2005), memory for
one’s personality traits (Craik, Moroz, Moscovitch, Stuss,
Winocur, Tulving, et al., 1999), or one’s hopes for the future
(Johnson et al., 2006). Also, a temporary association of self
and objects that were assigned to participants, for example,
engaged the mPFC more than other objects (Kim & Johnson,
2012). Even word processing while reading (without instruc-
tions for self-referential processing) has been found to be dif-
ferent depending on whether the word is preceded by a per-
sonal pronoun (“my”) instead of an article (“the”)—particu-
larly when the noun is unpleasant (Herbert, Pauli, & Herbert,
2011). These findings highlight the importance of the self for
human beings (James, 1890)—and how easily it can be
activated.
30
35
40
45
50
55
Self
Control
Self
Control
Block 1
Block 2
Throwing Accuracy
Fig. 7 Throwing accuracy (higher scores reflect greater accuracy) of self
and control groups. Between 2 blocks of 10 throws, participants in the self
group were to asked think about their previous throwing experience
including their strengths and weaknesses as a thrower. As a result,
throwing accuracy was degraded on block 2, whereas that of a control
group remained unchanged. Note. From “The self: Your own worst
enemy? A test of the self-invoking trigger hypothesis,” by McKay,
Wulf, Lewthwaite, and Nordin, 2015, Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, p. 1913
1402
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414

----- Page 22 (native) -----
Goal-action coupling: a common mechanism
for motivational and attentional effects on motor
performance and learning
Insight into brain systems subserving self-referential process-
ing may provide one key to the mechanisms by which atten-
tional focus and motivation can produce performance and
learning effects. Motor learning is associated with structural
changes in neuroanatomy as well as in functional connections
across brain regions. We posit that practice under optimal
motivational and attentional focus conditions facilitates the
development of more effective neural connections in support
of better performance and more efficient learning. Both en-
hanced expectancies (and related autonomy) and attentional
focus direct movers with relative clarity toward their action
goals. Furthermore, these drivers may suppress off-task and
self-focused attention, buffering learners from these obstacles
to optimal performance (McKiernan, Kaufman, Kucera-
Thompson, & Binder, 2003). Figure 3 illustrates the putative
model for enhanced expectancy, autonomy, and external focus
effects on performance and learning.
Structural connections within brain regions concern gray
and white matter and more localized projections and pathways
that develop through practice and use (Dayan & Cohen, 2011;
Draganski & May, 2008). Beyond the motivational potentia-
tion of learning attempts described in earlier sections, dopa-
mine influences synaptogenic processes that create more ro-
bust connections, including long-term potentiation at the cel-
lular level (Ashby et al., 1999; Shohamy & Adcock, 2010;
Wise, 2004) and enlargement of the spiny processes on medi-
um spiny neurons to facilitate new neural connections
(Yagishita, Hayashi-Takagi, Ellis-Davies, Urakubo, Ishii, &
Kasai, 2014). Dopamine, in its motivational role, also contrib-
utes to the consolidation of motor memories when present
during and after motor practice (Sugawara, Tanaka, Okazaki,
Watanabe, Sadato, 2012; Wise, 2004).
Functional connectivity refers to temporal linkages
between spatially distinct neural regions or networks,
including large-scale coordinated activations and deacti-
vations of various structures and subsystems, that occur
relative to task (or non-task) performance and learning (Di
& Biswal, 2015; Friston, 2011; Fox et al., 2005).
Correlated low-level oscillatory resonance of activity
patterns in participating regions can be observed at rest
when regions have operated in concert. Reward-related
dopamine boosts the replay or reactivation of memories
during rest that contribute to consolidation (Ewell &
Leutgeb, 2014). It has been argued that the strength of
the functional connectivity in resting-state networks
reflects a history of task-relevant coactivation, with stron-
ger coherence in spontaneous activity at rest for regions
that were coactivated or fired together during the task
(Corbetta, 2012).
The default mode network is a key functional network,
centering brain activity, and pertaining to cognition, including
diverse functions such as long-term planning, mind wander-
ing, and self-referential thought (Buckner, 2012; Buckner,
et al., 2008; Gusnard,
Akbudak,
Shulman, & Raichle,
2001). As its name implies, the default mode network is spon-
taneously active when other systems are passive, although it
does not always deactivate when other so-called task-positive
or attentional networks are active (Raichle, 2015). The default
mode network roughly includes the ventral medial prefrontal cor-
tex, the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex; and the posterior cingulate
cortex, precuneus, and lateral parietal cortex (Raichle, 2015).
The default mode network typically does not overlap with
functional groupings involved in goal-directed and motor tasks.
A number of other functionally organized networks have been
identified, with some overlap in regions various researchers
have included within each. These networks include: a dorsal
attention network, a central executive network, task-positive net-
works, a sensorimotor network, a reward network, and a salience
network. Clusters of brain regions involved in motor learning can
be recognized, both at rest (Albert, Robertson, & Miall, 2009;
Biswal, Yetkin, Haughton, & Hyde, 1995; Wu, Srinivasan,
Kaur, & Cramer, 2014) and in-task (Hasan et al., 2013).
Functional connectivity can be disrupted in a number of
diseases and disorders, including clinical conditions such as
Parkinson’s disease, traumatic brain injury, depression,
Alzheimer’s disease, autism, schizophrenia, and stroke
(Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter, 2008; Corbetta,
2012). Importantly, functional connectivity is related to motor
skill learning (Albert et al., 2009; Song, Gotts, Dayan, &
Cohen, 2015) and to higher levels of motor skill (Di, Zhu,
Jin, Wang, Ye, Zhou et al., 2012; Ito, Matsuda, & Shimojo,
2015; Kim, Han, Kim, & Han, 2015; Milton, Solodkin,
Hluštík, & Small, 2007; Li, He, Huang, Zhang, Lu, Lai et al.,
2015). Functional connectivity tracks the learning of motor
skills, and more distinct functional connections are associated
with higher skill (Kim, Chang, Kim, Seo, Ryu, Lee et al., 2014;
Milton et al., 2007).
Shifting from default mode to other task-related functional
networks to accomplish different activities may be challenged
in conditions such as Parkinson disease (Delaveau et al., 2010;
van Eimeren, Monchi, Ballanger, & Strafella, 2009) and depres-
sion (Greicius, Flores, Menon, Glover, Solvason, Kenna et al.,
2007). The salience network comprises cortical (anterior insula
and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex) and subcortical (amygdala,
ventral striatum, including nucleus accumbens, and substantia
nigra/ventral tegmental area) regions with diverse roles in detect-
ing events salient to the organism, and integrating cognitive,
emotional, motivational, motor, and interoceptive signals into
response selection (Floresco, 2015; Menon, 2015; Sridharan,
Levitin, & Menon, 2008). The salience network has recently
been identified as critical in executing the switch between net-
works focused on exogenous and self-referential processing to
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414
1403

----- Page 23 (native) -----
reposition the organism for new tasks (Sridharan et al., 2008).
The salience network, with its integrative nature and network-
switching role, may be an important site for future investigations
into goal-action coupling by positive motivation and external
attentional focus.
Conclusions and predictions
While it may seem deceptively simple and almost automat-
ic, expert performers find ways to will efficient and some-
times spectacular movements into being. How do they
learn to cut to the chase and connect their thoughts to their
actions? We have reviewed several lines of evidence that
document the impacts of positive motivational and atten-
tional focus variables on motor performance and learning.
Conditions that enhance expectancies for future perfor-
mance success, including potential satisfaction of the psy-
chological need for competence are important.
Circumstances that provide an opportunity for choice or
self-determination, even minimally, influence learners’
sense of agency or autonomy, with consistently beneficial
results. Instructions or feedback that promote an external
focus of attention by directing concentration to a relevant
and appropriate external goal are reliably more helpful than
internal attention focused on body parts or movement co-
ordination. Table 1 identifies a number of predictions that
follow from the OPTIMAL theory.
We contend that these factors contribute to successful out-
comes by strengthening the coupling of performers’ goals to
their movement actions, presumably operating in complemen-
tary ways. We provide a plausible mechanism for the diverse
effects of expectation of positive experiences or outcomes as
defined by the mover; these expectations stimulate a dopami-
nergic response. When this dopaminergic response is tempo-
rally linked with performance attempts, we propose that motor
performance is optimized—for that learner at that given time
and level of task experience (Prediction 1; Table 1). It is likely
that enhanced expectancies for success will influence the fa-
cility with which a beneficial task focus can be identified and
held in concentration. Enhanced expectancies as well as
autonomy-supportive conditions contribute to efficient goal-
action coupling by preparing the motor system for task exe-
cution (Prediction 2). Furthermore, we suggest that autonomy
or learner control over some practice elements triggers a sense
of agency and thus acts through enhanced expectancies to
affect learning (Prediction 3).
An external focus of attention is a critical element in the
coupling of goals and actions, whereas an internal focus di-
rects attention to the self, thereby degrading performance
(Predictions 4 and 5). We consider the influence of an unam-
biguous attentional focus on the movement goal to be a useful
pairing with a sense of confidence. Furthermore, the
advantage of an external attentional focus will be manifest in
increasingly successful motor performance, thus fueling a
strong sense of performance accomplishment and the expec-
tation for more of the same (i.e., relatively high self-efficacy)
(Prediction 6).
Practice conditions that create positive motivation by
enhancing performers’ expectancies or providing autonomy
support facilitate motor learning by making dopamine
available for online and offline memory consolidation
and neuroplastic changes, such as structural and functional
connectivity (Prediction 7). In particular, substantial suc-
cess and moderately challenging practice provide the con-
ditions for the potentiation as well as ongoing presence of
dopamine, applied at the moments of successive actions
(Prediction 8). Effective structural connections within brain
regions would appear to lay the groundwork for the
establishment of efficient functional connections across
brain networks. Such connectivity appears to be a hallmark
of experienced and expert performers (Di et al., 2012; Ito
et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2014; Li et al.,
2015; Milton et al., 2007).
We speculate that some of the benefits of higher expectan-
cies and an external attentional focus occur by facilitating effi-
cient switching within and across brain networks (Predictions 9
and 10). The proximity and connectivity of motivational and
sensorimotor systems, perhaps in the salience network, make
Table 1
Predictions of the OPTIMAL Theory
1. When temporally associated with skill practice, conditions that
enhance expectancies for positive outcomes trigger dopaminergic
responses and thereby benefit motor performance
2. Enhanced expectancies and autonomy support contribute to efficient
goal-action coupling by readying the motor system for task execution
3. Autonomy support facilitates performance by enhancing expectancies
4. An external focus of attention directs attention to the task goal,
enhancing goal-action coupling
5. An internal focus of attention impedes performance by directing
attention to the self
6. Movement success resulting from an external focus enhances
expectancies for future success
7. Enhanced expectancies and autonomy support facilitate motor learning
by making dopamine available for memory consolidation and neural
pathway development
8. Challenge, in the context of prevailing success, elicits a potentiating
dopaminergic response that contributes to learning beyond success or
challenge alone.
9. Higher expectancies facilitate efficient switching from the default mode
network to motor networks associated with the movement skill
10. An external attentional focus facilitates efficient switching from the
default mode network to relevant motor networks
11. An internal attentional focus impedes efficient switching from the
default mode network to motor networks associated with the
movement skill
12. Generally, conditions that optimize performance facilitate learning
1404
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414

----- Page 24 (native) -----
the delicacy of switching from the default mode network to
relevant motor networks an intriguing potential locus for both
beneficial and disruptive goal-action coupling. While the forté
of enhanced expectancies and an external focus may be in
linking goals to upcoming actions, the possibility of beneficial
suppressive or preventative effects against intrusive or self-
focused thoughts exists. In contrast, an internal focus would
forestall switching from the default mode network to motor
networks (Prediction 11). Lastly, the OPTIMAL theory pre-
dicts that, in general, conditions that optimize performance
facilitate learning (Prediction 12). Paraphrasing the saying
linking current success to future success, the anticipation of
success breeds success and the presence of dopamine, which
supports the development of skill.
As we noted in our introduction, differences between sci-
entific fields studying motor learning from different vantage
points can be challenging to overcome in order to achieve
important insights. We have intrepidly walked into this inter-
section. Further progress will involve closing empirical gaps,
including the elicitation of dopamingergic responses with a
variety of “rewards” or positive experiences and capturing
the process of network development and dynamic switching
between networks. Testing of theory predictions will require
diverse expertise. How researchers may capture exquisite net-
work coordination and motor performance is a challenge, par-
tially aided by resting state observations and new analytical
methods and imaging technology (Di & Biswal, 2015;
O’Neill, Bauer, Woolrich, Morris, Barnes, & Brookes,
a) 
b)
Fig. 8 Conditions that fail to enhance learners’ expectancies and support
their need for autonomy, and promote an internal focus of attention result
in a vicious cycle of non-optimal learning (a), whereas conditions that
enhance expectancies, provide autonomy support, and promote an
external focus result in a virtuous cycle of enhanced motor learning (b)
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414
1405

----- Page 25 (native) -----
2015). Measurement of dopamine activity also is more chal-
lenging than some other biochemical substances (e.g., corti-
sol), because it cannot presently be assessed with salivary or
other less invasive methods than positron emission technolo-
gy paired with dopamine-antagonist medication (Lidstone
et al., 2010). Indirect measurement may be helpful (Aarts,
Bijleveld, Custers, Dogge, Deelder, Schutter et al., 2012).
Furthermore, innovations in the study of moments in athletic
performance are promising (Kim et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2014;
Milton et al., 2007).
Practical implications
Effective and skilled movement needs permeate many areas of
life, having relevance to individuals relearning basic motor
control after a neurological insult, learning to drive a new
vehicle, taking up or mastering a sport, controlling complex
systems, handling weapons in emergency situations, learning
to play a musical instrument, active gaming, using surgical
instruments, operating a robotic device, mastering a new
brain-computer interface or prosthesis, to name just a few.
Implications of the OPTIMAL theory for optimizing motor
performance and learning in applied and clinical contexts in-
volve finding the right approaches to boosting or supporting
positive motivation and directing attention to effective exter-
nal foci. Instructors, teachers, coaches, trainers, and clinicians
who may direct and frame learning experiences can create and
make use of these performance and learning features.
In a typical scenario, the instructor (e.g., coach, physical ther-
apist, music teacher) selects the tasks to be practiced, describes
how movements should be performed, gives corrective feedback,
and instructions that refer to the coordination of body move-
ments. Observations or interviews of coaches and physical ther-
apists confirm anecdotal evidence for the predominance of such
approaches (Durham, Van Vliet, Badger, & Sackley, 2009;
Halperin, Chapman, Martin, Abbiss, & Wulf, 2015; Johnson,
Burridge, & Demain, 2013; Porter, Wu, & Partridge, 2010).
Thus, instructors often neglect to enhance learners’ expectancies,
do not recognize and support their need for autonomy, and induce
an internal focus of attention (Figure 8a). Direct consequences of
such an approach would be low learner self-efficacy, little or no
positive affect, increased self-focus, and limited capacity to focus
on the task goal. Moreover, indirect consequences resulting from
poor performance or little performance improvement, and
learners’ perceptions of effort might lead to further decreases in
self-efficacy and positive affect, increased self-focus, etc.—essen-
tially resulting in a vicious cycle and less-than-optimal learning.
Ultimately, this scenario may lead to a lack of interest in practic-
ing or learning new skills, and perhaps activity avoidance.
In contrast, imagine a scenario in which the instructor gives
the learner choices, provides feedback at the request of the
learner, highlights good aspects of task performance while
mostly ignoring mistakes, avoids references to body move-
ments, and instead directs the performer’s attention externally
to the task goal (Figure 8b). In this case, enhanced performance
expectancies and perceptions of autonomy would likely in-
crease learners’ self-efficacy. [Experimentally, there have been
many variations in the forms of positive motivational influ-
ences that produce performance and learning benefits. In trans-
lation, expectancies can be enhanced by intrinsic or autono-
mous means that do not involve external rewards, incentives,
or deception, preventing threats to autonomy and social relat-
edness (Fenton, Duda, Quested, & Barrett, 2014; Hagger et al.,
2015).] Confidence in their ability to perform well, in combi-
nation with an instructed external focus, should facilitate suc-
cessful movement outcomes. These in turn will further promote
self-efficacy and positive affect that helps solidify good perfor-
mance, resulting in a virtuous cycle with overall positive con-
sequences for learning and motivation. Thus, simple changes in
the wording of task instructions and feedback that are often
used in applied settings (i.e., scenario 1) might be sufficient to
create the conditions necessary for optimal learning.
References
Aarts, H., Bijleveld, E., Custers, R., Dogge, M., Deelder, M., Schutter, D.,
& Haren, N. E. (2012). Positive priming and intentional binding:
Eye-blink rate predicts reward information effects on the sense of
agency. Social Neuroscience, 7, 105–112.
Aarts, H., Custers, R., & Marien, H. (2009). Priming and authorship
ascription: When nonconscious goals turn into conscious experi-
ences of self-agency. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 96, 967–979.
Abdollahipour, R., Wulf, G., Psotta, R., & Palomo Nieto, M. (2015).
Performance of a gymnastics skill benefits from an external focus
of attention. Journal of Sports Sciences, 33, 1807–1813.
Abe, M., Schambra, H., Wassermann, E. M., Luckenbaugh, D.,
Schweighofer, N., & Cohen, L. G. (2011). Reward improves long-
term retention of a motor memory through induction of offline memory
gains. Current Biology, 21, 557–562. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2011.02.030
Abrams, R. A., & Weidler, B. J. (2015). How far away is that? It depends
on you: Perception accounts for the abilities of others. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
41, 904–908.
Al-Abood, S. A., Bennett, S. J., Hernandez, F. M., Ashford, D., & Davids,
K. (2002). Effects of verbal instructions and image size on visual
search strategies in basketball free throw shooting. Journal of Sports
Sciences, 20, 271–278.
Albert, N. B., Robertson, E. M., & Miall, R. C. (2009). The resting human
brain and motor learning. Current Biology, 19, 1023–1027.
Amodio, D. M., & Frith, C. D. (2006). Meeting of minds: The medial frontal
cortex and social cognition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 7, 268–277.
An, J., Wulf, G., & Kim, S. (2013). Increased carry distance and X-factor
stretch in golf through an external focus of attention. Journal of
Motor Learning and Development, 1, 2–11.
Arias, P., Robles-García, V., Espinosa, N., Corral-Bergantiños, Y., Mordillo-
Mateos, L., Grieve, K., Cudeiro, J. (2014). The effects of expectancy
on corticospinal excitability: Passively preparing to observe a move-
ment. Journal of Neurophysiology, 111, 1479–1486.
1406
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414

----- Page 26 (native) -----
Ashby, F. G., Isen, A. M., & Turken, U. (1999). A neuropsychological
theory of positive affect and its influence on cognition.
Psychological Review, 106, 529–550.
Ashor, A. W. (2011). The placebo effect on psychomotor performance
and working memory capacity: Randomized single blind cross-over
trial. Annals of Neurosciences, 18, 141–144.
Ávila, L. T. G., Chiviacowsky, S., Wulf, G., & Lewthwaite, R. (2012).
Positive social-comparative feedback enhances motor learning in
children. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 13, 849–853.
Badami, R., VaezMousavi, M., Wulf, G., & Namazizadeh, M. (2011).
Feedback after good trials enhances intrinsic motivation. Research
Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 82, 360–364.
Badami, R., VaezMousavi, M., Wulf, G., & Namazizadeh, M. (2012).
Feedback about more accurate versus less accurate trials:
Differential effects on self-confidence and activation. Research
Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 83, 196–203.
Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavior-
al change. Psychological Review, 84, 191–215.
Bandura, A. (1993). Perceived self-efficacy in cognitive development and
functioning. Educational Psychologist, 28(2), 117–148.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York:
Freeman.
Bandura, A., & Jourden, F. I. (1991). Self-regulatory mechanisms
governing the impact of social comparison on complex decision mak-
ing. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60, 941–951.
Barker, J. B., Jones, M. V., & Greenlees, I. (2010). Assessing the imme-
diate and maintained effects of hypnosis on self-efficacy and soccer
wall-volley performance. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology,
32, 243–252.
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for
interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human motivation.
Psychological Bulletin, 117, 497–529.
Beilock, S. (2011). Choke: What the secrets of the brain reveal about
getting it right when you have to. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Bell, J. J., & Hardy, J. (2009). Effects of attentional focus on skilled perfor-
mance in golf. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 21, 163–177.
Berridge, K. C. (2007). The debate over dopamine’s role in reward: The
case for incentive salience. Psychopharmacology, 191, 391–431.
Biswal, B., Yetkin, F. Z., Haughton, V. M., & Hyde, J. S. (1995). Functional
connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-
planar MRI. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 34, 537–541.
Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit
theories of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent
transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention. Child
Development, 78, 246–263.
Boekaerts, M. (1996). Self-regulated learning at the junction of cognition
and motivation. European Psychologist, 1, 100–112.
Bollinger, J., Rubens, M. T., Zanto, T. P., & Gazzaley, A. (2010).
Expectation-driven changes in cortical functional connectivity influ-
ence working memory and long-term memory performance. Journal
of Neuroscience, 30, 14399–14410.
Boureau, Y.-L., & Dayan, P. (2011). Opponency revisited: Competition
and cooperation between dopamine and serotonin.
Neuropsychopharmacology Reviews, 36, 74–97.
Braver, T. S., Krug, M. K., Chiew, K. S., Kool, W., Westbrook, J. A.,
Clement, N. J., Somerville, L. H. (2014). Mechanisms of
motivation-cognition interaction: Challenges and opportunities.
Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 14, 443–472.
Brewer, J. A., Worhunskya, P. D., Gray, J. R., Tang, Y.-Y., Weber, J., &
Kober, H. (2011). Meditation experience is associated with differ-
ences in default mode network activity and connectivity.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 108, 20254–20259.
Broadbent, D. (1958). Perception and communication. London:
Pergamon Press.
Brown, K. W., & Ryan, R. M. (2003). The benefits of being present:
Mindfulness and its role in psychological well-being. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 822–848.
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. L. (2008). The
brain’s default network: Anatomy, function, and relevance to dis-
ease. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1124, 1–38. doi:
10.1196/annals.1440.011
Buckner, R. L. (2012). The serendipitous discovery of the brain's default
network. NeuroImage, 62, 1137-1145.
Calin-Jageman, R. J., & Caldwell, T. L. (2014). Replication of the super-
stition and performance study by Damisch, Stoberock, and
Mussweiler (2010). Social Psychology, 45, 239–245.
Catania, A. C. (1975). Freedom and knowledge: An experimental analy-
sis of preference in pigeons. Journal of Experimental Analysis of
Behavior, 24, 89–106.
Catania, A. C., & Sagvolden, T. (1980). Preference for free choice over
forced choice in pigeons. Journal of Experimental Analysis of
Behavior, 34, 77–86.
Chambon, V., & Haggard, P. (2012). Sense of control depends on fluency
of action selection, not motor performance. Cognition, 125, 441–451.
Chang, Y. K., Ho, L. A., Lu, F. J. H., Ou, C. C., Song, T. F. & Gill, D. L.
(2014). Self-talk and softball performance: The role of self-talk na-
ture, motor task characteristics, and self-efficacy in novice softball
players. Psychology of Sport and Exercise. 15, 139-145.
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (2002). Nonconscious motivations: Their
activation, operation, and consequences. In A. Tesser, D. A. Stapel,
& J. V. Wood (Eds.), Self and motivation: Emerging psychological
perspectives (pp. 13–41). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Chauvel, G., Wulf, G., & Maquestiaux, F. (2015). Visual illusions can facil-
itate sport skill learning. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 22, 717–721.
Chen, D. D., Hendrick, J. L., & Lidor, R. (2002). Enhancing self-
controlled learning environments: The use of self-regulated feed-
back information. Journal of Human Movement Studies, 43, 69–86.
Chen, D., & Singer, R. N. (1992). Self-regulation and cognitive strategies
in sport participation. International Journal of Sport Psychology, 23,
277–300.
Chiviacowsky, S., & Drews, R. (2014). Effects of generic versus non-
generic feedback on motor learning in children. PlosOne, 9, doi: 10.
1371/journal.pone.0088989
Chiviacowsky, S., & Wulf, G. (2002). Self-controlled feedback: Does it
enhance learning because performers get feedback when they need
it? Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 73, 408–415.
Chiviacowsky, S., & Wulf, G. (2005). Self-controlled feedback is effec-
tive if it is based on the learner’s performance. Research Quarterly
for Exercise and Sport, 76, 42–48.
Chiviacowsky, S., & Wulf, G. (2007). Feedback after good trials enhances
learning. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 78, 40–47.
Chiviacowsky, S., Wulf, G., Laroque de Medeiros, F., Kaefer, A., & Tani,
G. (2008). Learning benefits of self-controlled knowledge of results
in 10-year old children. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport,
79, 405–410.
Chiviacowsky, S., Wulf, G., Lewthwaite, R., & Campos, T. (2012a).
Motor learning benefits of self-controlled practice in persons with
Parkinson’s disease. Gait & Posture, 35, 601–605.
Chiviacowsky, S., Wulf, G., & Lewthwaite, R. (2012b). Self-controlled
learning: The importance of protecting perceptions of competence.
Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 458. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00458
Chiviacowsky, S., Wulf, G., & Ávila, L. (2013). An external focus of
attention enhances motor learning in children with intellectual dis-
abilities. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 57, 627–634.
Chiviacowsky, S., Wulf, G., & Wally, R. (2010). An external focus of
attention enhances balance learning in older adults. Gait & Posture,
32, 572–575.
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414
1407

----- Page 27 (native) -----
Chiviacowsky, S., Wulf, G., Wally, R., & Borges, T. (2009). KR after
good trials enhances learning in older adults. Research Quarterly for
Exercise and Sport, 80, 663–668.
Christina, R. W., & Alpenfels, E. (2014). Influence of attentional focus on
learning a swing path change. International Journal of Golf Science,
3, 35–49.
Cimpian, A., Arce, H.-M., Markman, E. M., & Dweck, C. S. (2007).
Subtle linguistic cues affect children’s motivation. Psychological
Science, 18, 314–316.
Clark, S. E., & Ste-Marie, D. M. (2007). The impact of self-as-a-model
interventions on children’s self-regulation of learning and swim-
ming performance. Journal of Sports Sciences, 25, 577–586.
Corbetta, M. (2012). Functional connectivity and neurological recovery.
Developmental Psychobiology, 54, 239–253.
Costa, V. D., Tran, V., Turchi, J., & Averbeck, B. B. (2014). Dopamine
modulates novelty seeking behavior during decision making.
Behavioral Neuroscience, 128, 556–566. doi:10.1037/a0037128
Craik, F. I. M., Moroz, T. M., Moscovitch, M., Stuss, D. T., Winocur, G.,
Tulving, E., & Kapur, S. (1999). In search of the self: A positron
emission tomography study. Psychological Science, 10, 27–35.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal
experience. New York: Harper & Row.
Damisch, L., Stoberock, B., & Mussweiler, T. (2010). Keep your fingers
crossed! How superstition improves performance. Psychological
Science, 21, 1014–1020.
Dayan, E., & Cohen, L. G. (2011). Neuroplasticity subserving motor skill
learning. Neuron, 72, 443–454.
de la Fuente-Fernandez, R. (2009). The placebo-reward hypothesis:
Dopamine and the placebo effect. Parkinsonism and Related
Disorders, 15S3, S72–S74.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and self-
determination in human behavior. New York: Plenum.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2000). The “what” and “why” of goal
pursuits: Human needs and the self-determination of behavior.
Psychological Inquiry, 11, 227–268.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2008). Self-Determination Theory: A
macrotheory of human motivation, development, and health.
Canadian Psychology, 49, 182–185.
Deci, E. L., Ryan, R. M., & Koestner, R. (1999). A meta-analytic review
of experiments examining the effects of extrinsic rewards on intrin-
sic motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 627–668.
Delaveau,P., Salgado-Pineda, P., Fossati, P., Witjas, T.,Azulay, J.-P., &Blin, O.
(2010). Dopaminergic modulation of the default mode network in
Parkinson's disease. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 20, 784–792.
Demanet, J., Muhle-Karbe, P. S., Lynn, M. T., Blotenberg, I., & Brass, M.
(2013). Power to the will: How exerting physical effort boosts the
sense of agency. Cognition, 129, 574–578.
Dewey, J. A., Seiffert, A. E., & Carr, T. H. (2010). Taking credit for
success: The phenomenology of control in a goal-directed task.
Consciousness and Cognition, 19, 48–62.
Di, X., & Biswal, B. B. (2015). Dynamic brain functional connectivity
modulated by resting-state networks. Brain Structure and Function,
220, 37–46.
Di, X., Zhu, S., Jin, H., Wang, P., Ye, Z., Zhou, K., Rao, H. (2012).
Altered resting brain function and structure in professional badmin-
ton players. Brain Connectivity, 2, 225–233.
Dickerson, S. S., & Kemeny, M. E. (2004). Acute stressors and cortisol
responses: A theoretical integration and synthesis of laboratory re-
search. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 355–391.
Doll, A., Hölzel, B. K., Boucard, C. C., Wohlschläger, A. M., & Sorg, C.
(2015). Mindfulness is associated with intrinsic functional connectivity
between default mode and salience networks. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 9, 461. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2015.00461
Draganski, B., Kherif, F., Kloppel, S., Cook, P. A., Alexander, D. C., Parker,
G. J. M., Frackowiak, R. S. J. (2008). Evidence for segregated and
integrative connectivity patterns in the human basal ganglia. Journal of
Neuroscience, 28, 7143-7152.
Draganski, B., & May, A. (2008). Training-induced structural changes in
the adult human brain. Behavioural Brain Research, 192, 137–142.
Dreisbach, G., & Goschke, T. (2004). How positive affect modulates
cognitive control: Reduced perseveration at the cost of increased
distractibility. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 30, 343–353.
Drews, R., Chiviacowsky, S., & Wulf, G. (2013). Children’s motor skill
learning is influenced by their conceptions of ability. Journal of
Motor Learning and Development, 2, 38–44.
Ducharme, S. W., & Wu, W. F. W. (2015). An external focus of attention
improves stability after a perturbation during a dynamic balance
task. Journal of Motor Learning and Development, 3, 74–90.
Durham, K., Van Vliet, P. M., Badger, F., & Sackley, C. (2009). Use of
information feedback and attentional focus of feedback in treating
the person with a hemiplegic arm. Physiotherapy Research
International, 14, 77–90.
Duzel, E., Bunzeck, N., Guitart-Masip, M., & Duzel, S. (2010). NOvelty-
related Motivation of Anticipation and exploration by Dopamine
(NOMAD): Implications for healthy aging. Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews, 34, 660–669.
Dweck, C. S. (1999). Self-theories: Their role in motivation, personality,
and development. Philadelphia: The Psychology Press.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to
motivation and personality. Psychological Review, 95, 256–273.
Eisenberger, N. I., Lieberman, M. D., & Satpute, A. B. (2005).
Personality from a control processing perspective: An fMRI study
of neuroticism, extraversion, and self-consciousness. Cognitive,
Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience, 5, 169–181.
Eisenberger, R., Pierce, W. D., & Cameron, J. (1999). Effects of reward
on intrinsic motivation—negative, neutral, and positive: Comment
on Deci, Koestner, and Ryan (1999). Psychological Bulletin, 125,
677–691.
Eitam, B., Kennedy, P. M., & Higgins, E. T. (2013). Motivation from
control. Experimental Brain Research, 229, 475–484.
Ennigkeit, F., & Hänsel, F. (2014). Effects of exercise self-schema on
reactions to self-relevant feedback. Psychology of Sport and
Exercise, 15, 108–115.
Ewell, L. A., & Leutgeb, S. (2014). Replay to remember: A boost from
dopamine. Nature Neuroscience, 17, 1629–1631.
Feather, N. T. (1982). Expectancy–value approaches: Present status
and future directions. In N. T. Feather (Ed.), Expectations and
actions: Expectancy–value models in psychology (pp. 395–420).
Hillsdale: Erlbaum.
Feltz, D. L., Chow, D. M., & Hepler, T. J. (2008a). Path analysis of self-
efficacy and diving performance revisited. Journal of Sport and
Exercise Psychology, 30, 401–411.
Feltz, D. L., Short, S. E., & Sullivan, P. J. (2008b). Self-efficacy in sport.
Champaign. IL: Human Kinetics.
Feltz, D. L., & Wood, J. M. (2009). Can self-doubt be beneficial to
performance? Exploring the concept of preparatory efficacy. The
Open Sports Sciences Journal, 2, 65–70.
Fenton, S. A. M., Duda, J. L., Quested, E., & Barrett, T. (2014). Coach
autonomy support predicts autonomous motivation and daily
moderate-to-vigorous physical activity and sedentary time in youth
sport participants. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 15, 453–463.
Ferguson, M. J., & Bargh, J. A. (2004). How social perception can auto-
matically influence behavior. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 33–39.
Finn, B., & Miele, D. B. (2015). Hitting a high note on math tests:
Remembered success influences test preferences. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
Advance online publication. doi:10.1037/xlm0000150
Fiorillo, C. D., Newsome, W. T., & Schultz, W. (2008). The temporal
precision of reward prediction in dopamine neurons. Nature
Neuroscience, 11, 966–973.
1408
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414

----- Page 28 (native) -----
Fiorio, M., Andani, M. E., Marotta, A., Classen, J., & Tinazzi, M. (2014).
Placebo-induced changes in excitatory and inhibitory corticospinal
circuits during motor performance. Journal of Neuroscience, 34,
3993–4005.
Floresco, S. B. (2015). The nucleus accumbens: An interface between cog-
nition, emotion, and action. Annual Review Psychology, 66, 25–52.
Ford, P., Hodges, N. J., Huys, R., & Williams, A. M. (2009). Evidence for
end-point trajectory planning during a kicking action. Motor
Control, 13, 1–24.
Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Vincent, J. L., Corbetta, M., Van Essen, D. C.,
& Raichle, M. E. (2005). The human brain is intrinsically organized
into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102,
9673–9678.
Freedman, S. E., Maas, E., Caligiuri, M. P., Wulf, G., & Robin, D. A.
(2007). Internal vs. external: Oral-motor performance as a function
of attentional focus. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Science, 50, 131–136.
Freudenheim, A. M., Wulf, G., Madureira, F., & Corrêa, S. C. P. (2010).
An external focus of attention results in greater swimming speed.
International Journal of Sports Science & Coaching, 5, 533–542.
Friston, K. J. (2011). Functional and effective connectivity: A review.
Brain Connectivity, 1, 13–36.
Frith, C. D. (2014). Action, agency and responsibility. Neuropsychologia,
55, 137–142.
Gallagher, I. I. (2000). Philosophical conceptions of the self: Implications
for cognitive science. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 14–21.
Gentsch, A., & Synofzik, M. (2014). Affective coding: The emotional
dimension of agency. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 608. doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2014.00608
Green, T. D., & Flowers, J. H. (1991). Implicit versus explicit learning
processes in a probabilistic, continuous fine-motor catching task.
Journal of Motor Behavior, 23, 293–300.
Greicius, M. D., Flores, B. H., Menon, V., Glover, G. H., Solvason, H. B.,
Kenna, H., Schatzberg, A. F. (2007). Resting-state functional connec-
tivity in major depression: Abnormally increased contributions from
subgenual cingulate cortex and thalamus. Biological Psychiatry, 62,
429–437.
Guadagnoli, M. A., & Lee, T. D. (2004). Challenge point: A framework
for conceptualizing the effects of various practice conditions in mo-
tor learning. Journal of Motor Behavior, 36, 212–224.
Guss-West, C., & Wulf, G. (2016). Attentional focus in classical ballet: A
survey of professional dancers. Journal of Dance Medicine & Science
(in press).
Gusnard, D. A., Akbudak, E., Shulman, G. L., & Raichle, M. E. (2001).
Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity:
Relation to a default mode of brain function. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 98, 4259–4264.
Guthrie, E. R. (1952). The psychology of learning. New York: Harper & Row.
Hafenbrack, A. C., Kinias, Z., & Barsade, S. G. (2013). Debiasing the
mind through meditation: Mindfulness and the sunk-cost bias.
Psychological Science, 25, 369–376.
Haggard, P., Clark, S., & Kalogeras, J. (2002). Voluntary action and
conscious awareness. Nature Neuroscience, 5, 382–385.
Hagger, M. S., Sultan, S., Hardcastle, S. J., & Chatzisarantis, N. L. D.
(2015). Perceived autonomy support and autonomous motivation
toward mathematics activities in educational and out-of-school con-
texts is related to mathematics homework behavior and attainment.
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 41, 111–123.
Halperin, I., Chapman, D. T., Martin, D. T., Abbiss, C., & Wulf, G. (2015).
Coaching cues in amateur boxing: An analysis of feedback provided
between rounds of competition. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Halperin, I., Chapman, D. T., Martin, D. T., & Wulf, G. (2015). Choices
enhance punching performance: An exploratory case study of a
world champion kickboxer. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Hardy, J., Begley, K., & Blanchfield, A. W. (2015). It_s good but it_s not
right: Instructional self-talk and skilled performance. Journal of
Applied Sport Psychology, 27, 132–139.
Hartman, J. M. (2007). Self-controlled use of a perceived physical assis-
tance device during a balancing task. Perceptual and Motor Skills,
104, 1005–1016.
Hasan, A., Galea, J. M., Casula, E. P., Falkai, P., Bestmann, S., &
Rothwell, J. C. (2013). Muscle and timing-specific functional con-
nectivity between the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the primary
motor cortex. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 25, 558–570.
Herbert, C., Pauli, P., & Herbert, B. M. (2011). Self-reference modulates
the processing of emotional stimuli in the absence of explicit self-
referential appraisal instructions. Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience, 6, 653–661.
Hooyman, A., Wulf, & Lewthwaite, R. (2014). Impacts of autonomy-
supportive versus controlling instructional language on motor learn-
ing. Human Movement Science, 36, 190–198.
Hosp, J. A., Pekanovic, A., Rioult-Pedotti, M. S., & Luft, A. R. (2011).
Dopaminergic projections from midbrain to primary motor cortex me-
diate motor skill learning. Journal of Neuroscience, 31, 2481–2487.
Huet, M., Camachon, C., Fernandez, L., Jacobs, D. M., & Montagne, G.
(2009a). Self-controlled concurrent feedback and the education of
attention towards perceptual invariants. Human Movement Science,
28, 450–467.
Huet, M., Jacobs, D. M., Camachon, C., Goulon, C., & Montagne, G.
(2009b). Self-controlled concurrent feedback facilitates the learning
of the final approach phase in a fixed-base flight simulator. Human
Factors, 51, 858–871.
Hughes, M. L., Geraci, L., & De Forrest, R. L. (2013). Aging 5 years in 5
minutes: The effect of taking a memory test on older adults’ subjec-
tive age. Psychological Science, 24, 2481–2488.
Hutchinson, J. C., Sherman, T., Martinovic, N., & Tenenbaum, G. (2008).
The effect of manipulated self-efficacy on perceived and sustained
effort. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 20, 457–472.
Ille, A., Selin, I., Do, M.-C., & Thon, B. (2013). Attentional focus effects
on sprint start performance as a function of skill level. Journal of
Sports Sciences, 31, 1705–1712.
Ito, T., Matsuda, T., & Shimojo, S. (2015). Functional connectivity of the
striatum in experts of stenography. Brain and Behavior, 5. doi: 10.
1002/brb3.333
Jackson, B. H., & Holmes, A. M. (2011). The effects of focus of attention
and task objective consistency on learning a balance task. Research
Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 82, 574–579.
Jalene, S., & Wulf, G. (2014). Brief hypnotic intervention increases
throwing accuracy. International Journal of Sports Science &
Coaching, 9, 199–206.
James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology (Vol. 2). New York: Holt.
Janelle, C. M., Barba, D. A., Frehlich, S. G., Tennant, L. K., & Cauraugh,
J. H. (1997). Maximizing performance effectiveness through video-
tape replay and a self-controlled learning environment. Research
Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 68, 269–279.
Jiao, J., Du, F., He, X., & Zhang, K. (2015). Social comparison modulates
reward-driven attentional capture. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
22, 1278–1284.
Johnson, L., Burridge, J. H., & Demain, S. H. (2013). Internal and exter-
nal focus of attention during gait re-education: An observational
study of physical therapist practice in stroke rehabilitation.
Physical Therapy, 93, 957–966.
Johnson, M. K., Raye, C. L., Mitchell, K. J., Touryan, S. R., Greene, E. J.,
& Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2006). Dissociating medial frontal and pos-
terior cingulate activity during self-reflection. Social Cognitive and
Affective Neuroscience, 1, 56–64.
Jourden, F. J., Bandura, A., & Banfield, J. T. (1991). The impact of
conceptions of ability on self-regulatory factors and motor skill ac-
quisition. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 8, 213–226.
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414
1409

----- Page 29 (native) -----
Kal, E. C., van der Kamp, J., & Houdijk, H. (2013). External attentional focus
enhances movement automatization: A comprehensive test of the
constrained action hypothesis. Human Movement Science, 32, 527–539.
Karsh, N., & Eitam, B. (2015). I control therefore I do: Judgments of
agency influence action selection. Cognition, 138, 122–131.
Kee, Y. H., Chatzisarantis, N. L., Kong, P. W., Chow, J. Y., & Chen, L. H.
(2012). Mindfulness, movement control and attentional focus strat-
egies: Effects of mindfulness on a postural balance task. Journal of
Sport and Exercise Psychology, 34, 561–579.
Kim, W., Chang, Y., Kim, J., Seo, J., Ryu, K., Lee, E., Woo, M., &
Janelle, C. M. (2014). An fMRI study of differences in brain activity
among elite, expert, and novice archers at the moment of optimal
aiming. Cognitive & Behavioral Neurology, 27, 173–182.
Kim, J. H., Han, J. K., Kim, B.-N., & Han, D. H. (2015). Brain networks
governing the golf swing in professional golfers. Journal of Sports
Sciences, 33, 1980–1987.
Kim, K., & Johnson, M. K. (2012). Extended self: Medial prefrontal
activity during transient association of self and objects. Social
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 7, 199–207.
Kirschenbaum, D. S. (1984). Self-regulation and sport psychology:
Nurturing an emerging symbiosis. Journal of Sport Psychology, 6,
159–183.
Klein, P.-A., Petitjean, C., Olivier, E., & Duque, J. (2014). Top-down
suppression of incompatible motor activations during response se-
lection under conflict. NeuroImage, 86, 138–149.
Koepp, M. J., Gunn, R. N., Lawrence, A. D., Cunningham, V. J., Dagher,
A., Jones, T., Grasby, P. M. (1998). Evidence for striatal dopamine
release during a video game. Nature, 393, 266–268.
Kojovic, M., Mir, P., Trender-Gerhard, I., Schneider, S. A., Pareés, I.,
Edwards, M. J., Jahanshahi, M. (2014). Motivational modulation
of bradykinesia in Parkinson’s disease off and on dopaminergic
medication. Journal of Neurology, 261, 1080-1089. doi: 10.1007/
s00415-014-7315-x
Kühn, A. A., Brücke, C., Hübl, J., Schneider, G.-H., Kupsch, A., Eusebio,
A., Ashkan, K., Holland, P., Aziz, T., Vandenberghe, W., Nuttin, B., &
Brown, P. (2008). Motivation modulates motorrelated feedback activ-
ity in the human basal ganglia. Current Biology, 18, R648–R650.
Lamarche, L., Gammage, K. L., & Adkin, A. L. (2011). Can balance
efficacy be manipulated using verbal feedback? Canadian Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 65, 277–284.
Lancaster, T. M., Heerey, E. A., Mantripragada, K., & Linden, D. E. J.
(2015). Replication study implicates COMT val158met polymor-
phism as a modulator of probabilistic reward learning. Genes,
Brain and Behavior, 14, 486–492.
Landers, M., Wulf, G., Wallmann, H., & Guadagnoli, M. A. (2005). An
external focus of attention attenuates balance impairment in
Parkinson’s disease. Physiotherapy, 91, 152–185.
Laufer, Y., Rotem-Lehrer, N., Ronen, Z., Khayutin, G., & Rozenberg, I.
(2007). Effect of attention focus on acquisition and retention of
postural control following ankle sprain. Archives of Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation, 88, 105–108.
Lee, C., Linkenauger, S. A., Bakdash, J. Z., Joy-Gaba, J. A., & Proffitt, D.
R. (2011). Putting like a pro: The role of positive contagion in golf
performance and perception. PLoS ONE, 6. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0026016
Lee, T. D., Swinnen, S. P., & Serrien, D. J. (1994). Cognitive effort and
motor learning. Quest, 46, 328–344.
Legault, L., & Inzlicht, M. (2013). Self-determination, self-regulation,
and the brain: Autonomy improves performance by enhancing
neuroaffective responsiveness to self-regulation failure. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 105, 123–138.
Leotti, L. A., & Delgado, M. R. (2011). The inherent reward of choice.
Psychological Science, 22, 1310–1318.
Leotti, L. A., Iyengar, S. S., & Ochsner, K. N. (2010). Born to choose:
The origins and value of the need for control. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 14, 457–463.
Lewthwaite, R., Chiviacowsky, S., Drews, R., & Wulf, G. (2015). Choose
to move: The motivational impact of autonomy support on motor
learning. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 22, 1383–1388.
Lewthwaite, R., & Wulf, G. (2010a). Grand challenge for movement
science and sport psychology: Embracing the social-cognitive-
affective-motor nature of motor behavior. Frontiers in Psychology,
1(Article 42), 1–3. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2010.00042
Lewthwaite, R., & Wulf, G. (2010b). Social-comparative feedback affects
motor skill learning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
63, 738–749.
Lewthwaite, R., & Wulf, G. (2012). Motor learning through a motiva-
tional lens. In N. J. Hodges & A. M. Williams (Eds.), Skill acquisi-
tion in sport: Research, theory & practice (2nd ed., pp. 173–191).
London: Routledge.
Li, G., He, H., Huang, M., Zhang, X., Lu, J., Lai, Y., Yao, D. (2015).
Identifying enhanced cortico-basal ganglia loops associated with
prolonged dance training. Scientific Reports, 5, 10271. doi: 10.
1038/srep10271
Liao, C. M., & Masters, R. S. W. (2001). Analogy learning: A means to
implicit motor learning. Journal of Sports Sciences, 19, 307–319.
Lidstone, S. C., Schulzer, M., Dinelle, K., Mak, E., Sossi V., Ruth, T. J.,
Stoessl A. J. (2010). Effects of expectation on placebo-induced do-
pamine release in Parkinson disease. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 67, 857–865.
Lighthall, N. R., Marissa, A., Gorlick, M. A., Schoeke, A., Frank, M. J.,
& Mather, M. (2013). Stress modulates reinforcement learning in
younger and older adults. Psychology and Aging, 28, 35–46.
Linkenauger, S. A., Witt, J. K., Stefanucci, J. K., Bakdash, J. Z., &
Proffitt, D. R. (2009). The effects of handedness and reachability
on perceived distance. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human
Perception and Performance, 35, 1649–1660.
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (2006). New directions in goal-setting
theory. Current Directions In Psychological Science, 15, 265–268.
Lohse, K. R. (2012). The influence of attention on learning and perfor-
mance: Pre-movement time and accuracy in an isometric force pro-
duction task. Human Movement Science, 31, 12–25.
Lohse, K. R., Jones, M. C., Healy, A. F., & Sherwood, D. E. (2014). The
role of attention in motor control. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 143, 930–948.
Lohse, K. R., & Sherwood, D. E. (2012). Thinking about muscles: The
neuromuscular effects of attentional focus on accuracy and fatigue.
Acta Psychologica, 140, 236–245.
Lohse, K. R., Sherwood, D. E., & Healy, A. F. (2010). How changing the
focus of attention affects performance, kinematics, and electromy-
ography in dart throwing. Human Movement Science, 29, 542–555.
Lohse, K. R., Sherwood, D. E., & Healy, A. F. (2011). Neuromuscular
effects of shifting the focus of attention in a simple force production
task. Journal of Motor Behavior, 43, 173–184.
Lohse, K. R., Wulf, G., & Lewthwaite, R. (2012). In N. J. Hodges & A.
M. Williams (Eds.), Skill acquisition in sport: Research, theory &
practice (2nd ed., pp. 40–58). London: Routledge.
Loosch, E. (1995). Funktionelle Variabilität in Dartwurf (Functional var-
iability in dart throwing). Sportwissenschaft, 25, 417–425.
Lutz, K., Pedroni, A., Nadig, K., Luechinger, R., & Jäncke, L. (2012).
The rewarding value of good motor performance in the context of
monetary incentives. Neuropsychologia, 50, 1739–1747.
Lyubomirsky, S., King, L., & Diener, E. (2005). The benefits of frequent
positive affect: Does happiness lead to success? Psychological
Bulletin & Review, 131, 803–855.
Mangels, J. A., Butterfield, B., Lamb, J., Good, C., & Dweck, C. S.
(2006). Why do beliefs about intelligence influence learning suc-
cess? A social cognitive neuroscience model. Social Cognitive and
Affective Neuroscience, 1, 75–86.
Marchant, D. C. (2011). Attentional focusing instructions and force produc-
tion. Frontiers in Psychology, 1, 210. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2010.00210
1410
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414

----- Page 30 (native) -----
Marchant, D. C., Clough, P. J., Crawshaw, M., & Levy, A. (2009a). Novice
motor skill performance and task experience is influenced by atten-
tional focus instructions and instruction preferences. International
Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 7, 488–502.
Marchant, D. C., Clough, P. J., & Crawshaw, M. (2007). The effects of
attentional focusing strategies on novice dart throwing performance
and their task experiences. International Journal of Sport and
Exercise Psychology, 5, 291–303.
Marchant, D. C., Greig, M., Bullough, J., & Hitchen, D. (2011).
Instructions to adopt an external focus enhance muscular endurance.
Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 82, 466–473.
Marchant, D. C., Greig, M., & Scott, C. (2008). Attentional focusing
strategies influence bicep EMG during isokinetic bicep curls.
Athletic Insight, 10(2).
Marchant, D. C., Greig, M., & Scott, C. (2009b). Attentional focusing
instructions influence force production and muscular activity during
isokinetic elbow flexions. Journal of Strength and Conditioning
Research, 23, 2358–2366.
Marsden, K. E., Ma, W. J., Deci, E. L., Ryan, R. M., & Chiu, P. H. (2015).
Diminished neural responses predict enhanced intrinsic motivation
and sensitivity to external incentive. Cognitive, Affective, and
Behavioral Neuroscience, 15, 276–286.
Maslovat, D., Hayes, S. J., Horn, R., & Hodges, N. J. (2010). Motor
learning through observation. In D. Elliott & M. A. Horn (Eds.),
Vision and goal-directed movement: Neurobehavioral perspectives
(pp. 315–340). Champaign: Human Kinetics.
Masters, R. S. W. (1992). Knowledge, knerves and know-how: The role of
explicit versus implicit knowledge in the breakdown of a complex
motor skill under pressure. British Journal of Psychology, 83, 343–
358.
Masters, R. S. W., & Poolton, J. (2012). Advances in implicit motor learn-
ing. In N. J. Hodges & A. M. Williams (Eds.), Skill acquisition in
sport: Research, theory and practice (pp. 59–75). London: Routledge.
Maxwell, J. P., Masters, R. S. W., & Eves, F. F. (2000). From novice to no
know-how: A longitudinal study of implicit motor learning. Journal
of Sports Science, 18, 111–120.
McCombs, M. L. (1989). Self-regulated learning and achievement: A
phenomenological view. In B. J. Zimmerman & D. H. Schunk
(Eds.), Self-regulated learning and academic achievement theory,
research, and practice: Progress in cognitive development research
(pp. 51–82). New York: Springer.
McKay, B., Lewthwaite, R., & Wulf, G. (2012). Enhanced expectancies
improve performance under pressure. Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 8.
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00008
McKay, B., & Wulf, G. (2012). A distal external focus enhances dart
throwing performance. International Journal of Sport and
Exercise Psychology, 10, 149–156.
McKay, B., Wulf, G., Lewthwaite, R., & Nordin, A. (2015). The self: Your
own worst enemy? A test of the self-invoking trigger hypothesis.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 68, 1910–1919.
McKiernan, K. A., Kaufman, J. N., Kucera-Thompson, J., & Binder, J. R.
(2003). A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced
deactivation in functional neuroimaging. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 15, 394–408.
McNevin, N. H., Shea, C. H., & Wulf, G. (2003). Increasing the distance
of an external focus of attention enhances learning. Psychological
Research, 67, 22–29.
Menon, V. (2015). Salience network. In A. W. Toga (Ed.), Brain map-
ping: An encyclopedic reference (Vol. 2, pp. 597–611). London:
Academic Press: Elsevier.
Milton, J., Solodkin, A., Hluštík, P., & Small, S. L. (2007). The mind of expert
motor performance is cool and focused. NeuroImage, 35, 804–813.
Montoya, E. R., Bos, P. A., Terburg, D., Rosenberger, L. A., & van Honk,
J. (2014). Cortisol administration induces global down-regulation of
the brain’s reward circuitry. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 47, 31–42.
Moore, L. J., Vine, S. J., Freeman, P., & Wilson, M. R. (2013). Quiet eye
training promotes challenge appraisals and aids performance under
elevated anxiety. International Journal of Sport and Exercise
Psychology, 11, 169–183.
Mooshagian, E., Keisler, A., Zimmermann, T., Schweickert, J. M., &
Wassermann, E. M. (2015). Modulation of corticospinal excitability
by reward depends on task framing. Neuropsychologia, 68, 31–37.
Moritz, S. E., Feltz, D. L., Fahrbach, K., & Mack, D. (2000). The relation
of self-efficacy measures to sport performance: A meta-analytic re-
view. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 71, 280–294.
Müller, H., & Loosch, E. (1999). Functional variability and an equifinal
path of movement during targeted throwing. Journal of Human
Movement Studies, 36, 103–126.
Murayama, K., Matsumoto, M., Izuma, K., Sugiura, A., Ryan, R. M.,
Deci, E. L., & Matsumoto, K. (2015). How self-determined choice
facilitates performance: A key role of the ventromedial prefrontal
cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 25, 1241–1251.
Murayama, K., Matsumoto, M., Izuma, K., & Matsumoto, K. (2010).
Neural basis of the undermining effect of monetary reward on in-
trinsic motivation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 107, 20911–20916.
Murty, V. P., & Adcock, R. A. (2014). Enriched encoding: Reward mo-
tivation organizes cortical networks for hippocampal detection of
unexpected events. Cerebral Cortex, 24, 2160–2168.
Neiss, R. (1989). Expectancy in motor behavior: A crucial element of the
psychobiological states that affect performance. Human
Performance, 2, 273–300.
Neumann, D. L., & Brown, J. (2013). The effect of attentional focus
strategy on physiological and motor performance during a sit-up
exercise. Journal of Psychophysiology, 27, 7–15.
Nieoullon, A., & Coquerel, A. (2003). Dopamine: A key regulator to
adapt action, emotion, motivation and cognition. Current Opinion
in Neurology, 16(Suppl. 2), S3–S9.
Northoff, G., Heinzel, A., de Greck, M., Bermpohl, F., Dobrowolny, H., &
Panksepp, J. (2006). Self-referential processing in our brain – A meta-
analysis of imaging studies on the self. Neuroimage, 31, 440–457.
O'Neill, G. C., Bauer, M., Woolrich, M. W., Morris, P. G., Barnes, G. R.,
& Brookes, M. J. (2015). Dynamic recruitment of resting state sub-
networks. NeuroImage, 115, 85–95.
Ong, N. T., Bowcock, A., & Hodges, N. J. (2010). Manipulations to the
timing and type of instructions to examine motor skill performance
under pressure. Frontiers in Psychology, 1, 196. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.
2010.00196
Ong, N. T., & Hodges, N. J. (2012). Mixing it up a little: How to schedule
observational practice. In N. J. Hodges & M. A. Williams (Eds.),
Skill acquisition in sport: Research, theory & practice (pp. 22–39).
London: Routledge.
Palmer, K., Chiviacowsky, S., & Wulf, G. (2016). Enhanced expectancies
facilitate golf putting. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 22, 229–232.
Parr, R., & Button, C. (2009). End-point focus of attention: Learning the
“catch” in rowing. International Journal of Sport Psychology, 40,
616–635.
Pascua, L. A. M., Wulf, G., & Lewthwaite, R. (2015). Additive benefits
of external focus and enhanced performance expectancy for motor
learning. Journal of Sports Sciences, 33, 58–66.
Patall, E. A., Cooper, H., & Robinson, J. C. (2008). The effects of choice
on intrinsic motivation and related outcomes: A meta-analysis of
research findings. Psychological Bulletin, 134, 270–300.
Patterson, J. T., & Carter, M. (2010). Learner regulated knowledge of
results during the acquisition of multiple timing goals. Human
Movement Science, 29, 214–227.
Patterson, J. T., Carter, M., & Sanli, E. (2011). Decreasing the proportion
of self-control trials during the acquisition period does not compro-
mise the learning advantages in a self-controlled context. Research
Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 82, 624–633.
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414
1411

----- Page 31 (native) -----
Patterson, J. T., & Lee, T. D. (2010). Self-regulated frequency of aug-
mented information in skill learning. Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 63, 33–40.
Perreault, M. E., & French, K. E. (2015). External-focus feedback bene-
fits free-throw learning in children. Research Quarterly for Exercise
and Sport, 86, 422–427.
Pessiglione, M., Schmidt, L., Draganski, B., Kalisch, R., Lau, H., Dolan,
R. J., & Frith, C. D. (2007). How the brain translates money into
force. A neuro-imaging study of subliminal motivation. Science,
316, 904–906.
Piedimonte, A., Benedetti, F., & Carlino, E. (2015). Placebo-induced de-
crease in fatigue: Evidence for a central action on the preparatory phase
of movement. European Journal of Neuroscience, 41, 492–497.
Plaks, J. E., & Stecher, K. (2007). Unexpected improvement, decline, and
stasis: A prediction confidence perspective on achievement success and
failure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93, 667–684.
Porter, J. M., Anton, P. M., & Wu, W. F. W. (2012). Increasing the
distance of an external focus of attention enhances standing long
jump performance. Journal of Strength and Conditioning
Research, 26, 2389–2393.
Porter, J. M., Nolan, R. P., Ostrowski, E. J., & Wulf, G. (2010a). Directing
attention externally enhances agility performance: A qualitative and
quantitative analysis of the efficacy of using verbal instructions to
focus attention. Frontiers in Psychology, 1, 216. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.
2010.00216
Porter, J. M., Ostrowski, E. J., Nolan, R. P., & Wu, W. F. W. (2010b).
Standing long-jump performance is enhanced when using an exter-
nal focus of attention. Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research,
24, 1746–1750.
Porter, J. M., Wu, W. F. W., & Partridge, J. A. (2010c). Focus of attention
and verbal instructions: Strategies of elite track and field coaches
and athletes. Sport Science Review, 19, 199–211.
Post, P. G., Fairbrother, J. T., Barros, J. A., & Kulpa, J. D. (2014). Self-
controlled practice within a fixed time period facilitates the learning
of a basketball set shot. Journal of Motor Learning and
Development, 2, 9–15.
Post, P. G., Fairbrother, J. T., & Barros, J. A. (2011). Self-controlled
amount of practice benefits the learning of a motor skill. Research
Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 82, 474–481.
Radel, R., Sarrazin, P., & Pelletier, L. (2009). Evidence of subliminally
primed motivational orientations: The effects of unconscious moti-
vational processes on the performance of a new motor task. Journal
of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 31, 657–674.
Raichle, M. E. (2015). The brain’s default mode network. Annual Review
of Neuroscience, 38, 433–447.
Reeve, J., & Tseng, C. M. (2011). Cortisol reactivity to a teacher's moti-
vating style: The biology of being controlled versus supporting au-
tonomy. Motivation and Emotion, 35, 63–74.
Ridderinkhof, K. R., van Wouwe N. C., Band, G. P., Wylie, S. A., Van der
Stigchel, S., van Hees, P., van den Wildenberg, W. P. (2012). A
tribute to Charlie Chaplin: Induced positive affect improves
reward-based decision-learning in Parkinson's disease. Frontiers in
Psychology, 3 (Article 185). doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00185
Rosenqvist, O., & Skans, O. N. (2015). Confidence enhanced perfor-
mance? – The causal effects of success on future performance in
professional golf tournaments. Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization, 117, 281–295.
Rotem-Lehrer, N., & Laufer, Y. (2007). Effect of focus of attention on
transfer of a postural control task following an ankle sprain. Journal
of Orthopaedic and Sports Physical Therapy, 37, 564–569.
Rowe, J. B., Eckstein, D., Braver, T., & Owen, A. M. (2008). How does
reward expectation influence cognition in the human brain? Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20, 1980–1992.
Rudman, L. A., Dohn, M. C., & Fairchild, K. (2007). Implicit self-esteem
compensation: Automatic threat defense. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 93, 798–813.
Russell, R., Porter, J., & Campbell, O. (2014). An external skill focus is
necessary to enhance performance. Journal of Motor Learning and
Development, 2, 37–46.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-Determination Theory and the
facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-
being. American Psychologist, 55, 68–78.
Saemi, E., Porter, J. M., Ghotbi-Varzaneh, A., Zarghami, M., & Maleki, F.
(2012). Knowledge of results after relatively good trials enhances
self-efficacy and motor learning. Psychology of Sport and Exercise,
13, 378–382.
Saemi, E., Wulf, G., Varzaneh, A. G., & Zarghami, M. (2011). Feedback
after good versus poor trials enhances motor learning in children.
Revista Brasileira de Educação Física e Esporte (Brazilian Journal
of Physical Education and Sport), 25, 671–679.
Salmoni, A. W., Schmidt, R. A., & Walter, C. B. (1984). Knowledge of
results and motor learning: A review and critical appraisal.
Psychological Bulletin, 95, 355–386.
Sanli, E. A., Patterson, J. T., Bray, S. R., & Lee, T. D. (2013).
Understanding self-controlled motor learning protocols through
self-determination theory. Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 611. doi:10.
3389/fpsyg.2012.00611
Schmidt, R. A. (1975). A schema theory of discrete motor skill learning.
Psychological Review, 82, 225–260.
Schmidt, R. A., & Bjork, R. A. (1992). New conceptualizations of prac-
tice: Common principles in three paradigms suggest new principles
for training. Psychological Science, 3, 207–217.
Schmidt, L., Braun, E. K., Wager, T. D., & Shohamy, D. (2014). Mind
matters: Placebo enhances reward learning in Parkinson's disease.
Nature Neuroscience, 17, 1793–1797.
Schmidt, L., Lebreton, M., Clery-Melin, M-L., Daunizeau, J., &
Pessiglione, M. (2012). Neural mechanisms underlying motivation
of mental versus physical effort. PLoS Biology, 10. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pbio.1001266
Schücker, L., Anheier, W., Hagemann, N., Strauss, B., & Völker, K.
(2013). On the optimal focus of attention for efficient running at
high intensity. Sport, Exercise, and Performance Psychology, 2,
207–219.
Schücker, L., Hagemann, N., Strauss, B., & Völker, K. (2009). The effect
of attentional focus on running economy. Journal of Sports
Sciences, 27, 1241–1248.
Schultz, W. (1998). Predictive reward signal of dopamine neurons.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 80, 1–27.
Schultz, W. (2000). Multiple reward signals in the brain. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 1, 199–207.
Schultz, W. (2010). Review of dopamine signals for reward value and
risk: Basic and recent data. Behavioral and Brain Functions, 6, 24.
doi:10.1186/1744-9081-6-24
Schultz, W. (2013). Updating dopamine reward signals. Current Opinion
in Neurobiology, 23, 229–238.
Shafizadeh, M., Platt, G. K., & Bahram, A. (2013). Effects of focus of
attention and type of practice on learning and self-efficacy in dart
throwing. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 117, 182–192.
Shea, C. H., & Wulf, G. (1999). Enhancing motor learning through ex-
ternal-focus instructions and feedback. Human Movement Science,
18, 553–571.
Shea, C. H., Wulf, G., Whitacre, C., & Park, J. H. (2001). Surfing the
implicit wave. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54A,
841–862.
Shmuelof, L., & Krakauer, J. W. (2011). Are we ready for a natural
history of motor learning? Neuron, 72, 469–476.
Shohamy, D., & Adcock, R. A. (2010). Dopamine and adaptive memory.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14, 464–472.
Shomstein, S., & Johnson, J. (2013). Shaping attention with reward:
Effects of reward on space- and object-based selection.
Psychological Science, 24, 2369–2378.
1412
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414

----- Page 32 (native) -----
Shors, T. J. (2014). The adult brain makes new neurons, and effortful
learning keeps them alive. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 23, 311–318.
Song, S., Gotts, S. J., Dayan, E., & Cohen, L. G. (2015). Practice structure
improves unconscious transitional memories by increasing synchro-
ny in a premotor network. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 27,
1503–1512. doi:10.1162/jocn_a_00796
Southard, D. (2011). Attentional focus and control parameter: Effect on
throwing pattern and performance. Research Quarterly for Exercise
and Sport, 82, 652–666.
Sridharan, D., Levitin, D. J., & Menon, V. (2008). A critical role for the
right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive
and default-mode networks. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, 105, 12569–12574.
Ste-Marie, D. M., Vertest, K., Rymal, A. M., & Martini, R. (2011).
Feedforward self-modeling enhances skill acquisition in children
learning trampoline skills. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 155. doi:10.
3389/fpsyg.2011.00155
Stephens, M. A. P., Franks, M. M., Rook, K. S., Iida, M., Hemphill, R. C.,
& Salem, J. K. (2013). Spouses attempts to regulate day-to-day
dietary adherence among patients with Type 2 diabetes. Health
Psychology, 32, 1029–1037.
Sternberg, S. (1969). The discovery of processing stages: Extensions of
Donders’ method. In W. G. Koster (Ed.), Attention and performance
II (pp. 276–315). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Stevens, D., Anderson, D. I., O’Dwyer, N. J., & Williams, A. M. (2012).
Does self-efficacy mediate transfer effects in the learning of easy and
difficult motor skills? Consciousness and Cognition, 21, 1122–1128.
Stoate, I., & Wulf, G. (2011). Does the attentional focus adopted by
swimmers affect their performance? International Journal of Sport
Science & Coaching, 6, 99–108.
Stoate, I., Wulf, G., & Lewthwaite, R. (2012). Enhanced expectancies
improve movement efficiency in runners. Journal of Sports
Sciences, 30, 815–823.
Stone, J., Lynch, C. I., Sjomeling, M., & Darley, J. M. (1999). Stereotype
threat effects on black and white athletic performance. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 1213–1227.
Sugawara, S. K., Tanaka, S., Okazaki, S., Watanabe, K., Sadato, N.
(2012). Social rewards enhance offline improvements in motor skill.
PLoS ONE, 7, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048174
Sugiura, M., Watanabe, J., Maeda, Y., Matsue, Y., Fukuda, H., &
Kawashima, R. (2005). Cortical mechanisms of visual self-recogni-
tion. NeuroImage, 24, 143–149.
Taren, A. A., Gianaros, P. J., Greco, C. M., Lindsay, E. K., Fairgrieve, A.,
Brown, K. W., Creswell, J. D. (2015). Mindfulness meditation training
alters stress-related amygdala resting state functional connectivity: A
randomized controlled trial. Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience. doi:10.1093/scan/nsv066
Taylor, G., Jungert, T., Mageau, G. A., Schattke, K., Dedic, H.,
Rosenfield, S., & Koestner, R. (2014). A self-determination theory
approach to predicting school achievement over time: The unique
role of intrinsic motivation. Contemporary Educational Psychology,
39, 342–358.
Themanson, J. R., Hillman, C. H., McAuley, E., Buck, S. M., Doerksen,
S. E., Morris, K. S., & Pontifex, M. B. (2008). Self-efficacy effects
on neuroelectric and behavioral indices of action monitoring in older
adults. Neurobiology of Aging, 29, 1111–1122.
Themanson, J. R., Pontifex, M. B., Hillman, C. H., & McAuley, E.
(2011). The relation of self-efficacy and error-related self-regulation.
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 80, 1–10.
Themanson, J. R., & Rosen, P. J. (2015). Examining the relationships
between self-efficacy, task-relevant attentional control, and task per-
formance: Evidence from event-related brain potentials. British
Journal of Psychology, 106, 253–271.
Theodorakis, Y. (1995). Effects of self-efficacy, satisfaction, and personal
goals on swimming performance. Sport Psychologist, 9, 245–253.
Tiger, J. H., Hanley, G. P., & Hernandez, E. (2006). An evaluation of the
value of choice with preschool children. Journal of Applied
Behavior Analysis, 39, 1–16.
Totsika, V., & Wulf, G. (2003). The influence of external and internal foci
of attention on transfer to novel situations and skills. Research
Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 74, 220–225.
Trempe, M., Sabourin, M., & Proteau, L. (2012). Success modulates con-
solidation of a visuomotor adaptation task. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 38, 52–60.
Tzetzis, G., Votsis, E., & Kourtessis, T. (2008). The effect of different cor-
rective feedback methods on the outcome and self confidence of young
athletes. Journal of Sports Science and Medicine, 7, 371–378.
van Eimeren, T., Monchi, O., Ballanger, B., & Strafella, A. P. (2009).
Dysfunction of the default mode network in Parkinson disease.
Archives of Neurology, 66, 877–883.
van Elswijk, G., Kleine, B. U., Overeem, S., & Stegeman, D. F. (2007).
Expectancy induces dynamic modulation of corticospinal excitabil-
ity. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 19, 121–131.
Vance, J., Wulf, G., Töllner, T., McNevin, N. H., & Mercer, J. (2004).
EMG activity as a function of the performers’ focus of attention.
Journal of Motor Behavior, 36, 450–459.
Vereijken, B., van Emmerik, R. E. A., Whiting, H. T. A., & Newell, K. M.
(1992). Free(z)ing degrees of freedom in skill acquisition. Journal of
Motor Behavior, 24, 133–142.
Vickers, J. N. (1996). Visual control when aiming at a far target. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
22, 342–354.
Vickers, J. N. (2009). Advances in coupling perception and action: The quiet
eye as a bidirectional link between gaze, attention and action. In: M.
Raab, J. G. Johnson, & H. R. Heekeren (Eds.), Progress in Brain
Research (p. 279–288), Vol. 174, Mind and Motion: The bidirectional
link between thought and action. The Netherlands: Elsevier.
Vine, S. J., Moore, S. J., & Wilson, M. R. (2011). Quiet eye training
facilitates competitive putting performance in elite golfers.
Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 8. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00008
Vine, S. J., Moore, S. J., & Wilson, M. R. (2015). Quiet eye training: The
acquisition, refinement and resilient performance of targeting skills.
European Journal of Sport Science, 14(Supplement 1), 235–242.
doi:10.1080/17461391.2012.683815
Voss, S. C., & Homzie, M. J. (1970). Choice as a value. Psychological
Reports, 26, 912–914.
Wager, T. D., & Altas, L. A. (2015). The neuroscience of placebo effects:
Connecting context, learning and health. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 16, 403–418.
Watkins, D. (1984). Students’ perceptions of factors influencing tertiary
learning. Higher Education Research and Development, 3, 33–50.
Watson, D. and Clark, L.A. (1999). The PANAS-X: Manual for the
Positive and Negative Affect Schedule-Expanded Form. Retrieved
September 29, 2015 from Iowa Research Online: http://ir.uiowa.
edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1011&context=psychology_pubs
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and val-
idation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: The
PANAS Scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54,
1063–1070.
White, R. W. (1959). Motivation reconsidered: The concept of compe-
tence. Psychological Review, 66, 297–333.
White, M. H., II, & Sheldon, K. M. (2014). The contract year syndrome in
the NBA and MLB: A classic undermining pattern. Motivation and
Emotion, 38, 196–205.
Wilson, B. M., Mickes, L., Stolarz-Fantino, S., Evrard, M., & Fantino, E.
(2015). Increased false-memory susceptibility after mindfulness
meditation Psychological Science OnlineFirst, published on
September 4, 201. doi: 10.1177/0956797615593705
Wise, R. A. (2004). Dopamine, learning and motivation. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 5, 1–12.
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414
1413

----- Page 33 (native) -----
Witt, J. K., Linkenauger, S. A., & Proffitt, D. R. (2012). Get me out of this
slump! Visual illusions improve sports performance. Psychological
Science, 23, 397–399.
Witt, J. K., South, S. C., & Sugovic, M. (2014). A perceiver’s own
abilities influence perception, even when observing others.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21, 384–389.
Wu, W. F. W., Porter, J. M., & Brown, L. E. (2012). Effect of attentional
focus strategies on peak force and performance in the standing long
jump. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 26, 1226–1231.
Wu, J., Srinivasan, R., Kaur, A., & Cramer, S. C. (2014). Resting-state
cortical connectivity predicts motor skill acquisition. NeuroImage,
91, 84–90.
Wulf, G. (2007a). Attention and motor skill learning. Champaign: Human
Kinetics.
Wulf, G. (2007b). Self-controlled practice enhances motor learning:
Implications for physiotherapy. Physiotherapy, 93, 96–101.
Wulf, G. (2013). Attentional focus and motor learning: A review of 15
years. International Review of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 6,
77–104.
Wulf, G. (2016). Why did Tiger Woods shoot 82? A commentary on
Toner and Moran (2015). Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 22,
337–338.
Wulf, G., & Adams, N. (2014). Small choices can enhance balance learn-
ing. Human Movement Science, 38, 235–240.
Wulf, G., Chiviacowsky, S., Schiller, E., & Ávila, L. T. (2010a). Frequent
external-focus feedback enhances learning. Frontiers in Psychology,
1, 190. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2010.00190
Wulf, G., Chiviacowsky, S., & Cardozo, P. (2014a). Additive benefits of
autonomy support and enhanced expectancies for motor learning.
Human Movement Science, 37, 12–20.
Wulf, G., Chiviacowsky, S., & Drews, R. (2015). External focus and
autonomy support: Two important factors in motor learning have
additive benefits. Human Movement Science, 40, 176–184.
Wulf, G., Chiviacowsky, S., & Lewthwaite, R. (2010b). Normative feed-
back effects on the learning of a timing task. Research Quarterly for
Exercise and Sport, 81, 425–431.
Wulf, G., Chiviacowsky, S., & Lewthwaite, R. (2012). Altering mindset
can enhance motor learning in older adults. Psychology and Aging,
27, 14–21.
Wulf, G., Clauss, A., Shea, C. H., & Whitacre, C. (2001a). Benefits of
self-control in dyad practice. Research Quarterly for Exercise and
Sport, 72, 299–303.
Wulf, G., & Dufek, J. S. (2009). Increased jump height with an external
focus due to enhanced lower extremity joint kinetics. Journal of
Motor Behavior, 41, 401–409.
Wulf, G., Dufek, J. S., Lozano, L., & Pettigrew, C. (2010c). Increased
jump height and reduced EMG activity with an external focus of
attention. Human Movement Science, 29, 440–448.
Wulf, G., Freitas, H. E., & Tandy, R. D. (2014b). Choosing to exercise
more: Small choices can increase exercise engagement. Psychology
of Sport and Exercise, 15, 268–271.
Wulf, G., Höß, M., & Prinz, W. (1998). Instructions for motor learning:
Differential effects of internal versus external focus of attention.
Journal of Motor Behavior, 30, 169–179.
Wulf, G., Landers, M., Lewthwaite, R., & Töllner, T. (2009). External
focus instructions reduce postural instability in individuals with
Parkinson disease. Physical Therapy, 89, 162–168.
Wulf, G., & Lewthwaite, R. (2009). Conceptions of ability affect motor
learning. Journal of Motor Behavior, 41, 461–467.
Wulf, G., & Lewthwaite, R. (2010). Effortless motor learning? An exter-
nal focus of attention enhances movement effectiveness and effi-
ciency. In B. Bruya (Ed.), Effortless Attention: A New Perspective
in Attention and Action (pp. 75–101). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Wulf, G., Lewthwaite, R., & Hooyman, A. (2013). Can ability conceptu-
alizations alter the impact of social comparison in motor learning?
Journal of Motor Learning and Development, 1, 20–30.
Wulf, G., McNevin, N. H., & Shea, C. H. (2001b). The automaticity of
complex motor skill learning as a function of attentional focus.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54A, 1143–1154.
Wulf, G., & Prinz, W. (2001). Directing attention to movement effects en-
hances learning: A review. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 648–660.
Wulf, G., Raupach, M., & Pfeiffer, F. (2005). Self-controlled observation-
al practice enhances learning. Research Quarterly for Exercise and
Sport, 76, 107–111.
Wulf, G., & Schmidt, R. A. (1997). Variability of practice and implicit
motor learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 23, 987–1006.
Wulf, G., Shea, C. H., & Park, J. H. (2001c). Attention and motor learn-
ing: Preferences for and advantages of an external focus. Research
Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 72, 335–344.
Wulf, G., & Su, J. (2007). External focus of attention enhances golf shot
accuracy in beginners and experts. Research Quarterly for Exercise
and Sport, 78, 384–389.
Wulf, G., & Toole, T. (1999). Physical assistance devices in complex
motor skill learning: Benefits of a self-controlled practice schedule.
Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 70, 265–272.
Wulf, G., Weigelt, M., Poulter, D. R., & McNevin, N. H. (2003).
Attentional focus on supra-postural tasks affects balance learning.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 56, 1191–1211.
Wulf, G., Zachry, T., Granados, C., & Dufek, J. S. (2007). Increases in
jump-and-reach height through an external focus of attention.
International Journal of Sport Science and Coaching, 2, 275–282.
Yagishita, S., Hayashi-Takagi, A., Ellis-Davies, G. C. R., Urakubo, H., Ishii,
S., & Kasai, H. (2014). A critical time window for dopamine actions on
the structural plasticity of dendritic spines. Science, 345, 1606–1620.
Yin, H. H., Ostlund, S. B., & Balleine, B. W. (2008). Reward-guided
learning beyond dopamine in the nucleus accumbens: The integra-
tive functions of cortico-basal ganglia networks. European Journal
of Neuroscience, 28, 1437–1448.
Zachry, T., Wulf, G., Mercer, J., & Bezodis, N. (2005). Increased move-
ment accuracy and reduced EMG activity as the result of adopting
an external focus of attention. Brain Research Bulletin, 67, 304–309.
Zahodne, L. B., Nowinski, C. J., Gershon, R. C., & Manly, J. J. (2015).
Self-efficacy buffers the relationship between educational disadvan-
tage and executive functioning. Journal of the International
Neuropsychological Society, 21, 297–304.
Zarghami, M., Saemi, E., & Fathi, I. (2012). External focus of attention
enhances discus throwing performance. Kinesiology, 44, 47–51.
1414
Psychon Bull Rev (2016) 23:1382–1414