

----- Page 1 (native) -----
THE PSYCHOLOGY
OF SELF‐DEFENSE:
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
David K. Sherman
GeoVrey L. Cohen
I. Introduction
In major league baseball, a hitter could have a long and productive career by
maintaining a .300 average, that is, by getting a base hit 30% of the time.
A great deal of money could be earned and fame accrued. Yet the other 70%
of the time, this player would have failed. The vast majority of attempts to
hit the ball would result in ‘‘making an out’’ and thus pose a potential threat
to the player’s sense of personal worth and social regard.
Like major league baseball players, people in contemporary society face
innumerable failures and self‐threats. These include substandard perfor-
mance on the job or in class, frustrated goals or aspirations, information
challenging the validity of long‐held beliefs, illness, the defeat of one’s politi-
cal party in an election or of one’s favorite sports team in a playoV, scientiﬁc
evidence suggesting that one is engaging in risky health behavior, negative
feedback at work or in school, rejection in a romantic relationship, real and
perceived social slights, interpersonal and intergroup conﬂict, the misbehav-
ior of one’s child, the loss of a loved one, and so on. In the course of a given
day, the potential number of events that could threaten people’s ‘‘moral and
adaptive adequacy’’—their sense of themselves as good, virtuous, successful,
and able to control important life outcomes (Steele, 1988)—seems limitless
and likely to exceed the small number of events that aYrm it. A major
undertaking for most people is to sustain self‐integrity when faced with the
inevitable setbacks and disappointments of daily life—the 70% of the time
183
ADVANCES IN EXPERIMENTAL
Copyright 2006, Elsevier Inc.
SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY, VOL. 38
All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/S0065-2601(06)38004-5
0065-2601/06 $35.00

----- Page 2 (native) -----
‘‘at bat’’ when they do not get a base hit. How do individuals adapt to such
threats and defend self‐integrity?
Much research suggests that people have a ‘‘psychological immune system’’
that initiates protective adaptations when an actual or impending threat is
perceived (Gilbert, Pinel, Wilson, Blumberg, & Wheatley, 1998). Psychologi-
cal adaptations to threats include the various cognitive strategies and even
distortions whereby people come to construe a situation in a manner that
renders it less threatening to personal worth and well‐being. Many of these
psychological adaptations can be thought of as defensive in nature, insofar as
they alter the meaning of the event in a way that shields people from the
conclusion that their beliefs or actions were misguided. Psychologists
have documented a wide array of such psychological adaptations that help
people to protect their self‐integrity in response to threat.
Indeed, defensive adaptations are so stubborn and pervasive that Greenwald
(1980) described the ego as ‘‘totalitarian’’ in its ambition to interpret the past
and present in a way congenial to its desires and needs. People view them-
selves as a potent causal agent even over events that they cannot control
(Langer, 1975); they view themselves as selectively responsible for producing
positive rather than negative outcomes (Greenwald, 1980; Miller & Ross,
1975; Taylor, 1983). They resist change or—if they do change—become
more extreme versions of what they were before (Lord, Ross, & Lepper,
1979). People dismiss health information suggesting that they are at risk for
disease or should change their risky behavior (Jemmott, Ditto, & Croyle,
1986; Kunda, 1987). Students may disidentify with, or downplay the person-
al importance of, domains where they fail, thus sustaining self‐worth but
precluding the opportunity for improvement (Major, Spencer, Schmader,
Wolfe, & Crocker, 1998; Steele, 1997). People are overoptimistic in their pre-
dictions of future success and estimations of their current knowledge and
competence (Dunning, GriYn, Milojkovic, & Ross, 1990; Kruger & Dunning,
1999). Indeed, these defensive adaptations may even beneﬁt psychological and
physical health (Taylor & Brown, 1988). Although we suspect that people can
be more realistic and more self‐critical than this research suggests, and that their
optimism and positive illusions may be magniﬁed in certain contexts rather
than others (see Armor & Taylor, 2002), the idea that people are ego defensive
resonates both with psychological research and lay wisdom. An important
question, then, concerns the circumstances under which people are less ego
defensive and more open‐minded in their relationship with the social world.
We see defensive responses as adaptations aimed at ameliorating threats
to self‐integrity. The vast research on defensive biases testiﬁes to their
robustness and to the frequency with which people use them. Although these
defensive responses are adaptive in the sense of protecting or enhancing an
individual’s sense of self‐integrity, they can be maladaptive to the extent they
forestall learning from important, though threatening, experiences and
184
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 3 (native) -----
information. Moreover, peoples’ eVorts to protect self‐integrity may threat-
en the integrity of their relationships with others (Cohen et al., 2005;
Murray, Holmes, MacDonald, & Ellsworth, 1998). Yet, these normal adap-
tations can be ‘‘turned oV’’ through an altogether diVerent psychological
adaptation to threat, an alternative adaptation that does not hinge on
distorting the threatening event to render it less signiﬁcant. One way that
these defensive adaptations can be reduced, or even eliminated, is through
the process of self‐aYrmation (Aronson, Cohen, & Nail, 1999; Sherman &
Cohen, 2002; Steele, 1988).
Steele (1988) ﬁrst proposed the theory of self‐aYrmation. It asserts that the
overall goal of the self‐system is to protect an image of its self‐integrity, of its
moral and adaptive adequacy. When this image of self‐integrity is threatened,
people respond in such a way as to restore self‐worth. As noted previously,
one way that this is accomplished is through defensive responses that directly
reduce the threat. But another way is through the aYrmation of alternative
sources of self‐integrity. Such ‘‘self‐aYrmations,’’ by fulﬁlling the need to
protect self‐integrity in the face of threat, can enable people to deal with
threatening events and information without resorting to defensive biases.
In this paper, we update the ﬁeld on research conducted using self‐aYrma-
tion theory as a framework. This research illuminates both the motivational
processes underlying self‐integrity maintenance and the implications of
such processes for many domains of psychology. We illustrate how self‐
aYrmation aVects not only people’s cognitive responses to threatening
information and events, but also their physiological adaptations and actual
behavior. The research presented has implications for psychological and
physical health, education, social conﬂict, closemindedness and resistance
to change, prejudice and discrimination, and a variety of other important
applied areas. We also examine how self‐aYrmations reduce threats to the
self at the collective level, such as when people confront threatening in-
formation about their groups. We then review factors that qualify or limit
the eVectiveness of self‐aYrmations, including situations where aYrmations
backﬁre, and lead to greater defensiveness and discrimination. We discuss
the connection of self‐aYrmation theory to other motivational theories
of self‐defense and review relevant theoretical and empirical advances. We
conclude with a discussion of the implications of self‐aYrmation theory for
interpersonal relationships and coping.
A. OVERVIEW OF SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
Self‐aYrmation theory (Aronson et al., 1999; Sherman & Cohen, 2002;
Steele, 1988) begins with the premise that people are motivated to maintain
the integrity of the self. Integrity can be deﬁned as the sense that, on the
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
185

----- Page 4 (native) -----
whole, one is a good and appropriate person. Cultural anthropologists use
the term ‘‘appropriate’’ to refer to behavior that is ﬁtting or suitable given
the cultural norms and the salient demands on people within that culture.
Thus, the standards for what it means to be a good person vary across
cultures, groups, and situations (e.g., Heine, 2005). Such standards of integ-
rity can include the importance of being intelligent, rational, independent,
and autonomous, and exerting control over important outcomes. Such
standards of integrity can also include the importance of being a good group
member and of maintaining close relationships. Threats to self‐integrity may
thus take many forms but they will always involve real and perceived failures
to meet culturally or socially signiﬁcant standards (Leary & Baumeister,
2000). Consequently, people are vigilant to events and information that call
their self‐integrity into question, both in their own eyes and in the eyes of
others. In such situations, people try to restore or reassert the integrity of the
self. Thus, the goal of protecting self‐integrity, and the impact of that goal
on psychology and behavior, becomes apparent when integrity is threatened.
There are three categories of responses that people deploy to cope with
such threats. First, they can respond by accommodating to the threat. That
is, they can accept the failure or the threatening information and then use it
as a basis for attitudinal and behavioral change. However, to the extent that
the threatened domain concerns an important part of one’s identity, the need
to maintain self‐integrity can make it diYcult to accept the threatening
information and to change one’s attitude or behavior accordingly. A second
response thus involves ameliorating the threat via direct psychological adap-
tations. While some direct adaptations preserve the fundamental infor-
mational value of the event while also changing one’s construal of that
event (e.g., framing a failure as a learning opportunity; Dweck & Leggett,
1988), other direct psychological adaptations are defensive in nature in that
they involve dismissing, denying, or avoiding the threat in some way. We
refer to these responses as defensive biases (see Sherman & Cohen, 2002).
Although a defensive bias can restore self‐integrity, the rejection of the
threatening information can lessen the probability that the person will learn
from the potentially important information.
Self‐aYrmation theory proposes a third alternative, a diVerent kind of
psychological adaptation—one that, under many circumstances, enables
both the restoration of self‐integrity and adaptive behavior change. People
can respond to threats using the indirect psychological adaptation of aYrming
alternative self‐resources unrelated to the provoking threat. Such ‘‘self‐aYr-
mations’’ include reﬂecting on important aspects of one’s life irrelevant to
the threat, or engaging in an activity that makes salient important values
unconnected to the threatening event. Whereas defensive psychological adap-
tations directly address the threatening information, indirect psychological
186
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 5 (native) -----
adaptations, such as self‐aYrmation, allow people to focus on domains of
self‐integrity unrelated to the threat. When self‐aYrmed in this manner,
people realize that their self‐worth does not hinge on the evaluative implica-
tions of the immediate situation. As a result, they have less need to distort
or reconstrue the provoking threat and can respond to the threatening
information in a more open and evenhanded manner.
B. BASIC TENETS OF SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
Much research within the self‐aYrmation framework examines whether an
aYrmation of self‐integrity, unrelated to a speciﬁc provoking threat, can
attenuate or eliminate people’s normal response to that threat. If it does,
then one can infer that the response was motivated by a desire to protect self‐
integrity. The self‐aYrmation framework encompasses four tenets, which are
enumerated below:
1. People are Motivated to Protect the Perceived Integrity and
Worth of the Self
The most basic tenet of self‐aYrmation theory (Steele, 1988) is that people
are motivated to protect the perceived integrity and worth of the self. As
Steele observed, the purpose of the self‐system is to ‘‘maintain a phenomenal
experience of the self . . . as adaptively and morally adequate, that is,
competent, good, coherent, unitary, stable, capable of free choice, capable
of controlling important outcomes . . . (p. 262).’’ These self‐conceptions and
images making up the self‐system can be thought of as the diVerent domains
that are important to an individual, or the diVerent contingencies of a
person’s self‐worth (Crocker & Wolfe, 2001). Figure 1 presents a schematic
of the self‐system. The self is composed of diVerent domains, which include
an individual’s roles, such as being a student or a parent; values, such as
being religious or having a sense of humor; social identities, such as mem-
bership in groups or organizations and in racial, cultural, and gender groups;
and belief systems, such as political ideologies. The self is also composed of
people’s goals, such as the value of being healthy or succeeding in school.
The self‐system is activated when a person experiences a threat to an impor-
tant self‐conception or image. Such threat poses a challenge to a desired
self‐conception. Thus, failure feedback could threaten a person’s identity
as a student, negative health information could threaten a person’s self‐
conception as a healthful individual, news about anti‐American sentiment
could threaten a person’s patriotic identity, and evidence of social inequality
could challenge a person’s belief in a just world (Lerner, 1980). All of these
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
187

----- Page 6 (native) -----
events are threatening because they have implications for a person’s overall
sense of self‐integrity.
2. Motivations to Protect Self‐Integrity can Result in
Defensive Responses
When self‐integrity is threatened, people are motivated to repair it, and this
motivation can lead to defensive responses. The defensive responses may
seem rational and defensible, though they are more ‘‘rationalizing’’ than
‘‘rational’’ (Aronson, 1968; Kunda, 1990; Pyszczynski & Greenberg, 1987).
They serve to diminish the threat and consequently, restore the perceived
integrity of the self. These defensive responses can be automatic and even
unconscious in nature, and indeed, the rapidity with which people respond
to threats speaks to the importance of self‐integrity maintenance.
3. The Self‐System is Flexible
People often compensate for failures in one aspect of their lives by empha-
sizing successes in other domains. Personality theorists, such as Allport
(1961) and Murphy (1947), have advanced this notion of compensation,
and self‐aYrmation theory is consistent with this claim (see also Brown &
Smart, 1991). Because the goal of the self‐system focuses on maintaining
the overall worth and integrity of the self, people can respond to threats in
one domain by aYrming the self in another domain. This fungibility in the
sources of self‐integrity is what can enable smokers, for example, to maintain
a perception of worth and integrity despite the potentially threatening
conclusion that they are acting in a maladaptive, harmful, and irrational
Fig. 1.
Schematic representation of self‐system.
188
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 7 (native) -----
way (Steele, 1988). AYrmations satisfy the motivation to maintain self‐
integrity—thus, they reduce the normal psychological adaptations people
engage to ameliorate a speciﬁc provoking threat.
4. People can be AYrmed by Engaging in Activities that Remind them
of ‘‘Who They Are’’ (And Doing so Reduces the Implications for
Self‐Integrity of Threatening Events)
Those qualities that are central to how people see themselves are potential
domains of self‐aYrmation. Such aYrmations can concern friends and
family, making art or music, a charity, or the observance of one’s religion.
In a diYcult situation, reminders of these core qualities can provide people
with perspective on who they are and anchor their sense of self‐integrity in
the face of threat. A ‘‘self‐aYrmation’’ makes salient one of these important
core qualities or sources of identity. Operationally, self‐aYrmations are
typically ideographic, in that people ﬁrst report an important value or life
domain, and then they are given the opportunity either to write an essay
about it or to complete a scale or exercise that allows them to assert its
importance (McQueen & Klein, 2005).
When global perceptions of self‐integrity are aYrmed, otherwise threaten-
ing events or information lose their self‐threatening capacity because the
individual can view them within a broader, larger view of the self. People can
thus focus not on the implications for self‐integrity of a given threat or
stressor, but on its informational value. When self‐aYrmed, individuals feel
as though the task of proving their worth, both to themselves and to others,
is ‘‘settled.’’ As a consequence, they can focus on other salient demands in
the situation beyond ego protection.
II. Self‐AYrmation and Threats to the Individual Self
A great deal of research has used self‐aYrmation theory to address a wide
range of psychological phenomena, including biased information processing,
causal attributions, cognitive dissonance, prejudice and stereotyping, stress
and rumination. What connects these disparate areas of research is that they
all address situations or events where people contend with a threat to a
valued self‐image. We ﬁrst review research on the impact of experienced
threats to self‐identities, such as one’s political identity or one’s identity as a
healthful or intelligent individual. We then review research on the impact of
experienced threats to collective identities, such as one’s team or racial
group.
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
189

----- Page 8 (native) -----
A. MOTIVATED INFERENCES AND BIASED ASSIMILATION
People often interpret new information in a way that reinforces their beliefs
and desires. One striking example occurred during the 2000 presidential
controversy in Florida. Evaluations of seemingly arbitrary events (e.g.,
beliefs about appropriate policies for dealing with hanging chads, whether
to count votes from certain counties) were consistently and predictably
aligned with people’s political identities. The Florida situation presented a
series of novel issues where partisanship lines had not, at ﬁrst, been clearly
deﬁned. Yet, in little time, people were able to determine their criteria for
establishing voter intent, and in most cases, their criteria were consistent
with their partisanship, and the position that they ultimately advocated
served the interests of their candidate of choice (cf. Gerber & Green, 1999).
It is interesting to imagine what would have happened during the Florida
debacle if the situation were reversed, and if Vice President Albert Gore were
leading rather than Governor George W. Bush as the vote was contested.
That is, if the situation was ‘‘counterbalanced’’ like a proper psychology
experiment, would Republican leaders have argued for the sanctity of the
vote and the need to count each chad and would Democratic leaders have
argued against them? Research on biased assimilation by Lord et al. (1979)
suggests that they would. In this classic study, proponents and opponents of
capital punishment evaluated two studies on the eYcacy of capital punish-
ment as a deterrent. The two studies featured diVerent designs (a panel
design comparing murder rates from states before and after the implemen-
tation of capital punishment policy, and a concurrent design comparing
murder rates from states that either used capital punishment or did not).
Unlike the situation in Florida, the study was completely counterbalanced.
That is, two versions of each study were created, one that supported and one
that refuted the deterrent value of capital punishment. Thus, the study
allows an examination of whether and to what extent prior beliefs (or
identities) bias the interpretation of information.
When the study was consistent with participants’ prior beliefs, they
thought it was better conducted and more convincing regardless of the
speciﬁc design (concurrent versus panel) of the study. Moreover, reading a
mixed bag of evidence—one study supporting and one study contradicting
their beliefs—led participants to report becoming more conﬁdent in the
validity of their beliefs about the deterrent eYcacy of the death penalty.
The study provides an experimental analog to the hypothetical switch in the
Florida election scenario. Regardless of what evidence people were pre-
sented, they evaluated it in a way consistent with their prior beliefs and, in
turn, this biased assimilation appeared to strengthen the very prior beliefs
that give rise to the bias in evaluation.
190
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Lord et al. (1979) emphasized the role of cool cognitive inferential pro-
cesses in producing biased assimilation. Like Bayesian theorists, people use
their prior beliefs to evaluate the validity of incoming data. It is thus
logically permissible for them to reject belief‐incongruent evidence and to
accept with little scrutiny belief‐congruent evidence (Nisbett & Ross, 1980).
In contrast, we argue that such biases issue from the motivation to maintain
and protect identity (see also Munro & Ditto, 1997). That is, partisans in the
Lord et al. (1979) study scrutinized the evidence in a way that would protect
their identity either as a ‘‘law and order’’ conservative or as a ‘‘humanitarian’’
liberal (Cohen, 2003; Ellsworth & Ross, 1983).
According to our analysis, the need to protect a valued identity or self‐
view is a major source of such biased processing and closed mindedness.
Because long‐held beliefs are often tied to important identities, they may be
given up only with great reluctance, and they may be embraced even when
they conﬂict with the demands of fact, logic, or material self‐interest (e.g.,
Abelson, 1986; Sears & Funk, 1991). Yet, people possess other important
identities and values that they can draw on when they encounter belief‐
threatening information. Providing them with an aYrmation of one of these
alternative sources of self‐integrity should enable them to evaluate the
threatening information in a less biased and defensive manner. We tested
this logic in a study of biased assimilation in the domain of capital punish-
ment (Cohen, Aronson, & Steele, 2000). In a study patterned after Lord
et al. (1979), proponents and opponents of capital punishment read an
article from the Journal of Law and Human Behavior titled ‘‘The Death
Penalty: New Evidence Informs an Old Debate.’’ The article was fabricated,
but contained facts, statistics, and arguments that waged a persuasive assault
on participants’ attitudes toward capital punishment. Thus, proponents of
capital punishment read an anti‐capital punishment report and opponents
of capital punishment read a pro‐capital punishment report.
Prior to reading the article on capital punishment, all participants com-
pleted a writing exercise that constituted our self‐aYrmation manipulation.
Participants in the self‐aYrmation condition wrote an essay about a person-
al value that they had rated, during pretest, as personally important (such as
their relationships with friends or sense of humor). Speciﬁcally, they were
asked to describe three to four personal experiences where the value had
been important to them and had made them feel good about themselves. The
value they wrote about was, in all cases, unrelated to their political views.
Participants in the no‐aYrmation condition wrote about a neutral topic.
In the no‐aYrmation control condition, our ﬁndings mirrored those of
Lord et al. (1979). Participants found ﬂaws in the methodology of the studies
that contradicted their political beliefs, they suspected bias on the part of the
authors of the report, and they persisted in their attitudes about capital
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
191

----- Page 10 (native) -----
punishment. By contrast, the responses of participants who aYrmed a
valued self‐identity proved more balanced. That is, self‐aYrmed participants
were less critical of the reported research and suspected less bias on the part
of the authors of the report. Participants even changed their global attitudes
toward capital punishment in the direction of the report they read. That
is, proponents of capital punishment supported the death penalty less, and
opponents of capital punishment supported it more (Cohen et al., 2000, Study
2). That both partisan groups showed the eVect attests to the power of the
psychological mechanism. Not only did proponents come to privilege ‘‘life’’
over ‘‘law and order’’ more when self‐aYrmed than when not, but opponents
of capital punishment, when self‐aYrmed, came to support state‐sanctioned
execution to a greater extent (see also Jacks & O’Brien, 2004).
A third study examined how people evaluate others who either agree or
disagree with their beliefs (Cohen et al., 2000). Pro‐choice and pro‐life parti-
sans were presented with a debate between two activists on opposite sides of
the abortion dispute. Participants who did not receive a self‐aYrmation judged
the activist who shared their convictions more favorably than the activist who
did not (see also Hastorf & Cantril, 1954). In contrast, participants who were
given a self‐aYrmation became more balanced in their evaluation of the two
activists and asserted that they were relatively less conﬁdent of the validity of
their abortion attitudes, relative to their nonaYrmed peers.
The motivation to protect identity may prove especially consequential in
the context of negotiation. In negotiation—between parties, nations, indivi-
duals—there exists a barrier to compromise, a barrier that often leads
disputing factions to reject even mutually beneﬁcial settlements and instead
persist in mutually destructive conﬂict (Ross & Ward, 1995; Sherman,
Nelson, & Ross, 2003). This barrier issues, in part, from a motivation to
defend one’s political, national, or regional identity—a motivation that can
result in intransigence and stalemate (De Dreu & Carnevale, 2003). To
accept compromise entails acting in a way that could exact painful costs to
self and social identity. Compromise entails that one must accept policies
anathema to one’s past ideological commitments, or take courses of action
contrary to the interests of one’s constituencies and group loyalties. Accord-
ingly, negotiation should be facilitated when people’s partisan identities are
made less vital to their sense of self‐integrity through the aYrmation of
alternative sources of self‐worth.
In one study, pro‐choice participants entered into a negotiation with a
pro‐life advocate about appropriate federal abortion policy (Cohen et al.,
2005). To make their partisan identity salient prior to the negotiation,
participants were ﬁrst asked to assert their ‘‘true beliefs’’ on abortion policy.
Additionally, prior to the negotiation, half of the participants received a
values aYrmation and half did not. It was found that aYrmation increased
192
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 11 (native) -----
the number of concessions that pro‐choice participants made to their pro‐life
adversary (e.g., they were more likely to agree to the idea of parental
notiﬁcation). More dramatically, aYrmation also led participants to evalu-
ate their adversary as more objective and trustworthy (i.e., as less inﬂuenced
by self‐interest and ideology)—a ﬁnding with clear implications for real‐
world negotiation where the cultivation of trust is a critical step in the
resolution of conﬂict.
These studies raise an important question as to why people are more open‐
minded when aYrmed than when not. Correll, Spencer, and Zanna (2004)
proposed that aYrmation leads to greater attitude change via a more careful
consideration of the arguments, rather than through more superﬁcial, heu-
ristic processing. That is, aYrmation does not lead to change through more
peripheral or ‘‘mindless’’ routes (e.g., by raising mood and thus promoting
agreeableness) but through the more central route of more balanced infor-
mation processing (Petty & Cacioppo, 1986; Petty & Wegener, 1998). These
researchers presented people with pro‐ and counter‐attitudinal arguments
that varied in quality. According to their analysis, what should prove most
threatening is strong evidence against one’s position and weak evidence
in favor of one’s position. Thus, self‐aYrmation should increase openness
only to strong evidence against one’s position and increase rejection of
weak evidence in favor of one’s position. This is what Correll et al. (2004)
found. Self‐aYrmation led people to be more responsive to the intrinsic
strength of the arguments rather than the concordance of those arguments
with their prior beliefs. Also consistent with the claim that self‐aYrmation
helps reduce the bias of personal beliefs in processing information, Cohen
et al. (2005) found that self‐aYrmed participants exhibited more balanced
cognitive and aVective responses to a counter‐attitudinal report than did
their non‐aYrmed peers.
B. THREATENING HEALTH INFORMATION
Defensive processing can be particularly costly when it leads people to reject
important health information. Individuals often face information suggesting
that they are engaging in behavior that puts their health at risk. Health
information can threaten the self by suggesting that people have acted
unwisely, for example, by smoking, drinking, or practicing unsafe sex.
Although it would be optimal if people responded to personal health infor-
mation by ceasing risky behavior, people often resist threatening health
messages, and subsequently, persist in unhealthful or risky behaviors. For
example, one study found that sexually active students who saw an AIDS
educational message responded by lowering their perceived risk for sexually
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
193

----- Page 12 (native) -----
transmitted diseases—a defensive response (Morris & Swann, 1996). Several
studies have found that when a health message is of high personal rele-
vance, people are more likely to scrutinize the message for fault than
when a message is of no special relevance (Ditto & Lopez, 1992; Kunda,
1987; Liberman & Chaiken, 1992). People use diVerent criteria or probative
thresholds when evaluating the validity of information that either sup-
ports or contradicts their desires (Ditto, Scepansky, Munro, Apanovitch,
& Lockhart, 1998). That is, they use a ‘‘must I believe this information?’’
criterion when evaluating evidence that runs contrary to their preexisting
health beliefs, whereas they use a ‘‘can I believe this information?’’ criterion
when evaluating evidence consistent with those beliefs (Dawson, Gilovich, &
Regan, 2002).
People are biased in their assessments of threatening health information,
we argue, because being a ‘‘healthy person’’ is an important part of how they
see themselves. Making a behavioral change in a positive direction carries
the self‐evaluative burden of acknowledging that one has engaged in mal-
adaptive behaviors in the past. Thus, out of a desire to protect a self‐image
of oneself as rational and healthy, people may ultimately persevere in
irrational and unhealthful behavior. However, the logic of self‐aYrmation
theory suggests that if individuals can reﬂect on an alternative source of
identity, their overall sense of self‐integrity will be secured, and they may be
more apt to consider information without resorting to defensive biases.
Sherman, Nelson, and Steele (2000) examined defensive responses to
threatening health information in the context of breast‐cancer prevention.
Participants were women who were either coVee drinkers or noncoVee
drinkers, and they reviewed a (fabricated) scientiﬁc report linking caVeine
consumption to ﬁbrocystic disease, a precursor to breast cancer. The report
concluded by suggesting that women can reduce their risk for ﬁbrocystic
disease by reducing their caVeine consumption. Those in the no‐aYrmation
control condition exhibited the pattern found in earlier research (Kunda,
1987; Liberman & Chaiken, 1992): the coVee‐drinking women were more
critical of the scientiﬁc article and more resistant to the message than were
the noncoVee drinking women (see Fig. 2). By contrast, coVee‐drinking
women who had completed a scale that enabled them to assert the personal
importance of a central value (e.g., their religious or political values) proved
more open to the message than any other group and intended to reduce their
coVee drinking accordingly. Because the motivation to protect self‐worth
was satisﬁed via this self‐aYrmation, people who would have otherwise felt
threatened by the health message proved more open and more willing to
engage in adaptive behavior change.
Other researchers have also documented the ‘‘de‐biasing’’ eVects of self‐
aVirmation. In one study by Reed and Aspinwall (1998), heavy and light
194
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 13 (native) -----
caVeine consuming women were given information about the link between
caVeine consumption and ﬁbrocystic disease. Half of the participants were
then given the opportunity to aYrm the self by reﬂecting on acts of kindness
that they had performed. The heavy caVeine consumers who were aYrmed
oriented more rapidly to the risk‐conﬁrming information, that is, they looked
at this information more quickly and viewed it as more convincing. Further-
more, the aYrmed heavy caVeine consumers recalled less risk‐disconﬁrming
information at a one‐week follow‐up.
If self‐aYrmation can reduce the biased processing of health information,
does it have implications for actual behavior? One study examined whether
aYrmation could lead to change in health behavior (Sherman et al., 2000).
Sexually active undergraduates watched an AIDS‐educational video sug-
gesting that their sexual behavior could put them at risk for HIV. Half
received a self‐aYrmation prior to watching the video; the others did
not. Although non‐aYrmed participants tended to resist the presented infor-
mation (maintaining their perceived risk from pretest levels), aYrmed parti-
cipants responded by increasing their perceived potential risk for contracting
AIDS. The aYrmation not only aVected perceived risk but also aVected
subsequent health behavior. Whereas 25% of nonaYrmed individuals
Fig. 2.
Acceptance of article’s conclusions as a function of coVee‐drinking status and aVirmation
status. From Sherman, D. A. K., Nelson, L. D., & Steele, C. M. (2000). Do messages about health
risks threaten the self? Increasing the acceptance of threatening health messages via self‐aVirma-
tion. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 1046–1058. Adapted with permission.
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
195

----- Page 14 (native) -----
purchased condoms after viewing the video, 50% of aYrmed participants did
so. Additionally, participants who completed the self‐aYrmation were more
likely to take an AIDS‐educational brochure (78% did so) than participants
in the no‐aYrmation condition (54% did so). The self‐aYrmation seemed to
buVer individuals from the potential threat of the AIDS‐educational mes-
sage, opened them to the possibility that they were at risk, and motivated
them to undertake preventive behaviors.
Do self‐aYrmation interventions produce long‐term eVects on increasing
the acceptance of threatening health messages? For the eVects to have
practical signiﬁcance, they must persist beyond the experimental setting.
From a theoretical standpoint, if self‐aYrmation promotes attitude change
via more central route processing (as was found in the Correll et al., 2004
study), then the eVects of self‐aYrmation on attitude change should be
durable rather than short‐lived. To date, few studies have examined the
longer‐term eVects of self‐aYrmation.
Harris and Napper (2005) speciﬁcally examined the longer‐term eVects
of self‐aYrmation on health persuasion. Young women (light versus heavy
alcohol consumers) were given a pamphlet describing the risks of developing
breast cancer from drinking too much alcohol. The pamphlet informed young
women that excessive drinking can lead to breast cancer and is thus dangerous.
Prior to reading the pamphlet, all participants completed a self‐aYrmation
wherein they either wrote an essay about their most important value or a
relatively unimportant value. The researchers assessed perceived risk at the
experimental session as well as at one week and one month after the experimen-
tal session.
Among the participants most at risk for health problems—that is, the women
who drank heavily—those who completed the self‐aYrmation saw themselves
as being at greater risk for breast cancer than those who were not aYrmed (as in
Sherman et al., 2000), an eVect that did not diminish over time. The high‐risk
self–aYrmed participants also reported that they found it easier to imagine
themselves with breast cancer—an eVect that persisted one month later. Final-
ly, the high‐risk participants who completed the self‐aYrmation had stronger
intentions to reduce their alcohol consumption at the experimental session,
although this was not associated with more positive health behaviors in the
form of drinking reduction during the following month. Thus, the eVects of
the self‐aYrmation proved durable (1 month) at aVecting risk perceptions,
although the long‐term eVects on behavior have not been established.
An interesting question concerns the factors that facilitate long‐term
behavioral eVects. Long‐term eVects will be enhanced, we suspect, when
situational cues remind individuals of the change in attitude and identity
that a persuasive message had engendered in them. For example, Dal Cin,
MacDonald, Fong, Zanna, and Elton‐Marshall (in press) provided evidence
196
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 15 (native) -----
that an information campaign to reduce unsafe sexual practices could have
long‐term eVects on condom use (as assessed up to 8 weeks later) if partici-
pants are given an ‘‘identity cue’’ to wear that would remind them both of
the ‘‘safe sex’’ persuasive video they had previously viewed and to their
commitment to the cause of promoting safe sexual practices. Speciﬁcally,
the impact of the safer sex message on behavior was greatly increased if
participants were given a ‘‘friendship bracelet’’ that served to aYrm their
personal concern for people suVering from sexually transmitted diseases
(Dal Cin et al., in press). Pairing such identity cues with self‐aYrmation
constitutes an exciting direction for future research.
C. STRESS
If self‐aYrmation enables people to view otherwise threatening events, such as
negative health information, as less threatening, then one intriguing possibili-
ty is that it could also reduce evaluative stress. Stress is the process by which
environmental events are appraised as threatening, which in turn elicits
emotional and physiological responses that can adversely aVect health and
increase susceptibility to disease (Lazarus, 1993; McEwen, 1998). As Keough,
Garcia, and Steele (1998) suggested, stress may arise, in large part, from
threats to the perceived worth and integrity of the self (Creswell, et al., 2005;
Keough, 1998). Consistent with this notion, common laboratory methods for
inducing stress, such as the Trier Social Stress Task, have participants deliver
a personally relevant speech and perform diYcult mental arithmetic in front
of a hostile audience (Kirschbaum, Pirke, & Hellhammer, 1993). These tasks
have reliably been shown to threaten the self, induce appraisals of threat, and
elicit the stress hormone cortisol (Dickerson & Kemeny, 2004).
The self‐aYrmation analysis also suggests that stress can be ameliorated
through the aYrmation of alternative sources of self‐integrity. Speciﬁcally,
self‐aYrmations can secure self‐worth in a domain unrelated to the stressor
(Creswell et al., 2005; Keough, 1998), and may, as a result, encourage people
to view the stressful event without feeling as though their self integrity is in
question. A study examining self‐enhancement and physiological responses
to stress provides suggestive evidence for this eVect. Those who saw them-
selves as being above average across a number of domains responded to a
stressful situation (mental arithmetic challenge in front of a hostile audience)
with reduced blood pressure and heart rate, relative to those who were less
self‐enhancing (Taylor, Lerner, Sherman, Sage, & McDowell, 2003). This
ﬁnding suggests that those who perceive themselves as having more
resources and abilities experience a potentially threatening task in a less
physiologically taxing manner because their overall feelings of self‐integrity
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
197

----- Page 16 (native) -----
hinge less on their performance on that particular task (see also Seery,
Blascovich, Weisbuch, & Vick, 2004).
An inﬂuential model of how to conceptualize psychological resources in
stressful situations was advanced by Hobfoll (1989). He deﬁned resources
as ‘‘those objects, personal characteristics, conditions, or energies that
are valued by the individual or that serve as a means for attainment of
these objects, personal characteristics, and energies (p. 516).’’ Psychological
resources can thus encompass aspects of self that are unrelated to a given
threat or stressor. If this is true, then enhancing the perception of self‐
resources via self‐aYrmation could reduce the physiological costs of stress.
Consistent with this work, one study found that self‐aYrmation reduced
perceived stress during a diYcult serial subtraction task (Keough et al., 1998).
To test the stress‐buVering eVects of self‐aYrmation directly, one study
had participants complete a self‐aYrmation procedure—a values scale for
their most important value (versus an unimportant value in the control
condition)—prior to engaging in the Trier Social Stress Task (Creswell
et al., 2005). Thus, those in the self‐aYrmation condition indicated their
agreement with an important value (e.g., religion) in a domain of their life
unrelated to the stressful task. Participants were instructed to prepare a
speech to be given to two speech evaluators concerning why they would be
qualiﬁed for a job as an administrative assistant in a psychology department.
The speech evaluators (i.e., confederates who were trained to act in a sullen
manner) directed the 5‐minute speech task and then asked the participant
to complete a 5‐minute mental arithmetic task by counting aloud back-
wards from 2083 by 13’s (a task where self‐aYrmations have been success-
ful at improving performance; Schimel, Arndt, Banko, & Cook, 2004).
Salivary cortisol measurements were assessed at baseline and at 20, 30, and
45 minutes poststress onset.
As displayed in Fig. 3, during baseline there were no diVerences in cortisol
levels between participants in the self‐aYrmation and control conditions.
Yet, at the 20‐minute measurement, and persisting through 45 minutes
after the stress task, the participants in the control condition had elevated
cortisol levels, whereas the self‐aYrmation participants did not (Creswell
et al., 2005). This ﬁnding provides the ﬁrst experimental evidence that a self‐
aYrmation manipulation can buVer the self not only at a psychological level,
but also at a physiological level.
Threatening experiences are not only stressful while they occur, but also
after the fact, as people engage in ruminative thinking, and the thoughts of
the threatening event reoccur (Martin & Tesser, 1996; Nolen‐Hoeksema &
Morrow, 1991). One study examined whether this ruminative thinking
would be reduced among participants who completed a self‐aYrmation
(Koole, Smeets, van Knippenberg, & Dijksterhuis, 1999). In this research,
198
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 17 (native) -----
participants were given failure feedback on an analogy test that was ostensi-
bly an IQ test. Then, half of them completed a values scale concerning their
most important value, whereas the other half completed a values scale of a
value they considered to be relatively unimportant to them. The accessibility
of the words from the failed IQ test (i.e., words from the analogy items) was
assessed, either by recognition accuracy (Study 1) or the use of a lexical
decision‐making test (Study 2) (Koole et al., 1999). Both measures assessed
the extent to which participants were ruminating about the failure. Those
participants who aYrmed an important aspect of the self by completing the
values scale were less likely to ruminate after failure (Koole et al., 1999).
Self‐aYrmation, then, can decrease ruminative thinking, and this may be one
mechanism by which it makes stressors less stressful.
If self‐aYrmations can reduce physiological responses to stress (Creswell
et al., 2005), then it is plausible that repeated aYrmations might help people
cope with daily stressors. As daily stressors have been shown to impair
immune functioning (Glaser & Kiecolt‐Glaser, 1994), a self‐aYrmation
intervention could lead to beneﬁcial health outcomes. Keough et al. (1998)
examined this hypothesis in a sample of undergraduates who wrote essays
over winter break on one of four topics. Participants in the aYrmation
condition wrote about the events of the day in terms of their most important
value. Speciﬁcally, they integrated the day’s events into that value (e.g., by
writing about how the happenings of the day were relevant to the impor-
tance of their relationships with friends). There were three control condi-
tions: a writing control condition (where people simply recorded what had
Fig. 3.
Salivary cortisol as a function of time and aYrmation status. From Creswell, J. D.,
Welch, W., Taylor, S. E., Sherman, D. K., Gruenewald, T., & Mann, T. (2005). AYrmation of
personal values buVers neuroendocrine and psychological stress responses. Psychological Sci-
ence, 16, 846–851. Adapted with permission.
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
199

----- Page 18 (native) -----
happened that day), a positive events control group (where people wrote
about the positive things that had happened to them that day), and a
nonwriting control group. Compared to all other groups, those who wrote
the aYrming essays over winter break reported the least amount of stress,
and visited the health center signiﬁcantly less often (when they returned to
school). This eVect was particularly strong among those who reported
experiencing the greatest number of daily hassles and were, presumably,
the most stressed.
Thus, self‐aYrmation interventions were associated with positive physio-
logical and health outcomes with two relatively healthy college student
samples (Creswell et al., 2005; Keough et al., 1998). An important question
centers on whether similar eVects would be obtained in a sample of people
confronting disease. A study of women with breast cancer by Creswell et al.
(2006) examined the relation between self‐aYrming writing and recovery
from breast cancer. This research was based on a reanalysis of data from a
study by Stanton et al. (2002). Stanton and colleagues (Stanton et al., 2002)
had initially recruited 60 early‐stage breast cancer survivors and randomly
assigned them to write four essays on (1) their deepest thoughts and feelings
about breast cancer (emotional processing); (2) their positive thoughts and
feelings about breast cancer (beneﬁt ﬁnding); or (3) the facts of their day
(control). Findings from this initial study showed that women in both the
emotional‐processing and beneﬁt‐ﬁnding conditions had reduced physical
symptoms and doctor visits 3 months after the study.
In the follow‐up study (Creswell et al., 2006), all essays were coded for
self‐aYrmation (whether the essay evidenced positive reﬂection on valued
self‐domains), cognitive processing (whether the essays evidenced active
thinking about the positive aspects of the breast cancer experience), and
discovery of meaning statements (whether the essay evidenced eVorts to ﬁnd
a larger lesson or signiﬁcance to their breast cancer), to test for potential
mediating mechanisms for the writing eVects on breast‐cancer recovery.
Interestingly, the number of aYrming statements made in the essays (e.g.,
‘‘We have been married over 31 years and we are very lucky because we still
love each other.’’) fully mediated the intervention eVects found on physical
symptoms at 3‐month follow‐up, whereas (at least in this study) no mediat-
ing role was found for cognitive processing or discovery of meaning. Self‐
aYrming cognitions played an important mediating role regardless of
whether the intervention itself focused on emotional processing or beneﬁt
ﬁnding. Additionally, the frequency of self‐aYrmation statements predicted
enhanced coping and reductions in distress at the follow‐up session.
Together with the earlier work demonstrating the eVects of self‐aYrmation
on increasing the acceptance of threatening health information, the research
reviewed in this section suggests that self‐aYrmation can have both direct
200
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 19 (native) -----
and indirect beneﬁts for health. Directly, it seems to reduce physiological
stress reactivity (Creswell et al., 2005), reduce daily stress perceptions
(Keough et al., 1998), and potentially, aid in coping with distress in people
with chronic disease (Creswell et al., 2006). Indirectly, it may promote more
positive health behaviors by making people more open to information that
they are engaging in risky health behaviors (Harris & Napper, 2005; Reed &
Aspinwall, 1998; Sherman et al., 2000).
D. COGNITIVE DISSONANCE
The notion in self‐aYrmation theory (Steele, 1988) of a ﬂexible self‐system
that seeks to maintain its perceived integrity shed new light on cognitive
dissonance theory, and in particular, on the assumption that dissonance is
aroused by psychological inconsistency (Aronson, 1968; Festinger, 1957).
Speciﬁcally, the self‐aYrmation studies suggested that people are primarily
motivated to maintain self‐integrity rather than psychological consistency.
Thus, people should be able to tolerate psychological inconsistency—and to
refrain from dissonance‐motivated cognitive distortions—if their self‐integrity
is buttressed through the aYrmations of an alternative domain of identity.
For example, Steele, Hopp, and Gonzales (1986; cited in Steele, 1988) had
participants rank 10 record albums in order of preference. They then gave
the participants a choice of their 5th‐ or 6th‐ranked album—a dissonance
provoking choice (Brehm, 1956) that typically leads participants to accentu-
ate the diVerences in the direction of their choice. Half of the participants
then put on a lab coat in anticipation of a second study. For those who
indicated that science was their most important value, wearing the lab coat
aYrmed an important domain. For others who indicated that science was not
an important domain, wearing a lab coat was not self‐aYrming. All students
then re‐ranked the record albums. As predicted, with one exception, all groups
showed the standard ‘‘spreading of alternatives’’ eVect. They inﬂated the value
of the option chosen and denigrated the value of the option foregone—a
garden‐variety rationalization eVect. The exception was those science‐minded
students who wore the lab coat, and who thus had the opportunity to restore
their self‐integrity through the aYrmation of an important self‐identity. These
participants did not defensively change their attitudes to make them concor-
dant with their choice (see also Steele & Liu, 1983).
A full review of the theoretical debate concerning the circumstances under
which self‐aYrmation is a viable explanation for cognitive dissonance phe-
nomena is beyond the scope of this chapter (see Aronson et al., 1999; Simon,
Greenberg, & Brehm, 1995; Stone & Cooper, 2001). However, there have
been several important developments that merit review.
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
201

----- Page 20 (native) -----
In various dissonance‐provoking situations, self‐aYrmations have been
found to reduce psychological discomfort and defensive biases. For example,
Matz and Wood (2005) found that individuals report experiencing an aversive
state of dissonance when others in a social group disagree with them. However,
this dissonance discomfort was eliminated among participants who completed
a self‐aYrmation. Another study suggested that dissonance reduction results
in overconﬁdent judgments (Blanton, Pelham, Dettart, & Carvallo, 2001).
That is, if one cares about the accuracy of one’s predictions then any cogni-
tions that call that accuracy into question are likely to arouse dissonance. This
dissonance is reduced by ﬁnding reasons to bolster one’s conﬁdence in the
accuracy of one’s predictions. Blanton et al. (2001) found that people who
cared more about a prediction (involving correctly identifying Pepsi versus
Coke based on a taste test) were relatively overconﬁdent in the accuracy of
their judgments. However, this overconﬁdence was eliminated among those
who completed a self‐aYrmation.
Other studies have examined the conditions moderating the eVects of self‐
aYrmation on dissonance‐reducing justiﬁcations (as in Steele & Liu, 1983).
When the self‐aYrmations are in the same domain as the threatening infor-
mation, they have been found to exacerbate cognitive dissonance (Blanton,
Cooper, Skurnik, & Aronson, 1997) because they make salient the personal
standards that are violated with the dissonant behavior. Consequently, when
given a choice, people tend to choose to aYrm the self in a domain unrelated
to the perceived threat in order to reduce the dissonance they are experien-
cing (Aronson, Blanton, & Cooper, 1995). However, even aYrmations in
alternative domains of self‐worth are not impervious to disconﬁrmation, and
when they are disconﬁrmed (e.g., being told you are not religious shortly
after aYrming religion as a central value), cognitive dissonance can be rein-
stated (Galinsky, Stone, & Cooper, 2000). Several studies (e.g., Steele,
Spencer, & Lynch, 1993; Stone & Cooper, 2001) have also examined the
relationship between self‐esteem, self‐aYrmation, and cognitive dissonance
processes—a topic to which we will return in our discussion of individual
diVerences and their moderating inﬂuence on self‐aYrmation processes.
E. MOTIVATED DISTORTIONS IN SOCIAL PERCEPTION
When people make judgments of others—such as whether a person is a good
candidate for a job, or whether a person is above or below average—they
have the opportunity to put themselves in a positive light through social
comparison. Indeed, Dunning (2003) has argued that people are ‘‘zealous
self‐aYrmers’’ in that their social judgments often reﬂect more about their
own self‐evaluative needs than about the target of judgment. Whether
202
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 21 (native) -----
students evaluate a person who studies 19 hours a week as ‘‘studious’’
depends upon how many hours a week they study themselves (Dunning &
Cohen, 1992)—that is, people egocentrically deﬁne what evidence constitutes
a given trait or ability. When people deﬁne what characteristics are likely to
make a person have a successful marriage, they emphasize those character-
istics that they themselves possess rather than those they do not (Kunda,
1987). And they do so more after experiencing a threat to self‐worth, than
after experiencing an aYrmation of self‐worth (Dunning & Beauregard, 2000;
Dunning & Hayes, 1996; Dunning, Leuenberger, & Sherman, 1995).
After experiencing a self‐threat, people may engage in any number of
strategies to reaYrm self‐integrity via social judgment. These strategies
include comparing the self with a clearly inferior other (Fein, Hoshino‐
Browne, Davies, & Spencer, 2003), gossiping negatively about a third party
(Wert, 2004; Wert & Salovey, 2004), or harshly judging a political ingroup
member who fails to demonstrate as much fervor for the cause as one
personally does (Beauregard & Dunning, 1998). At other times, esteem‐
boosting social judgments take a more disturbing form; people may try to
feel better about themselves by putting down members of a marginalized
group (Fein & Spencer, 1997). Because stereotypes are ‘‘cognitively defensi-
ble’’ justiﬁcations for denigrating others, people may be especially apt to use
them to restore self‐worth. Derogating an outgroup member would not only
enhance one’s own self‐worth via downward comparison processes, but also
enhance the integrity of a person’s ingroup more generally. In one study,
participants who were threatened with negative feedback on an intelligence
task showed more stereotyping in their judgments of a gay male than those
who received neutral feedback (Fein & Spencer, 1997).
Thus, self‐threatening feedback can exacerbate outgroup derogation and
the use of stereotypes. This ﬁnding suggests that self‐image maintenance
concerns can motivate prejudicial responses. Is the converse true as well—
can an aYrmation of an individual’s self‐integrity reduce the need to stereo-
type an outgroup member? Fein and Spencer (1997) examined this possibili-
ty in one study where participants completed a self‐aYrmation through
writing about an important value (versus a control condition where they
wrote about a relatively unimportant value). They did so prior to evaluating
a job candidate who was presented either as a member of a negatively
stereotyped group (Julie Goldberg, who ﬁt with a ‘‘Jewish American Prin-
cess’’ stereotype widely in circulation on campus at the time) or not (Maria
D’Agostino, an Italian American). In the no‐aYrmation condition, partici-
pants made more negative evaluations of the candidate’s qualiﬁcation for
the job and viewed the personality of the Jewish woman more negatively
than that of the Italian woman. In contrast, those participants who com-
pleted the self‐aYrmation rated the Jewish candidate as favorably as the
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
203

----- Page 22 (native) -----
Italian candidate. Thus, the extent to which a person is threatened or
aYrmed will aVect whether or not they are likely to make prejudicial judg-
ments of an outgroup member (cf. Shrira & Martin, 2005; Zarate & Garza,
2002). Indeed, in this study, self‐aYrmation did not simply attenuate preju-
dice and discrimination but eliminated it.
Comparing oneself to another person who is faring worse is another way
that people may aYrm self‐integrity via social perception. When people have
a vulnerable or easily threatened self‐image, they generally respond with
downward social comparisons (Taylor & Lobel, 1989; Wills, 1981). Shelley
Taylor and her colleagues (Taylor, Wood, & Lichtman, 1983) found that
women with breast cancer responded to their highly threatening situation by
making downward social comparisons. They would assert that their illness
was, at least, less severe than that of another patient, or that they were
coping with their illness better than others. These downward comparisons,
Taylor suggested, helped patients to maintain a sense of worth in a situation
where they struggled to maintain their sense of control, predictability,
and optimism. Such downward comparisons, while helping to sustain self‐
integrity, may by themselves limit an individual’s opportunities to learn from
others who are more experienced or performing more optimally (indeed,
such ‘‘upward’’ comparisons also have motivational beneﬁts; see Lockwood
& Kunda, 1997).
If people engage in downward social comparisons to compensate for a
threatened self‐image, then they should engage in them to a lesser extent when
self‐aYrmed. Indeed, they may even be more prone to engage in upward
comparisons that they might otherwise view as threatening (Spencer, Fein,
& Lomore, 2001). In one study, college students completed a test of intelli-
gence, and they were informed that they performed at the 47th percentile. This
mediocre performance presumably threatened participants’ self‐image as
intelligent college students. Half of the students then had the opportunity
to aYrm the self by writing an essay about an important value, whereas the
other half wrote about an unimportant value. Then the participants, in a
separate task, were informed that another participant would interview them.
For the ostensible purpose of preparing them for their interview, they then
listened to excerpts of two previous interviews. In one of the excerpts, the
interviewee made a terrible impression (e.g., unintentionally insulting the
interviewer, speaking incoherently), whereas in the other the interviewee
was smooth and articulate. The participants had a choice of which inter-
view to listen to in full. This choice provided an opportunity to make
an upward comparison (if they selected the superior interviewee) or a
downward comparison (if they selected the inferior interviewee).
Because all participants had been threatened by the feedback they had
received on the intelligence task, the study allowed an examination of social
204
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 23 (native) -----
comparison under threat. In the no‐aYrmation condition, the participants
generally made downward comparisons, as 83% chose to hear the inferior
interviewee. By contrast, among those who completed the self‐aYrmation,
83% chose to hear the superior interviewee, making an upward social com-
parison. Once again, self‐aYrmation reduced threat and thereby encouraged
people to expose themselves to an informative but potentially threatening
learning opportunity.
In summary, predictions derived from self‐aYrmation theory (Steele,
1988) have been supported in a wide range of situations involving self‐threat.
When self‐integrity is aYrmed, people are less biased in their judgments of
information related to their political identity (Cohen et al., 2000), their
health (Reed & Aspinwall, 1998; Sherman et al., 2000), and their impressions
of others (Fein & Spencer, 1997; Spencer et al., 2001). Self‐aYrmation
inoculates people against threat, and thus makes them more open to ideas
that would otherwise be too painful to accept. It also reduces the stressfulness
of evaluative situations (Creswell et al., 2005) and the cognitive accessibility of
threatening cognitions (Koole et al., 1999). Theoretically consistent eVects of
self‐aYrmation have been found on self‐report measures, physiological
responses, and behavior. When self‐integrity is secured, people seem less
concerned with the self‐evaluative implications of social experiences and are
more likely to engage their social world in a non‐defensive, open manner.
III. Self‐AYrmation and Responses to Collective Threats
Originally, self‐aYrmation theory (Steele, 1988) focused on how people
respond to information and events that threaten a valued self‐image, such
as situations that provoke cognitive dissonance and defensive rationalization
of counter‐attitudinal behavior (Steele & Liu, 1983), or situations that chal-
lenge a sense of personal control (Liu & Steele, 1986). The research detailed
in the previous sections extends this theorizing to many other situations
where people contend with events that challenge a personal identity.
A major advance in self‐aYrmation theory concerns its relevance to
the way people cope with threats to their social (i.e., group) identities. This
work begins with the premise that social identities—such as aYliation with
a sports team, membership in a gender or racial group, citizenship in a
country, involvement in an organization—constitute important sources of
identity (Abrams & Hogg, 1988; Deaux, 1996; Tajfel & Turner, 1986).
Consequently, people will defend against threats to collective aspects of
the self much as they defend against threats to individual or personal aspects
of self. They may do so even when these events do not directly implicate
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
205

----- Page 24 (native) -----
oneself (e.g., even when the threat involves the behavior of another group
member rather than one’s own behavior; Cohen & Garcia, 2005; Norton,
Monin, Cooper, & Hogg, 2003; Wiesenfeld, Brockner, & Martin, 1999).
We argue that both personal and social (i.e., group) identities are funda-
mentally confounded (Cohen & Garcia, 2005), in that both types of iden-
tities contribute to the same overarching goal of maintaining self‐integrity
(see also Gaertner, Sedikides, & Graetz, 1999; Sherman & Kim, 2005). When
a fellow member of one’s racial group confronts the threat of a negative
stereotype, it is threatening to self even when one personally faces no risk of
being prejudiced against (Cohen & Garcia, 2005). When an athlete’s team
loses, he or she will resist explanations that implicate the team because doing
otherwise would threaten the image of a valued group. When one’s country
is viliﬁed in an editorial, a patriot will attack the credibility of the source to
protect the perceived integrity of his or her national identity.
The self‐aYrmation analysis of such collective threats, however, asserts
that because social identities are only one part of a larger, ﬂexible self‐
system, people can respond to threats to their group memberships or social
identities indirectly. That is, they can maintain an overall self‐perception of
worth and integrity by aYrming some other aspect of the self, unrelated to
their group. This insight has applications to a wide range of phenomena
related to group identity.
A. GROUP‐SERVING JUDGMENTS
A popular aphorism is that ‘‘There is no I in team.’’ It conveys the notion
that the goals of a team or a group should be important enough that
individuals are willing to sacriﬁce their personal ambitions and self‐interests
in the service of team success. Self‐serving aspirations are antithetical to the
team’s progress. However, social groups are a central part of how people
see themselves, and people are motivated to defend their social identities
(Abrams & Hogg, 1988). Consequently, when explaining the success or
failure of their group, people tend to be defensive and group serving. This
phenomenon has been observed in several studies examining attributions
made for success or failure in real world contexts. Letters to shareholders
feature more internal attributions after successful years (e.g., stocks rose
because of the work of the management team) than after disappointing years
(Bettman & Weitz, 1983), and athletes’ explanations for success feature more
internal attributions than do their explanations for failure (Lau & Russell,
1980; Winkler & Taylor, 1979). These biased judgments—encompassing
both inﬂated internal attributions for success and attenuated internal attri-
butions for failure—are group serving in the sense that they suggest that
206
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 25 (native) -----
group members are selectively responsible for causing the positive events
that befall their group.
In two ﬁeld studies involving intramural sports team athletes as partici-
pants, Sherman and Kim (2005) examined the role of the self‐integrity
motivations in group‐serving judgments. The intramural sports teams,
consisting of voluntarily formed groups of friends, played their games where
they either won or lost and then participated in the study. They completed
a self‐aYrmation manipulation in which they ﬁlled out a values scale
concerning either their most important value or a relatively unimportant
value. Then, they assessed their attributions for the outcome of the game.
They estimated how much their personal performance contributed to the
outcome of the game, and how much their team’s play and teamwork
contributed to the outcome of the game.
Overall, the athletes were both self‐serving and group serving in their
attributions. That is, winners thought that their personal performance con-
tributed more to their team’s victory than losers did to their defeat (a self‐
serving bias). Additionally, winners thought that their team’s performance
and teamwork contributed more to their team’s victory than losers did to their
defeat (a group‐serving bias). Both self‐ and group‐serving biases, however,
were eliminated among those who completed a self‐aYrmation. The reduc-
tion of group‐serving judgments is depicted in Fig. 4. Whereas in the no
Fig. 4.
Group‐serving attributions as a function of game outcome and aVirmation status. From
Sherman, D. K., & Kim, H. S. (2005). Is there an ‘‘I’’ in ‘‘team’’? The role of the self in group‐serving
judgments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 108–120. Adapted with permission.
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
207

----- Page 26 (native) -----
aYrmation condition, winners made much stronger internal team attribu-
tions than did losers, this diVerence was eliminated in the self‐aYrmation
condition (Sherman & Kim, 2005).
A second goal of this research focused on examining the relation between
self‐ and group‐serving judgments. Because one’s self‐concept and one’s social
identity are overlapping cognitive constructs (Smith & Henry, 1996; Smith,
Coats, & Walling, 1999), people will tend to use the self‐concept as an anchor or
evaluative base to form judgments of the group (Cadinu & Rothbart, 1996;
Gramzow & Gaertner, 2005; Otten, 2002). People generalize their positive
evaluation of self to their evaluation of their group. However, if the need to
protect self‐integrity is satisﬁed via self‐aYrmation, then people should be able
to evaluate the group independently of how they evaluate the self.
We examined whether such self‐group anchoring would be attenuated by a
self‐aYrmation (Sherman & Kim, 2005, Study 2), again with intra-
mural athletes who had just won or lost a game. We replicated the basic
ﬁndings that self‐aYrmation reduced both the self‐ and the group‐serving
attributional biases. Additionally, we examined the correlations between
the attributions to the self and the attributions to the group as a function of
aYrmation condition. As predicted, in the no‐aYrmation condition,
there was a strong correlation (r ¼ .60) between judgments about the self
and judgments about the group, indicating that under normal conditions, the
athletes generalized their self‐evaluations to their evaluations of their group.
In contrast, when participants were self‐aYrmed in an alternative domain,
they evaluated the group independently of their self‐evaluations, as the corre-
lation was eliminated (r ¼ .10). Self‐aYrmation, then, allows people to
evaluate their groups independently of the way they evaluate themselves.
B. DEFENSE OF COLLECTIVE IDENTITY
Patriotism and pride in one’s national citizenship represent manifestations of
another collective identity that people try to defend—particularly when their
country is under threat. In the wake of September 11th, for example, two
responses emerged. On the one hand, some people responded to the national
threat by embracing their American identity uncritically, and by ﬁnding little
if any problem or fault in America’s foreign policy in the Middle East. On
the other hand, there were those who took a critical eye to American foreign
policies and noted how these policies (such as its support of totalitarian
regimes in the Middle East) may have sowed the conditions and sense of
disenfranchisement among that populace, which contributed, in part, to the
terrorist acts against the United States.
208
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 27 (native) -----
We were interested in how people’s self‐identities as American ‘‘patriots’’
(i.e., people who asserted that they were patriotic, and who felt that the
US constituted a force of good in the world) or American ‘‘anti‐patriots’’
(i.e., people who asserted that they were unpatriotic, and who felt that the US
constituted a force of harm in the world) would aVect their evaluation of a
persuasive report entitled ‘‘Beyond the Rhetoric: Understanding the Recent
Terrorist Attacks in Context’’ (Cohen et al., 2005). The report argued that
Islamic terrorism can be understood in terms of the social and economic forces
of the Middle East. It further underscored the role that US foreign policy had
played in fostering some of the social—economic conditions in the Middle East
that later led to the terrorist attacks of 9/11. The arguments were credible
(drawn from the writings of several prominent analysts) and buttressed with
factual evidence and historical analysis. To amplify the counter‐American tone
of the report, it was ostensibly written by an author of Arab descent, ‘‘Babek
Hafezi.’’ To make participants’ American identity situationally salient, the
experimenter wore a small American ﬂag pin on her lapel.
Fig. 5.
Openness to anti‐U.S. foreign policy report among patriots and anti‐patriots as a
function of aYrmation status.
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
209

----- Page 28 (native) -----
Figure 5 presents the relevant results. In the absence of aYrmation, there
was a partisan divide in perception. Patriots proved far more critical of
the report than did antipatriots. Indeed, the correlation between a measure
of participants’ identiﬁcation as an American patriot versus antipatriot
(administered several weeks prior to the experiment), and their openness to
the report was r ¼ .58. In other words, participants’ preexisting identity
accounted for 34% of the variance in their openness to the report. By
contrast, in a condition where participants self‐aYrmed prior to reading
the report (by writing about an important value unrelated to their national
identity), patriots became more open to the report, and anti‐patriots became
more skeptical of it. Indeed, the correlation between prior identity and
openness was reduced to nil (r ¼ .05). Collective identity ceased to aVect
the assimilation of new information when participants had aYrmed an
alternative source of self‐integrity.
C. STEREOTYPE THREAT AND PERFORMANCE
Stereotype threat—the potential that one could be judged in light of a
negative stereotype about one’s group—is a potent type of collective threat
(Steele, 1997). Members of negatively stereotyped groups may experience
elevated levels of stress when performing on tasks where they risk conﬁrming
a stereotype about their group in the eyes of others (Ben‐Zeev, Fein, &
Inzlicht, 2005; Blascovich, Spencer, Quinn, & Steele, 2001; O’Brien &
Crandell, 2003). This stress can in turn undermine performance. Several
studies, both in the laboratory and in the ﬁeld, have now examined whether
self‐aYrmation can reduce stereotype threat and facilitate performance in
conditions where people from negatively stereotyped groups have been
shown to underperform (Spencer, Steele, & Quinn, 1999; Steele & Aronson,
1995).
One study examined whether stereotype threat could be reduced among
women taking a math test (Martens, Johns, Greenberg, & Schimel, 2006). To
the extent that women care about performing well in such a situation, they
may worry, should they perform poorly, that they could conﬁrm the nega-
tive stereotype that women are worse than men at math. If so, then aYrma-
tion of an alternative aspect of the self could reduce the threat and facilitate
performance. Whereas other interventions to reduce stereotype threat
directly refute the stereotype or its relevance (e.g., by portraying a test as
gender‐fair; Cohen, Steele, & Ross, 1999; Spencer et al., 1999), this interven-
tion was psychologically farther downstream—aimed at altering students’
threat/stress response to the perceived relevance of the stereotype.
210
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 29 (native) -----
The participants were female college students who took a diYcult math
test that was described either as ‘‘diagnostic’’ of their math and reasoning
abilities or as a reasoning task unrelated to their ability and still being
developed for future research. Replicating the standard stereotype threat
eVect (Steele, Spencer, & Aronson, 2002), women performed worse in the
ability‐diagnostic condition (where they were aware that a potentially poor
performance on their part could be viewed as evidence of lack of math ability
and as ultimately a validation of the negative stereotype), worse than their
female counterparts in the ability‐nondiagnostic condition, and worse
than men overall. However, women in the diagnostic condition who com-
pleted a self‐aYrmation—where they wrote about an important value
unrelated to math or to their gender—performed as well as women in the
no‐threat condition and no diVerent from male college students.
Given the evidence that self‐aYrmation appears to reduce stereo-
type threat among students in laboratory situations (Martens et al., 2006;
Schimel et al., 2004), perhaps having students engage in aYrmation of
non‐academic aspects of themselves in school settings could produce positive
educational beneﬁts by reducing the psychological impact of social
identity threat and other sources of psychological distress. In such educa-
tional contexts, social identity threat may be exacerbated by the mis-
trust
that
minority
students
sometimes
feel
when
confronted
with
negative or critical feedback from White evaluators and teachers (Cohen
et al., 1999). Because they know that the stereotype could bias members of
the outgroup, these students may come to doubt the intentions motivating
critical feedback. Is it possible for aYrmation to mitigate these detrimental
responses?
To examine this question, a ﬁeld study (Cohen, Garcia, Apfel, & Masters,
2006) was conducted that featured a randomized, double‐blind experimental
design. Students completed a 20‐minute in‐class self‐aYrmation exercise in
which they wrote about an important value and why it mattered to them, or,
in a control condition, wrote about an unimportant value and why it might
be important to someone else. In the control condition, minority students,
unlike their majority peers, displayed a decline in trust in their teachers and
school administrators over the course of the 7th‐grade school year. That is,
they judged their grades and treatment in school as less fair and more biased
at the end of the year than they had at the beginning. By contrast, aYrmed
minority students remained constant in their relatively high levels of trust
and perceived fairness over the course of the school year (see Fig. 6). Just as
aYrmation increases trust across partisan lines in the context of negotiation
(Cohen et al., 2000, 2005), it cultivates trust and reduces threat across racial
lines as well.
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
211

----- Page 30 (native) -----
D. PERCEPTIONS OF RACISM
When individuals interact with members of stereotyped groups, they often
want to appear nonprejudiced (e.g., Gaertner & Dovidio, 1986; Monteith &
Voils, 1998). The very idea of prejudice itself could be threatening to an
individual’s self‐integrity for many reasons. Consider a European American
evaluating whether prejudice against minorities still constitutes a major factor
in the diVerential academic and economic success of people from diVerent
groups. If prejudice is a major factor, this suggests that one may have been
unfairly privileged, that one may have beneﬁted (indirectly or even directly)
from the oppression of minority groups, and that one’s country fails, in some
ways, to live up to the values of equality and egalitarianism. One way people
from majority groups can reduce this threat is by minimizing the perceived
frequency and impact of prejudice against minority groups.
Building on this logic, Adams, Tormala, and O’Brien (in press) examined
the eVect of self‐aYrmation on perceptions of prejudice against minorities.
The participants were both European Americans and Latinos. Overall,
Latinos perceived more prejudice against minorities in everyday life than
did European American participants. However, this race eVect was attenu-
ated by a self‐aYrmation. There were no group diVerences in perceived
prejudice among those who aYrmed an important value (unrelated to race)
Fig. 6.
Trust in academic authorities as a function of race, time, and aYrmation status.
212
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 31 (native) -----
prior to assessing their perceptions of prejudice. Importantly, the eVect of
self‐aYrmation was more evident among European Americans than Latino
Americans. While Latino Americans showed a slight drop in their percep-
tion of prejudice against minority groups when self‐aYrmed, this drop was
not signiﬁcant. On the other hand, self‐aYrmation led European Americans
to perceive signiﬁcantly more racism against minorities in the United States
(Adams et al., in press, Study 2). AYrmed European American partici-
pants also agreed, to a far greater extent than their non‐aYrmed peers, that
European Americans in general tend to understate the impact of racism in
daily life. Thus, the otherwise threatening idea of racism in America was
more acceptable among those who were buVered by a self‐aYrmation.
Indeed, these studies suggest that it is not just minority students who
defensively exaggerate the role of prejudice to protect self‐worth (cf. Crocker
& Major, 1989). It is the majority group members, as well, who defensively
deny racism in order to protect their self‐esteem.
IV. Moderator Variables and Qualifying Conditions
Across a variety of potentially threatening situations, self‐aYrmations
reduced perceived threat and the likelihood of engaging in defensive adapta-
tions to threat. Health information suggesting that one has acted in a risky
manner, the defeat of one’s team, a stereotype directed at oneself or a fellow
group member, a report attacking one’s political worldview, a failure at an
intellectual or athletic task—these events threaten individuals’ self‐integrity.
When the self is under threat, people engage defensive adaptations to
ameliorate the threat. Motivated inferences about health information,
group‐serving biases, biased assimilation of new information, and outgroup
derogation are examples of such adaptations. These self‐protective strategies
can be reduced and even eliminated, however, when people aYrm alternative
sources of self‐integrity unrelated to the provoking threat.
To understand the process of self‐aYrmation, it is important to examine
factors that moderate when and how self‐aYrmation operates. Cultural
diVerences may moderate the eVects of threat and aYrmation. Additionally,
individual diVerences in self‐esteem and in identiﬁcation with the domain
of threat should moderate whether and to what extent self‐aYrmation is
eVective. Situational diVerences in the salience of a particular identity may
prove critical. Moreover, aYrmations may have diVerent eVects as a func-
tion of their form and content. While the majority of the research previously
reviewed demonstrates how self‐aYrmations can lead to greater openness,
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
213

----- Page 32 (native) -----
some types of aYrmations may backﬁre; they may decrease openness and
promote defensive responses. We now review these moderating variables.
A. CULTURE
Given the extensive research and theorizing on cross‐cultural diVerences
in the conception and experience of selfhood (e.g., Heine, Lehman, Markus,
& Kitayama, 1999; Kim & Markus, 1999; Markus & Kitayama, 1991;
Triandis, 1989), an important question concerns the eVect of culture on
self‐aYrmation processes. In individualist cultures (such as the US), the self
is a more bounded, autonomous entity, whereas in collectivist cultures (such
as in East Asia), the self is more interconnected and tied to important
relationships. Members of collectivist cultures may thus be less motivated
to protect self‐integrity because their culture places less emphasis on esteem-
ing the self (Heine et al., 1999). Alternatively, they may be just as motivated
to protect self‐integrity, but they may diVer in terms of the events and issues
they ﬁnd threatening versus aYrming.
Heine and Lehman (1997) conducted one of the ﬁrst studies on culture,
self‐aYrmation, and cognitive dissonance. Among European Canadians,
they replicated the Steele and Liu (1983) ﬁnding that aYrmation of personal
values eliminated the spreading of alternatives in the free‐choice dissonance
paradigm (Brehm, 1956). Yet among Japanese participants, no spreading‐
of‐alternatives eVect was found, perhaps because they did not experience the
situation as self‐threatening (Heine et al., 1999). Consequently, there was no
defensive response for the aYrmation to ameliorate.
Thus, to identify how self‐aYrmation operates cross‐culturally, it is impor-
tant to test the eVects of a situation that could theoretically threaten self‐
integrity and produce defensiveness among people in diVerent cultures.
Research by Hoshino‐Browne and colleagues (Hoshino‐Browne et al., 2005)
identiﬁed such conditions in their examination of the cultural moderation of
dissonance and aYrmation processes (see also Kitayama, Snibbe, Markus, &
Suzuki, 2004). First, they found that when a choice is potentially threaten-
ing to their relationships, members of collectivist ethnic groups (i.e., Asian
Canadians) experience cognitive dissonance. When Asian Canadians made
choices of food preferences, they rationalized their decisions more when they
chose for their friends than for themselves (Hoshino‐Browne et al., 2005).
That is, after making a choice between two comparable food options for a
friend, they came to believe that the friend would ﬁnd the chosen option far
superior to the non‐chosen option. In contrast, European Canadians ratio-
nalized their decisions more when they made choices for themselves rather
than for their friends (Study 1 and Study 2 of Hoshino‐Browne et al., 2005).
214
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 33 (native) -----
To examine whether this dissonance would be reduced by a self‐aYrmation,
the researchers modiﬁed the standard self‐aYrmation procedure to contrast
an independent with an interdependent self‐aYrmation. For the interdepen-
dent aYrmation, participants ranked values in terms of how important they
were to ‘‘themselves and their family’’ and wrote a paragraph about why this
value is shared among them and their families. For the independent self‐
aYrmation, participants ranked values in terms of personal importance and
wrote an essay about why that value was personally important. The partici-
pants in the study, all of East Asian descent, then made choices for their
friends and had the opportunity to rationalize these choices. As predicted,
the interdependent aYrmation reduced dissonance‐motivated rationaliza-
tion when participants had to make a choice for a friend, whereas the
independent self‐aYrmation did not. Follow‐up studies also revealed that,
for the European Canadians, the opposite eVect occurred: the independent
aYrmation reduced dissonance‐motivated rationalization, but the interde-
pendent aYrmation did not. Moreover, both aYrmations were eVective
among bicultural Asian Canadians who identiﬁed with both Asian and
Canadian culture (see also Hoshino‐Browne, Zanna, Spencer, & Zanna,
2004). The latter result suggests that bicultural identity can confer access
to diVerent sources of aYrmation.
This research sheds light on how culture moderates the eVectiveness of
self‐aYrmation. Where the self is structured diVerently, what constitutes a
threat and an aYrmation are diVerent as well. However, the general process
whereby aYrmation reduces defensive responses to threats appears to be
culturally invariant.
B. SELF‐ESTEEM
If one way that people respond to threats is by aYrming the self in an
alternative domain, then it stands to reason that those who have more
positive views of the self will have more psychological resources with which
to self‐aYrm. Steele et al. (1993) predicted that high self‐esteem individuals
would have greater aYrmational resources and would thus be more resilient
to threatening events than would low self‐esteem individuals. Consistent
with this logic, they found that high self‐esteem people were less likely to
rationalize a choice they had made (i.e., by inﬂating the value of a music
album they had selected and/or by deﬂating the value of a desirable
music album they had foregone). Interestingly, this eVect was found only
among those high self‐esteem people who had ﬁrst completed a self‐esteem
scale that made their self‐resources cognitively accessible to them. Under this
condition, those with greater aYrmational resources were more resilient to
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
215

----- Page 34 (native) -----
threats to their self‐image and less likely to engage in defensive rationaliza-
tion of their behavior (see also Nail, Misak, & Davis, 2004).
There are two schools of thought about the relationship between self‐
esteem and the ability to tolerate dissonant acts or beliefs. Whereas the
aYrmational resources view posits that people with high self‐esteem have
more positive self‐concepts, making it easier for them to tolerate their
dissonant actions (Spencer, Josephs, & Steele, 1993; Steele et al., 1993), the
self‐consistency view posits that high self‐esteem people will view a dissonant
act as more discrepant with their positive self‐image (Aronson, 1968;
Thibodeau & Aronson, 1992). According to this latter view, high self‐esteem
people are likely to feel more dissonance than low self‐esteem people and
are more prone to engage in dissonance reduction strategies such as justiﬁ-
cation. For example, one study examined smokers who were participating
in a smoking cessation clinic (Gibbons, Eggleston, & Benthin, 1997). The
smokers who relapsed and began smoking again reduced the dissonance
associated with this attitude‐discrepant behavior (discrepant because they
were committed to quitting smoking) by reducing their self‐perceived risk of
acquiring smoking‐related illnesses. However, this occurred only among
high self‐esteem smokers (Gibbons et al., 1997).
A third theory, the self‐standards model of cognitive dissonance (Stone &
Cooper, 2001) proposes that people, at times, use self‐esteem as a resource
(as in Steele et al., 1993). However, people may also use their level of self‐
esteem as a standard or expectancy that determines whether they view a
particular behavior as dissonant. Once people act, they evaluate their behav-
ior in light of a standard—but what standard comes to mind varies with
situational cues. When the cues focus on normative standards for behavior
(e.g., how most people act), no diVerences between low– and high–self‐
esteem individuals emerge. It is only when the cues focus people on their
own personal standards that self‐esteem diVerences do, in fact, emerge.
Whether low or high self‐esteem individuals rationalize more, in turn,
depends on the nature of the self‐aYrmation. Self‐aYrmations related to
the threatening act (e.g., writing about how compassionate one is after
having behaved uncompassionately) increase the salience of personal stan-
dards of conduct, draw attention to the discrepancy between those standards
and one’s previous behavior and thus lead high self‐esteem people to experi-
ence more dissonance (and rationalize more) than low self‐esteem people. By
contrast, self‐aYrmations unrelated to the threatening act draw attention to
alternative psychological resources, and thus lead high self‐esteem people to
experience less dissonance (and rationalize less) than low self‐esteem people
(Stone & Cooper, 2003).
One variable that holds important implications for the relation between
self‐esteem and cognitive dissonance is whether a person’s high self‐esteem is
216
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 35 (native) -----
secure and stable versus insecure, defensive, and fragile (Baumeister,
Heatherton, & Tice, 1993; Deci & Ryan, 1995; Jordan, Spencer, Zanna,
Hoshino‐Browne, & Cornell, 2003; see also Kernis & Paradise, 2002).
Secure, high self‐esteem is operationalized as having high explicit self‐esteem
(as assessed by a self‐report measure of self‐esteem such as the Rosenberg
Self‐Esteem Scale; Rosenberg, 1965) and high implicit self‐esteem (i.e., non-
conscious, automatic positive associations with the self, as assessed by the
Implicit Associations Test; Greenwald, McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998). Such
people have high self‐esteem both at a conscious level and at a deep,
unconscious, and reﬂexive level. By contrast, defensive high self‐esteem
is operationalized as having high explicit self‐esteem but low implicit self‐
esteem. Such people have high conscious self‐esteem but unconsciously, and
reﬂexively, evaluate the self negatively. Jordan and colleagues ﬁnd that those
with secure high self‐esteem show little dissonance reduction (consistent with
the aYrmational resources view). That is, those with secure high self‐esteem
are less likely to rationalize their decisions to reduce dissonance, whereas
those with defensive high self‐esteem are more likely to engage in dissonance
reduction (consistent with the self‐consistency view) (Jordan, Spencer, &
Zanna, 2003). It seems that people with defensive high self‐esteem may have
fewer self‐resources that can be drawn upon when experiencing threat.
C. IDENTITY CENTRALITY AND SALIENCE
Whether a potentially threatening domain is personally important to an
individual or constitutes a part of their personal identity aVects whether or
not they can experience self‐threat in that domain (Boninger, Krosnick, &
Berent, 1995), and consequently, whether an aYrmation will prove eVective
at ameliorating defensiveness. Ironically, it is the people who view an issue
as important rather than unimportant who should prove the most open
to aYrmation‐induced change. For example, a report describing the link
between caVeine use and ﬁbrocystic disease concerns a topic of greater
importance for heavy caVeine consumers than for light caVeine consumers.
Consequently, it is only heavy caVeine consumers who respond defensively
to such a report (e.g., Kunda, 1987; Liberman and Chaiken, 1992) and who
exhibit greater openness to the report when self‐aYrmed (Sherman et al.,
2000).
Adopting another approach, Correll et al. (2004) examined students’
responses to a debate over the merits of a tuition increase. They found that
only participants who saw tuition increases as personally important were
biased in their assessments of the quality of pro‐ versus counterattitudinal
information on this topic. Further, it was only these participants for whom
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
217

----- Page 36 (native) -----
aYrmation proved an eVective debiasing intervention. In a related vein, one
study found that sports fans that watched their team win or lose were only
biased in their attributions for the outcome of the game when being a fan
was viewed by them as an important part of their identity (Sherman, Kinias,
Major, Kim, & Prenovost, 2005). Moreover, this group‐serving bias could be
eliminated when participants aYrmed a value of high importance to their
group.
Individuals may thus vary in the strength of their allegiance to particular
sources of identity and in their resistance to new and challenging ideas that
would force them to see the world in other than black and white terms
(Correll et al., 2004; Zuwerink & Devine, 1996). Additionally, implicit and
explicit situational cues may play a role in heightening these types of identity
defense motivations that lead to closed‐mindedness and inﬂexibility. Situa-
tional contexts diVer in how much they highlight a particular identity and
its importance to self‐integrity (Cohen et al., 2005). When a given context
heightens the salience of an individual’s partisan identity and/or commit-
ment to a given position on an identity‐relevant issue, that individual may
feel relatively more obliged to consider the identity costs of openness and
compromise. It is precisely those costs, in turn, that are reduced when an
alternative source of self‐integrity is made salient and aYrmed.
In one study, for example, political partisans with varying views regarding
US foreign policy evaluated a report critical of that policy. They did so after
a self‐aYrmation or threat was administered, under conditions where either
their identities as self‐rated ‘‘patriots’’ (versus ‘‘anti‐patriots’’) or the goal of
rationality was made salient. In the identity salient condition, the experi-
menter wore an American ﬂag pin on her lapel, whereas in the rationality
salient condition, the experimenter wore a white lab coat. A focus on
rationality was expected to diminish attention to, and concern with, sources
of identity that would otherwise make the prospect of belief change and
compromise threatening. The results in the American ﬂag condition were
described previously: participants interpreted information critical of the
United States in a manner consistent with their national identity—but a
self‐aYrmation eliminated this bias. In contrast, when the experimenter wore
the lab coat—minimizing concerns of identity maintenance—aYrmation had
no eVect (Cohen et al., 2005).
D. WHEN AFFIRMATIONS BACKFIRE
An interesting issue concerns classes of aYrmations that increase rather than
decrease bias and resistance to change. One such class of aYrmations is
those that are in the same domain as the threatening event or information.
218
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 37 (native) -----
Whereas diVerent‐domain aYrmations decrease bias, closed‐mindedness,
and inﬂexibility, same‐domain aYrmations increase people’s sense of self‐
conﬁdence, certainty, and impunity. They thus produce eVects opposite to
those observed when the aYrmation targets a domain unrelated to the threat
(Blanton et al., 1997). Prior to reviewing a counter‐attitudinal report, for
example, people might aYrm a value related to the issue that ﬁgures in
that report. Before reading a report critical of evidence supporting global
warming, an environmentalist might reﬂect on the personal importance of
the cause of environmentalism (Sherman et al., 2005). Alternatively, before
reading a report arguing against allowing gays in the military, an egalitarian
might assert the importance of tolerance (Jacks & O’Brien, 2004). In contrast
to domain‐irrelevant aYrmations, such domain‐relevant aYrmations consis-
tently increase resistance to change, presumably by highlighting a person’s
commitment to the issue and the identity at stake. This research suggests that,
if attitude and behavior change is the goal, policy‐makers and interventionists
should resist lay intuitions to provide aYrmations targeting the domain of
threat. It may do more harm than good to provide academically at‐risk
students with aYrmations of their academic ability, risk‐seeking adolescents
with aYrmations of their rationality, or negotiators with aYrmations of
their ideological commitments. Instead, the more eVective strategy is the
counterintuitive one—that of aYrming domains unrelated to the threat.
An intriguing phenomenon involves the way in which, under some cir-
cumstances, aYrmations of moral worth can lead to a sense of personal
impunity, in which people no longer feel obliged to prove themselves in the
domain in question and thus feel licensed to act in ways that violate impor-
tant moral principles. This seems to occur particularly in contexts where
the ‘‘right’’ or ‘‘moral’’ course of action is ambiguous. For example, when
people aYrm their lack of prejudice, they engage in more gender and racial
discrimination, at least under some situations that render such discrimina-
tion ambiguous in its moral implications (Jacks & O’Brien, 2004; Monin &
Miller, 2001). In one line of studies, people made their ‘‘moral credentials’’
clear—in our language, aYrmed their self‐concepts as ‘‘moral’’ and ‘‘egali-
tarian’’—by being led to select a clearly qualiﬁed ethnic minority for a job.
Relative to those who did not aYrm their lack of prejudice, those who did
later proved more prejudiced; that is, they were more willing to state that a
particular job (one that could have posed problems for a minority due to its
hostile work environment) was more appropriate for White workers than
for Black ones. When people aYrm their lack of prejudice, they seem to
become more lax in their adherence to egalitarian values.
In an unusually disturbing series of studies, Brown (2000) further demon-
strated how moral aYrmations not only lead to impunity but also license
what many would view as immoral behavior. College students were given
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
219

----- Page 38 (native) -----
positive feedback concerning the morality of individuals at their school—
they were told that students at their school scored higher on standard moral
development tests than did students attending a rival school. ‘‘Morally
aYrmed’’ participants were subsequently more swayed by negative propa-
ganda targeting foreign graduate students. The propaganda in question
asserted that foreign graduate students posed a threat to national security
due to the possibility that they might, for example, steal scientiﬁc secrets or
engage in espionage. In response to this propaganda, morally aYrmed sub-
jects proved more likely to endorse punitive and ‘‘proto‐genocidal’’ policies
for dealing with the ‘‘foreign graduate student problem.’’ They advocated to a
greater extent the policy of forcing foreign graduate students to carry identiﬁ-
cation papers with them at all times and even became more favorable to the
proposal to banish all foreign students from studying in American universi-
ties. The moral aYrmation seemed to imbue participants with impunity
to discriminate in the name of protecting national security. Clearly, more
research needs to be done to determine the conditions under which such
domain‐relevant aYrmations lead to open‐mindedness, closed‐mindedness,
and moral impunity.
Another class of potentially detrimental aYrmations involves those that
activate a person’s sense of self‐perceived objectivity. When made to feel
objective, people adopt an ‘‘I think it, therefore it’s true’’ mindset. That is,
they assume that their own thoughts and beliefs—by virtue of being theirs—
are objective, valid, and therefore worthy of being acted upon (Uhlmann &
Cohen, 2005a). As a consequence, objectivity‐aYrmed evaluators may be-
come more likely to act on any prejudicial thoughts and beliefs that they
harbor, and whose inﬂuence they might have otherwise suppressed. Consis-
tent with this analysis, in a series of studies, Uhlmann and Cohen (2005b)
found that aYrming individuals’ sense of objectivity made them more likely
to discriminate against women when deciding whom to hire for stereotypi-
cally male, high‐status jobs (e.g., corporate representative, police chief).
Objectivity‐aYrmed subjects also proved more likely to act on stereotypes
that had been nonconsciously primed in their social environment. In one
study, participants were either primed on words related to negative stereo-
types about women (e.g., pink, Barbie, make‐up, emotional) or not. Those
who aYrmed their objectivity (i.e., by answering several easy‐to‐agree‐with
questions concerning their personal objectivity) were more inﬂuenced by
this prime. When primed on gender stereotypes, participants proved more
likely to hire a man over a woman when they were objectivity‐aYrmed than
when they were not (see Fig. 7 for the relevant results). Paradoxically,
making people feel objective causes them to become more subjective. It
confers a sense of impunity about using personal thoughts and beliefs that
happen to be cognitively salient at the particular moment of a decision.
220
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 39 (native) -----
V. Underlying Processes and Superordinate Functions
Given the wide range of studies reported in this review, it is clear that self‐
aYrmations exert eVects across many domains of psychological functioning.
Yet, important questions remain concerning both the mechanisms underly-
ing these eVects and the ultimate function of the self‐integrity system. These
questions set the stage for exciting and important opportunities for future
research.
A. UNDERLYING MECHANISM OF SELF‐AFFIRMATION
Through what mechanisms do self‐aYrmations produce their eVects?
AYrmations, we suggest, lift people’s self‐evaluative concerns in the situation
at hand and allow other motivations, such as a desire to be even‐handed,
rational, or healthful, to predominate. But, what are the psychological mechan-
isms implicated in this process? What do the self‐aYrmation manipulations
do to individuals that result in such eVects?
One point seems important to acknowledge. For phenomena as rich and
complex as defensive resistance to persuasion, stereotyping, and dissonance
reduction, there is unlikely to be one mechanism or mediator through
Fig. 7.
Pro‐male gender discrimination as a function of gender stereotype prime and aYrma-
tion status.
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
221

----- Page 40 (native) -----
which aYrmation produces the eVects it does. It seems likely that there are a
number of aVective, cognitive, and motivational processes acting in concert
to produce self‐aYrmation eVects.
One way to address this question is to probe other theories of self‐defense
for underlying commonalities. Tesser (2000) has argued that self‐esteem
maintenance processes are essentially interchangeable with self‐aYrmation
processes. One focus of self‐esteem maintenance theory (Tesser, 1988) is how
people respond to potentially threatening social comparisons. In perfor-
mance settings, they behave in ways that maintain their self‐esteem, for
example, by sabotaging the performance of close others (rather than that
of strangers) on important intellectual tasks (Tesser & Smith, 1980). More-
over, supporting the idea of interchangeability or ﬂuidity in self‐defensive
processes, aYrmation of an important value reduces people’s tendency to
sabotage the performance of friends working on intellectual tasks (Tesser &
Cornell, 1991). People are also more likely to spontaneously self‐aYrm, for
example, by writing essays with more self‐aYrming content, after making
a self‐threatening upward comparison (Tesser, Crepaz, Collins, Cornell, &
Beach, 2000).
Tesser (2000) argues that these studies support a basic interchangeability of
self‐evaluative processes. Importantly, he asks whether the diVerent self‐related
processes identiﬁed by self‐aYrmation theory and self‐esteem maintenance
theory share the common mechanism of maintaining positive aVect or mood.
From this perspective, the eVect of self‐aYrmation on behavior should be
mediated by a reduction in negative aVect. Contrary to this expectation, self‐
aYrmation studies generally ﬁnd that aYrmation of important values has no
eVect on self‐reported mood (Fein & Spencer, 1997; Schmeichel & Martens,
2005; Sherman et al., 2000; Spencer et al., 2001) and that manipulations of
mood fail to produce the same eVects as self‐aYrmations (e.g., Steele et al.,
1993; but see Raghunathan & Trope, 2002). Moreover, if aYrmations were
operating via positive mood, then one would expect aYrmed individuals to be
accepting of persuasive arguments regardless of the strength or weakness of
those arguments (Mackie & Worth, 1989). The ﬁnding that self‐aYrmation
makes people more responsive to the strength of persuasive arguments (Correll
et al., 2004) runs contrary to this expectation.
On the other hand, an alternative possibility is that the common mecha-
nism is aVect of which a person is unaware (Tesser, Martin, & Cornell,
1996). While it is clear that much cognition lies beneath conscious awareness
(Bargh & Chartrand, 1999; Dijksterhuis, 2004; Wilson, 2002), an interesting
question concerns whether aVect can lie beneath conscious awareness as
well. The use of implicit measures of aVect (i.e., measures that circumvent
conscious control) would help to address this issue. As one example, Koole
et al. (1999) found that a measure of nonconscious aVect (i.e., a word
222
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 41 (native) -----
fragment completion task) mediated the eVect of self‐aYrmation on the
reduction in rumination reported previously. That is, self‐aYrmation led to
increases in implicit positive mood, which in turn was associated with
decreases in ruminative thought.
State self‐esteem is another mediational candidate. Self‐aYrmations might
boost state self‐esteem and thus enable people to accept conclusions that
might otherwise lower their state self‐esteem below an acceptable threshold.
Consistent with this reasoning, Fein and Spencer (1997) gave people positive
personality feedback and found that this self‐aYrmation not only reduced
stereotyping but also raised state self‐esteem. Moreover, the increase in state
self‐esteem mediated the reduction in stereotyping. However, in other stud-
ies, aYrmations of personal values have not been found to boost self‐esteem.
Schmeichel and Martens (2005) extensively tested the impact of aYrmation
(i.e., writing about an important personal value) on state self‐esteem. While
they did ﬁnd eVects on the primary outcomes featured in that study
(worldview defense and death‐thought accessibility), they found no eVects
on self‐esteem. It appears that self‐aYrmations can have eVects similar to
self‐esteem eVects, but without inﬂuencing self‐esteem.
One potential mediator that has not been tested, but that may hold
promise, is self‐certainty. That is, reﬂecting on a core source of self‐integrity,
such as one’s long‐held values, may make people more certain of their
identity and their priorities. Such certainty could anchor individuals’ self‐
worth and make them less susceptible to self‐integrity threats. Future research
examining this issue could adopt measures used to assess self‐concept clarity
(Campbell, 1990; Markus, 1977), for example by having people indicate
‘‘me’’/‘‘not me’’ to a series of trait adjectives. To the extent that aYrmation
makes people more certain of the self, they may respond more quickly to such
questions when they involve self‐descriptive traits (see also McGregor &
Marigold, 2003).
To close, while diVerent individual studies have found evidence for poten-
tial mechanisms underlying self‐aYrmation eVects—including elevations in
implicit positive aVect (Koole et al., 1999), in state self‐esteem (Cohen et al.,
2000; Fein & Spencer, 1997), in collective self‐esteem (Sherman & Kim,
2005), and in message scrutiny (Correll et al., 2004)—few if any consistent
mediators have emerged across multiple studies. Thus, this remains an
important topic for future research. In future studies, researchers should
also consider the proposal of Spencer, Zanna, and Fong (2005). In ques-
tioning whether experiments employing the mediational analyses suggested
by Baron and Kenny (1986) are a proper ‘‘gold standard’’ in social psy-
chology, they argue that designs that rely on mediational analyses should
only be preferred when measurement of a psychological process is easy and
manipulation of it is diYcult. In contrast, an alternative strategy in the
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
223

----- Page 42 (native) -----
present context would be to experimentally manipulate these posited psy-
chological mediators independently of self‐aYrmation and to assess whether
the standard eVects of self‐aYrmation are achieved in their absence.
B. ARE PEOPLE AWARE OF SELF‐AFFIRMATION PROCESSES?
One important question concerns whether people are aware of the self‐
aYrmation process or of the eVects of aYrmations on their behavior. Con-
sider Al Franken’s character of Stuart Smalley (1992), who parodied the self‐
help movement with his so‐called daily aYrmations, ‘‘I’m good enough, I’m
smart enough and doggone it, people like me.’’ It appears that his attempts
at aYrmation fall short, in part, because he is well aware that he is desper-
ately trying to boost his own self‐worth. Conversely, the process of self‐
aYrmation, as described in this chapter, tends to occur outside of awareness,
in that participants are generally unaware that the goal of the procedure is
to modify or enhance their feelings of self‐worth. (Moreover, in contrast to
Stuart Smalley’s self‐help attempts, self‐aYrmation interventions usually
entail aYrming a speciﬁc area of self‐integrity that is unrelated to the domain
of threat.) We propose that awareness is a critical moderator of the eVects
of self‐aYrmation. When one is made aware of the link between a self‐
aYrmation intervention and one’s potential responses to a threatening
event, the eVectiveness of aYrmation may be diminished. In a series of
studies, we examined the role of awareness in self‐aYrmation processes
(Sherman et al., 2005).
In one pair of studies, we adopted the methodology of Gilbert et al. (1998)
who used two groups of participants—experiencers and forecasters—to
compare the actual eVects of a stimulus or event with their anticipated eVect.
In the ﬁrst group of participants (the experiencers), we demonstrated that
self‐aYrmation of an important value unrelated to identity‐threatening news
made people more open to counterattitudinal information. In this case,
environmentalists who had aYrmed an alternative value proved more open
to the ostensibly ‘‘good’’ but identity‐challenging news that ecological
catastrophe in the near future was unlikely. For a second group of envir-
onmentalists (the forecasters), we simply described the procedure of writing
the value‐aYrming essay and presented them the identity‐threatening news
report. Then we asked participants whether and how writing the essay
would aVect their evaluation of the news report. Participants evidenced no
awareness that the aYrmation exercise would aVect openness to the essay.
The rated inﬂuence of the value‐aYrming essay was no greater than the
rated inﬂuence of a neutral essay.
224
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 43 (native) -----
A more direct test of the role of awareness is to make people aware of the
potential impact of the self‐aYrmation exercise and to assess the impact of
such awareness on the eYcacy of the aYrmation. In one study, we examined
optimistic illusions about invulnerability to disease; such illusions are noto-
riously diYcult to undo (Weinstein & Klein, 1995). We found that such
illusions were reduced via a self‐aYrmation procedure. Participants who
completed a values scale relevant to an important value proved more likely
to acknowledge that they, relative to the average student, were at some risk
for negative health outcomes. However, aYrmation had no impact on
participants who had been informed that the value aYrmation was linked
to their assessments of physical and health risk (i.e., that the researchers
were examining the connection between personal values and health assess-
ments). Merely suggesting the potential link between a self‐aVirmation and
one’s subsequent response rendered the aVirmation impotent.
A third study examined an implication of the argument that aYrmation
processes occur beneath conscious awareness: that the self‐aYrmation process
can proceed entirely without participants’ awareness either of the perceived
connection between the aYrmation and the outcome or the self‐aYrming
stimulus itself. Adapting the procedure of Bargh, Chen, and Burrows (1996),
we primed participants to be in an aYrmed state and found that such
implicit aYrmation can reduce defensiveness (Sherman et al., 2005). Parti-
cipants failed a diYcult math test and then indicated their interest in pursu-
ing various math‐related careers (e.g., physicist, mathematician). The
typical, defensive response to such failure is to disidentify from domain‐
relevant careers—that is, to downplay one’s personal interest in pursuing
math‐related professions (e.g., Major et al., 1998). Before failing the math
test, participants completed a sentence‐unscrambling task. That is, they had
to remove one word and unscramble the remaining words to make a sen-
tence (e.g., ‘‘he grape intelligent is’’). In one condition, the words featured in
some of the items involved self‐aYrming words (e.g., intelligent, triumphant,
proﬁcient), whereas in the other conditions the words involved either
threatening words (e.g., unintelligent, defeat) or achievement‐related control
words (e.g., progress, eVort). Participants who had completed the self‐
aYrming, sentence–completion task showed much less defensive disidentiﬁ-
cation from math‐related careers than did participants in either of the two
other conditions. Indeed, the eVect size of this priming manipulation was
equal in magnitude to the eVect size of participants’ sex in predicting their
interest in math‐related careers. This was the case in spite of the fact that
participants showed little, if any, awareness of the thematic content of
the words used in the self‐aYrmation task and no awareness at all of the
potential impact of this task on their interest in math careers.
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
225

----- Page 44 (native) -----
These ﬁndings hold implications for how the process of aYrmation may
operate in everyday life. AYrmations may operate with subtlety and without
a mediating role for awareness or conscious intent. Consider an individual
going to the doctor and receiving information that his or her cholesterol is
higher than it should be and without signiﬁcant changes in diet, medication
may be necessary. An initial response might be skepticism, the desire to seek a
retest or ﬁnd fault in the information (Ditto & Lopez, 1992). Yet, if people are
to proﬁt from this type of diagnostic information, they need to accept it at
some level. However, this acceptance need not be immediate. Perhaps the
individual returns home and browses the Internet, checking for information
on a coming election (aYrming a political identity), or examines the scores
from last night’s game (aYrming a valued social identity). In such situations,
people may think that they are procrastinating, but this procrastination may
serve an important integrity‐reparative function. As a consequence, a second
appraisal of the health‐risk information may cause less psychological pain
and avoidance. Contrast this type of ‘‘non‐conscious’’ self‐aYrmation with
the type oVered in an online self‐help webpage for people with bipolar
disorder:
Self aYrmation is you telling yourself positive things about yourself, making sure that
you impart the same caring for yourself that you would provide for another . . . .
Repeat aYrmations to yourself each and every day, and each and every time your
‘‘dragon’’ attacks you with a negative thought (bipolarworld.net, 2005).
Such aYrmations are intended to help people confront the threats of
everyday life. However, we suspect that self‐aYrmation may prove more
eVective—as suggested by the results reviewed above—if it occurs without
conscious intention. Indeed, for people in chronically stressful situations, aYr-
mations may prove more eVective when they are delivered less frequently—the
better to camouﬂage their intended purpose (Cohen et al., 2006). In summary,
aYrmation appears to operate not in a self‐conscious, deliberate manner, but
rather in a subtle, nonconscious manner. Future research could address this
issue more directly by experimentally manipulating whether participants are
informed of the psychological beneﬁts of self‐aYrmation, and assessing wheth-
er such aYrmations are less eVective when people are unaware, rather than
aware, of their beneﬁcial eVects.
C. QUESTIONS OF SUPERORDINATE FUNCTIONS
What is the function of self‐integrity? And why do people go to such lengths
to protect self‐integrity, to the point of even misrepresenting reality and mis-
perceiving themselves? Although self‐aYrmation theory posits a self‐system
226
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 45 (native) -----
motivated to protect worth and integrity, it does not speak to the ultimate
purpose of such a system. The beneﬁts of positive self‐illusions for psy-
chological and even physical health suggest the adaptive value, and perhaps
even evolutionary advantage, of maintaining self‐integrity (cf. Colvin,
Block, & Funder, 1995; Taylor & Brown, 1988; Taylor & Sherman, in press).
To return to the baseball analogy noted previously, for a ‘‘good’’ hitter who
bats .300 but fails nearly 70% of the time, it seems important to maintain a
sense of self‐worth and eYcacy in order to take advantage of those few
opportunities where one could get a ‘‘hit.’’ Maintaining self‐integrity in the
face of threat could help sustain optimism and eVort in the sometimes long
wait for success. Here, we oVer some additional, tentative speculations about
the ‘‘superordinate’’ function of self‐integrity.
One possibility is suggested by terror management theory—to wit, that the
maintenance of self‐integrity serves to stave oV the existential terror that
accompanies the knowledge of one’s own mortality (Solomon, Greenberg, &
Pyszczynski, 1991). According to this theory, people cope with the anxiety of
impending mortality by identifying with a cultural worldview—a worldview
that provides meaning and the possibility of symbolic immortality through
participation in culturally sanctioned projects. In the wake of September
11th, for example, American ﬂags appeared in great abundance, and patri-
otism increased dramatically. After this vivid reminder of death, people
found comfort in asserting their American identities, by identifying with
their fellow citizens, and by supporting the symbolic leader of their culture,
the President (Landau et al., 2004; Pyszczynski, Solomon, & Greenberg,
2003). Another related way that people cope with the knowledge of their
mortality is through the cultivation of self‐esteem, which is achieved by
being a good member of one’s culture. According to terror management
theorists, maintaining self‐esteem (and perhaps self‐integrity more generally)
serves to buVer people against the terror associated with the knowledge
of their own mortality (Greenberg, Solomon, Arndt, & Schimel, 2004;
Harmon‐Jones et al., 1997).
If cultural worldviews and the maintenance of self‐esteem help to pro-
tect people from the terror associated with their mortality, then leading
individuals to focus on their own mortality should increase both their
endorsement of cultural worldviews and engagement in self‐esteem protec-
tive behaviors. Numerous studies support these hypotheses (see Greenberg,
Solomon, & Pyszczynski, 1997 for a review). Research by Schmeichel
and Martens (2005) speciﬁcally examined the relationship between self‐
aYrmation processes and terror management processes. They examined
whether self‐aYrmation reduces the eVects of mortality salience. Writing
about an important value, for example, not only has self‐aYrming eVects,
but also serves to bolster one’s worldview (Schmeichel & Martens, 2005). As
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
227

----- Page 46 (native) -----
a consequence, people might have less need to stave oV thoughts of their own
mortality by resorting to various forms of worldview defense, such as
derogation of outgroup members who hold views anathema to one’s own.
In one study, a mortality salience manipulation—thinking about one’s
death—led participants to defend their cultural worldview. Participants in-
creased their support of a pro‐American essay writer over an anti‐American
essay writer—a standard terror management eVect (e.g., Greenberg et al.,
1990). However, this cultural worldview defense was eliminated among
participants who had completed a self‐aYrmation—that is, among partici-
pants who had written about an important value unrelated to the threat.
Thus, the aYrmation of self‐integrity seems to buVer people against the
existential terror associated with the knowledge of their inevitable death.
Such studies, however, do not address the question of motivational primacy.
Does the maintenance of self‐integrity serve the ultimate purpose of manag-
ing existential terror? Such questions of ultimate purpose are, of course,
diYcult to answer. However, it is clear that both terror management theory
and self‐aYrmation theory provide complementary evidence concerning
how the self‐integrity maintenance system copes with threats to the self,
both existential and otherwise.
From a more evolutionary perspective, an intriguing possibility is that
the motivation to protect self‐integrity serves to increase social ﬁtness. As
Trivers (2000) has argued, people’s positive illusions and self‐deceptions may
be in the service of social deception. Individuals who create a public persona
as a person of integrity—as someone whose goodness, strength, and ability
to control important outcomes are clear—will acquire material and even
reproductive advantages in the social hierarchy. It thus serves the individual
well to hide, rationalize, and compensate for personal ﬂaws and mistakes
that might otherwise compromise his or her status in the eyes of others.
A similar idea is found in Nisbett and Cohen’s work (1996) on the Southern
culture of honor: by projecting a social image of strength and willingness to
retaliate, Southern men maintain their ‘‘honor’’ and consequently deter
others from challenging their status or stealing their resources. The critical
insight is this: the public posturing, social manipulations, and interpersonal
deceptions needed to convince others of one’s integrity will prove far more
plausible and persuasive if the individual in question actually believes in
the persona he or she is trying to project (Trivers, 2000). As noted in the
sociometer theory of self‐esteem (Leary & Baumeister, 2000), the ego‐
protective strategies people have evolved to maintain self‐integrity may thus
help to promote their social ﬁtness. Future research might test this account
by manipulating whether self‐threats and self‐aYrmations are delivered
in private or in public (such as in front of a socially signiﬁcant audience).
If the maintenance of self‐integrity serves a social ﬁtness function, then
228
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 47 (native) -----
self‐threats may be more threatening and self‐aYrmations more aYrming,
when delivered in the presence of others.
VI. Implications for Interpersonal Relationships and Coping
Because people experience many potential threats to their self‐integrity, an
important question concerns the extent to which people use aYrmational
strategies in everyday life. To what extent do people spontaneously rely on
this mechanism involved in the psychological immune system? Relatedly,
what are the real‐world analogs to the self‐aYrmation manipulations that
have been featured in the laboratory? Research on close relationships and on
coping and resiliency suggests some answers and points the way to exciting
directions for future research.
A. INTERPERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS
When people rank their values in terms of their personal importance in self‐
aYrmation studies, they consistently rank relationships with friends and
family highly. Additionally, in a writing intervention study designed to elicit
thoughts and feelings among patients about their illness—a study that
provided an opportunity for self‐aYrming without an explicit prompt—
people most frequently invoked the importance of their close relationships
(Creswell et al., 2006). Thus, personal relationships seem to be an important
aYrmational resource that people draw on in times of stress. Several studies
in the close‐relationships literature have examined this idea in some depth.
People can use their relationships and their romantic partners as aYrma-
tional resources by emphasizing the love they receive from their partners
(Kumashiro & Sedikides, 2005; Murray, Bellavia, Feeney, Holmes, & Rose,
2001; Swann, De La Ronde, & Hixon, 1994). People with high self‐esteem in
particular seem to respond to threats to their self‐image by aYrming the
integrity of their relationships (Murray et al., 1998).
Threats can also exist within relationships, as for example when one
partner outperforms the other. Tesser (1988) has found that upward social
comparisons within a relationship could constitute a threat, particularly if
the domain is of high personal importance. One adaptive way to respond to
such a threat is to draw upon the relationship as an aYrmational resource
(and perhaps also bask in the glory of one’s partner). In a series of studies,
people in close relationships were able to use the relationship as an aYrma-
tion after engaging in a potentially threatening upward social comparison
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
229

----- Page 48 (native) -----
with their partner (Lockwood, Dolderman, Sadler, & Gerchak, 2004). When
dealing with this potential within‐relationship threat, those people in close
relationships aYrmed their relationships by emphasizing the warmth and
kindness of the relationship.
Many questions remain for researchers interested in the how personal
relationships serve such aYrming functions. For example, the aYrmation
framework may be useful in understanding the relationship between posses-
sing multiple roles and depression. Sociological studies have found that
people who have multiple roles, such as family and career, tend to have
reduced stress and depression—at least as long as the number of roles remains
below a manageable threshold (e.g., Gore & Mangione, 1983). For women in
particular, it has been found that although work and family can be great
strains on resources, those who participate in multiple roles have reduced
levels of depression (Kandel, Davies, & Raveis, 1985). These studies raise
questions of causality, as those who have better mental health may be
more able to handle multiple roles without becoming depressed (Kandel
et al., 1985). This caveat notwithstanding, the self‐aYrmation framework
provides a possible explanation for the observed phenomenon. That is, per-
haps multiple roles function as aYrmational resources allowing people to use
one domain of life to aYrm the self when threatened in the other. Adopting
the methodological approaches of close relationships researchers, such as use
of daily diary reports and experience sampling, is an exciting direction for
researchers interested in how people use relationships and other aYrmational
resources to cope with threats and manage stress on a day‐to‐day level.
B. COPING AND RESILIENCE
The assumption that people need to work through their grief, and to experi-
ence negative emotions after facing loss or trauma, has been challenged by
work on resilience—the ability to maintain a stable equilibrium after a loss
(Bonanno, 2004; Wortman & Silver, 1989). The failure to experience nega-
tive emotions after trauma was thought to be associated with delayed grief
and greater psychological problems in the future; however, evidence does
not support this intuition that people must experience grief in order to
‘‘move on’’ (Bonanno & Field, 2001). By contrast, those who express posi-
tive emotions after a loss are more likely to exhibit resilience in subsequent
years (Bonanno & Keltner, 1997).
What are some of the factors that promote resiliency in the face of loss?
One factor seems to be the ability to self‐enhance (Bonanno, 2004)—to
perceive the self as possessing more positive attributes than the average
person (Taylor & Brown, 1988). In support of this claim, measured levels
230
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 49 (native) -----
of self‐enhancement were associated with better adjustment among Bosnian
civilians after the civil war in Sarajevo (Bonanno, Field, Kovacevic, &
Kaltman, 2002). In another study involving people near the World Trade
Center at the time of the 9/11 terrorist attacks, self‐enhancement (as assessed
by endorsement of such statements as ‘‘I am fully in control of my own fate,’’
and ‘‘I always know why I do things’’; see Paulhus, 1984) prospectively
predicted a reduction in both depression and in Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder symptoms (Bonanno, Rennicke, Dekel, & Rosen, 2005).
It seems plausible that self‐aYrmation is another mechanism by which
people remain resilient after trauma. Just as the ability to self‐enhance may
help people to muster valuable resources to grapple with life challenges, the
ability to aYrm alternative domains of self‐integrity in the face of threat may
facilitate better coping with the trauma or loss (Taylor & Sherman, in press).
AYrmation of other aspects of self‐integrity—such as religion, relationships,
work, or hobbies—may enable people to deal constructively with the threats
to perceived control, meaning, and signiﬁcance that issue from real‐world
loss and trauma.
Future research is needed to identify whether and how people use self‐
aYrmation to cope with trauma and loss. Just as self‐aYrmation can lead
to greater acceptance and less defensiveness across a wide range of threaten-
ing situations featured in laboratory studies, it will be exciting to explore
whether and when it can lead to more adaptive coping among those who
have experienced trauma.
VII. Conclusions
In her seminal review on motivated cognition, Kunda (1990) observed:
[M]otivated illusions can be dangerous when they are used to guide behavior and
decisions, especially in those cases in which objective reasoning could facilitate more
adaptive behavior.
For example, people who play down the seriousness of early
symptoms of severe diseases such as skin cancer and people who see only weaknesses
in research pointing to the dangers of drugs such as caVeine or of behaviors such as
drunken driving may literally pay with their lives for their motivated reasoning.
Hopefully, once the mechanisms producing such biases are fully understood, it will
be possible to help people overcome them.
(Kunda, 1990, p. 495–496)
Self-aYrmation theory provides a framework to understand and over-
come such biases. At both the individual and collective levels, important
domains of functioning—health, political decision-making, conﬂict, rela-
tionships, academic performance—call forth the motivation to defend the
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
231

----- Page 50 (native) -----
self. People defensively distort, deny, and misrepresent reality in a manner
that protects self-integrity. The cost of doing so, of course, is that they miss
potential opportunities for learning and growth that, if acted upon, could
otherwise increase their adaptiveness in the long term. However, in the face
of daily threats, people can also protect self-integrity through the aVirmation
of alternative sources of self-identity. Doing so helps them to accept experi-
ences and information that, although threatening, hold important lessons
for self-change. By illuminating the psychology of self-defense, the research
reviewed in this chapter oVers practitioners, teachers, clinicians, mediators,
and interventionists more generally theory-driven strategies for overcoming
self-defense and encouraging self-improvement.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Nancy Apfel, Patricia Brzustoski, David Creswell, Jennifer Crocker,
David Dunning, Julio Garcia, Heejung Kim, Leif Nelson, Steve Spencer, Claude Steele, and
Mark Zanna for their thoughtful comments on earlier versions of this paper.
References
Abelson, R. (1986). Beliefs are like possessions. Journal for the Theory of Social Behavior, 16,
223–250.
Abrams, D., & Hogg, M. (1988). Comments on the motivational status of self‐esteem in social
identity and intergroup discrimination. European Journal of Social Psychology, 18,
317–334.
Adams, G., Tormala, T. T., & O’Brien, L. T. (in press). The eVect of self‐aYrmation on
perceptions of racism. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology.
Allport, G. W. (1961). Pattern and growth in personality. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Wonston.
Armor, D. A., & Taylor, S. E. (2002). When predictions fail: The dilemma of unrealistic optimism.
In T. Gilovich, D. GriYn, and D. Kahneman (Eds.), Heuristics and biases: The psychology of
intuitive judgment (pp. 334–347). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Aronson, E. (1968). Dissonance theory: Progress and problems. In R. P. Abelson, E. Arson,
W. J. McGuire, T. M. Newcomb, M. J. Rosenberg, and P. H. Tannembaum (Eds.),
Theories of cognitive consistency: A sourcebook (pp. 5–27). Chicago: Rand McNally.
Aronson, J., Blanton, H., & Cooper, J. (1995). From dissonance to disidentiﬁcation: Selectivity
in the self‐aYrmation process. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 986–996.
Aronson, J., Cohen, G. L., & Nail, P. R. (1999). Self‐aYrmation theory: An update and
appraisal. In E. Harmon‐Jones and J. Mills (Eds.), Cognitive dissonance theory: Revival
with revisions and controversies (pp. 127–147). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Aronson, J., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the eVects of stereotype threat
on African American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
232
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 51 (native) -----
Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (1999). The unbearable automaticity of being. American
Psychologist, 54, 462–476.
Bargh, J. A., Chen, M., & Burrows, L. (1996). Automaticity of social behavior: Direct eVects of
trait construct and stereotype activation on action. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 71, 230–244.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator‐mediator variable distinction in social
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173–1182.
Baumeister, R. F., Heatherton, T. F., & Tice, D. M. (1993). When ego threats lead to self‐
regulation failure: Negative consequences of high self‐esteem. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 64, 141–156.
Beauregard, K. S., & Dunning, D. (1998). Turning up the contrast: Self‐enhancement motives
prompt egocentric contrast eVects in social judgments. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74, 606–621.
Ben‐Zeev, T., Fein, S., & Inzlicht, M. (2005). Arousal and stereotype threat. Journal of Experi-
mental Social Psychology, 41, 174–181.
Bettman, J. R., & Weitz, B. A. (1983). Attributions in the boardroom: Causal reasoning in
corporate annual reports. Administrative Science Quarterly, 28, 165–183.
Bipolarworld.net. (2005). AYrmation. Retrieved July 1, 2005 from http://www.bipolarworld.net/
Treatments/Self%20Help/self_aYrmation.htm
Blanton, H., Cooper, J., Skurnik, I., & Aronson, J. (1997). When bad things happen to good
feedback: Exacerbating the need for self‐justiﬁcation with self‐aYrmations. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 684–692.
Blanton, H., Pelham, B. W., DeHart, T., & Carvallo, M. (2001). Overconﬁdence as dissonance
reduction. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 37, 373–385.
Blascovich, J., Spencer, S. J., Quinn, D., & Steele, C. (2001). African Americans and high blood
pressure: The role of stereotype threat. Psychological Science, 12, 225–229.
Bonanno, G. A., & Field, N. P. (2001). Evaluating the delayed grief hypothesis across 5 years of
bereavement. American Behavioral Scientist, 44, 798–816.
Bonanno, G. A., & Keltner, D. (1997). Facial expressions of emotion and the course of conjugal
bereavement. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106, 126–137.
Bonanno, G. A., Field, N. P., Kovacevic, A., & Kaltman, S. (2002). Self‐enhancement as a
buVer against extreme adversity: Civil war in Bosnia and traumatic loss in the United
States. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 184–196.
Bonanno, G. A., Rennicke, C., Dekel, S., & Rosen, J. (2005). Self‐enhancement among high‐
exposure survivors of the September 11th terrorist attack: Resilience or social maladjust-
ment? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 984–988.
Bonanno, G. A. (2004). Loss, trauma, and human resilience: Have we underestimated the
human capacity to thrive after extremely aversive events? American Psychologist, 59,
20–28.
Boninger, D. S., Krosnick, J. A., & Berent, M. K. (1995). Origins of attitude importance:
Self‐interest, social identiﬁcation, and value relevance. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 68, 61–80.
Brehm, J. (1956). Postdecision changes in the desirability of alternatives. Journal of Abnormal
and Social Psychology, 52, 384–389.
Brown, B. R. (2000). When moral entitlement leads to immoral acts. Doctoral dissertation,
Stanford University. Dissertation Abstracts International: Sciences and Engineering, 61,
1132.
Brown, J. D., & Smart, S. A. (1991). The self and social conduct: Linking self‐representations to
prosocial behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60, 368–375.
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
233

----- Page 52 (native) -----
Cadinu, M. R., & Rothbart, M. (1996). Self‐anchoring and diVerentiation processes in the
minimal group setting. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 661–677.
Campbell, J. D. (1990). Self‐esteem and clarity of the self‐concept. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 59, 538–549.
Cohen, G. L. (2003). Party over policy: The dominating impact of group inﬂuence on political
beliefs. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 808–822.
Cohen, G. L., Aronson, J., & Steele, C. M. (2000). When beliefs yield to evidence: Reducing
biased evaluation by aYrming the self. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26,
1151–1164.
Cohen, G. L., & Garcia, J. (2005). ‘‘I am us’’: Negative stereotypes as collective threats. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 566–582.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A. (2006). A social‐psychological intervention to
reduce the racial achievement gap in school. Manuscript under review.
Cohen, G. L., Sherman, D. K., McGoey, M., Hsu, L., Bastardi, A., & Ross, L. D. (2005).
Bridging the partisan divide: Self‐aYrmation and the reduction of ideological bias. Manu-
script under review.
Cohen, G. L., Steele, C. M., & Ross, L. D. (1999). The mentor’s dilemma: Providing
critical feedback across the racial divide. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25,
1302–1318.
Correll, J., Spencer, S. J., & Zanna, M. P. (2004). An aYrmed self and an open mind: Self‐
aYrmation and sensitivity to argument strength. Journal of Experimental Social Psycholo-
gy, 40, 350–356.
Colvin, C. R., Block, J., & Funder, D. C. (1995). Overly positive self‐evaluations and personali-
ty: Negative implications for mental health. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
68, 1152–1162.
Creswell, J. D., Lam, S., Stanton, A. L., Taylor, S. E., Bower, J. E., & Sherman, D. K. (2006).
Does self‐aYrmation, cognitive processing, or discovery of meaning explain cancer‐related
health beneﬁts of expressive writing? Manuscript under review.
Creswell, J. D., Welch, W., Taylor, S. E., Sherman, D. K., Gruenewald, T., & Mann, T. (2005).
AYrmation of personal values buVers neuroendocrine and psychological stress responses.
Psychological Science, 16, 846–851.
Crocker, J., & Major, B. (1989). Social stigma and self‐esteem: The self‐protective properties of
stigma. Psychological Review, 96, 608–630.
Crocker, J., & Wolfe, C. T. (2001). Contingencies of self‐worth. Psychological Review, 108,
593–623.
Dal Cin, S., MacDonald, T. K., Fong, G. T., Zanna, M. P., & Elton‐Marshall, T. E. (in press).
Remembering the message: Using a reminder cue to increase condom use following a safer
sex intervention. Health Psychology.
Dawson, E., Gilovich, T., & Regan, D. T. (2002). Motivated reasoning and performance on the
Wason selection task. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 1379–1387.
De Dreu, C. K. W., & Carnevale, P. J. (2003). Motivational bases of information processing and
strategy in negotiation and social conﬂict. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental
social psychology (Vol. 35, pp. 235–290). San Diego: Academic Press.
Deaux, K. (1996). Social identiﬁcation. In E. T. Higgins and A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social
psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 777–798). New York: Guilford.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1995). Human autonomy: The basis for true self‐esteem. In M. H.
Kernis (Ed.), EYcacy, agency, and self‐esteem (pp. 31–49). New York: Plenum.
Dickerson, S. S., & Kemeny, M. E. (2004). Acute stressors and cortisol responses: A theoretical
integration and synthesis of laboratory research. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 355–391.
234
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 53 (native) -----
Dijksterhuis, A. (2004). Think diVerent: The merits of unconscious thought in preference devel-
opment and decision making. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 586–598.
Ditto, P. H., & Lopez, D. F. (1992). Motivated skepticism: Use of diVerential decision criteria
for preferred and nonpreferred conclusions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
63, 569–584.
Ditto, P. H., Scepansky, J. A., Munro, G. D., Apanovitch, A. M., & Lockhart, L. K. (1998).
Motivated sensitivity to preference‐inconsistent information. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 75, 53–69.
Dunning, D. (2003). The zealous self‐aYrmer: How and why the self lurks so pervasively behind
social judgment. In S. J. Spencer, S. Fein, M. P. Zanna, and J. M. Olson (Eds.), Motivated
social perception: The Ontario symposium (Vol. 9, pp. 45–72). Mahwah, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Dunning, D., & Beauregard, K. S. (2000). Regulating impressions of others to aYrm images of
the self. Social Cognition, 18, 198–222.
Dunning, D., & Cohen, G. L. (1992). Egocentric deﬁnitions of traits and abilities in social
judgment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 341–355.
Dunning, D., GriYn, D. W., Milojkovic, J. H., & Ross, L. (1990). The overconﬁdence eVect in
social prediction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 568–592.
Dunning, D., & Hayes, A. F. (1996). Evidence for egocentric comparison in social judgment.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 213–229.
Dunning, D., Leuenberger, A., & Sherman, D. A. (1995). A new look at motivated inference:
Are self‐serving theories of success a product of motivational forces? Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 69, 58–68.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. (1988). A social cognitive approach to motivation and personality.
Psychological Review, 95, 256–273.
Ellsworth, P. C., & Ross, L. (1983). Public opinion and capital punishment: A close examination
of the views of abolitionists and retentionists. Crime and Delinquency, 29, 116–169.
Fein, S., & Spencer, S. J. (1997). Prejudice as self‐image maintenance: AYrming the self through
derogating others. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 31–44.
Fein, S., Hoshino‐Browne, E., Davies, P. G., & Spencer, S. J. (2003). Self‐image maintenance
goals and sociocultural norms in motivated social perception. In S. J. Spencer, S. Fein,
M. P. Zanna, and J. M. Olson (Eds.), Motivated social perception: The Ontario symposium
(Vol. 9, pp. 21–44). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Festinger, L. A. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson.
Franken, A. (1992). I’m good enough, I’m smart enough, and doggone it, people like me! Daily
aYrmations by Stuart Smalley. New York: Dell Publishing.
Gaertner, L., Sedikides, C., & Graetz, K. (1999). In search of self‐deﬁnition: Motivational
primacy of the individual self, motivational primacy of the collective self, or contextual
primacy? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 5–18.
Gaertner, S. L., & Dovidio, J. F. (1986). The aversive form of racism. In J. F. Dovidio and S. L.
Gaertner (Eds.), Prejudice, discrimination, and racism (pp. 61–89). San Diego: Academic
Press.
Galinsky, A. D., Stone, J., & Cooper, J. (2000). The reinstatement of dissonance and psycho-
logical discomfort following failed aYrmations. European Journal of Social Psychology, 30,
123–147.
Gerber, A., & Green, D. (1999). Misperceptions about perceptual bias. Annual Review of
Political Science, 2, 189–210.
Gibbons, F. X., Eggleston, T. J., & Benthin, A. (1997). Cognitive reactions to smoking relapse:
The reciprocal relation of dissonance and self‐esteem. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 72, 184–195.
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
235

----- Page 54 (native) -----
Gilbert, D. T., Pinel, E. C., Wilson, T. D., Blumberg, S. J., & Wheatley, T. P. (1998). Immune
neglect: A source of durability bias in aVective forecasting. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 75, 617–638.
Glaser, R., & Kiecolt‐Glaser, J. (1994). Handbook of human stress and immunity. New York:
Academic Press.
Gore, S., & Mangione, T. W. (1983). Social roles, sex role, and psychological distress: Addditive
and interactive models of sex diVerences. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 24,
300–312.
Gramzow, R. H., & Gaertner, L. (2005). Self‐esteem and favoritism toward novel in‐groups:
The self as an evaluative base. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 801–815.
Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T., Solomon, S., Rosenblatt, A., Veeder, M., Kirkland, S., &
Lyon, D. (1990). Evidence for terror management theory II: The eVects of mortality
salience on reactions to those who threaten or bolster the cultural worldview. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 308–318.
Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., & Pyszczynski, T. (1997). Terror management theory of self‐esteem
and cultural worldviews: Empirical assessments and conceptual reﬁnements. In M. P.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 29, pp. 61–139). San Diego:
Academic Press.
Greenwald, A. G. (1980). The totalitarian ego: Fabrication and revision of personal history.
American Psychologist, 35, 603–618.
Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., & Schwartz, J. L. K. (1998). Measuring individual diVer-
ences in implicit cognition: The implicit association test. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74, 1464–1480.
Harmon‐Jones, E., Simon, L., Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T., Solomon, S., & McGregor, H.
(1997). Terror management theory and self‐esteem: Evidence that increased self‐esteem
reduces mortality salience eVects. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 24–36.
Harris, P. R., & Napper, L. (2005). Self‐aYrmation and the biased processing of threatening
health‐risk information. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 1250–1263.
Hastorf, A., & Cantril, H. (1954). They saw a game: A case study. Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology, 49, 129–134.
Heine, S. J. (2005). Constructing good selves in Japan and North America. In R. M. Sorrentino,
D. Cohen, J. M. Olson, and M. P. Zanna (Eds.), Cultural and social behavior: The Ontario
Symposium (Vol. 10, pp. 95–116). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Heine, S. J., & Lehman, D. R. (1997). Culture, dissonance, and self‐aYrmation. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 389–400.
Heine, S. J., Lehman, D. R., Markus, H., & Kitayama, S. (1999). Is there a universal need for
positive self‐regard? Psychological Review, 106, 766–794.
Hobfoll, S. E. (1989). Conservation of resources: A new attempt at conceptualizing stress.
American Psychologist, 44, 513–524.
Hoshino‐Browne, E., Zanna, A. S., Spencer, S. J., & Zanna, M. P. (2004). Investigating attitudes
cross‐culturally: A case of cognitive dissonance among East Asians and North Americans.
In G. Haddock and G. R. Maio (Eds.), Contemporary perspectives on the psychology of
attitudes (pp. 375–397). New York: Psychology Press.
Hoshino‐Browne, E., Zanna, A. S., Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., Kitayama, S., & Lackenbauer, S.
(2005). On the cultural guises of cognitive dissonance: The case of Easterners and Wester-
ners. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 294–310.
Jacks, J. Z., & O’Brien, M. E. (2004). Decreasing resistance by aYrming the self. In E. S.
Knowles and J. A. Linn (Eds.), Resistance and persuasion (pp. 235–257). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
236
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 55 (native) -----
Jemmott, J. B., III, Ditto, P. H., & Croyle, R. T. (1986). Judging health status: EVects of perceived
prevalence and personal relevance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 899–905.
Jordan, C. H, Spencer, S. J., & Zanna, M. P. (2003). ‘‘I love me. . .I love me not:’’ Implicit self‐
esteem, explicit self‐esteem, and defensiveness. In S. J. Spencer, S. Fein, M. P. Zanna, and J. M.
Olson (Eds.), Motivated social perception: The Ontario symposium (Vol. 9, pp. 117–145).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Jordan, C.,H, Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., Hoshino‐Browne, E., & Correll, J. (2003). Secure
and defensive high self‐esteem. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 969–978.
Kandel, D. B., Davies, M., & Raveis, V. H. (1985). The stressfulness of daily social roles for
women: Marital, occupational, and household roles. Journal of Health and Social Behavior,
26, 64–78.
Keough, K. A. (1998). When the self is at stake: Integrating the self into stress and physical
health research (Doctoral dissertation, Stanford University, 1998). Dissertation Abstracts
International, 58, 3959.
Keough, K. A., Garcia, J., & Steele, C. M. (1998). Reducing stress and illness by aYrming the
self. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University.
Kernis, M. H., & Paradise, A. W. (2002). Distinguishing between secure and fragile forms of
high self‐esteem. In E. L. Deci and R. M. Ryan (Eds.), Handbook of self‐determination
research (pp. 339–360). Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press.
Kim, H., & Markus, H. R. (1999). Deviance or uniqueness, harmony or conformity: A cultural
analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 785–800.
Kirschbaum, C., Pirke, K., & Hellhammer, D. H. (1993). The ‘Trier Social Stress Test’: A tool
for investigating psychobiological stress responses in a laboratory setting. Neuropsychobiol-
ogy, 28, 76–81.
Kitayama, S., Snibbe, A. C., Markus, H. R., & Suzuki, T. (2004). Is there any ‘‘free’’ choice?
Self and dissonance in two cultures. Psychological Science, 15, 527–533.
Koole, S. L., Smeets, K., van Knippenberg, A., & Dijksterhuis, A. (1999). The cessation of
rumination through self‐aYrmation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77,
111–125.
Kruger, J. M., & Dunning, D. (1999). Unskilled and unaware of it: How diYculties in recogniz-
ing one’s own incompetence lead to inﬂated self‐assessments. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 77, 1121–1134.
Kumashiro, M., & Sedikides, C. (2005). Taking on board liability‐focused information:
Close positive relationships as a self‐bolstering resource. Psychological Science, 16, 732–739.
Kunda, Z. (1987). Motivated inference: Self‐serving generation and evaluation of causal the-
ories. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 636–647.
Kunda, Z. (1990). The case for motivated reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 108, 480–498.
Landau, M. J., Solomon, S., Greenberg, J., Cohen, F., Pyszczynski, T., Arndt, J., Miller, C. H.,
Ogilvie, D. M., & Cook, A. (2004). Deliver us from evil: The eVects of mortality salience
and reminders of 9/11 on support for president George W. Bush. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1136–1150.
Langer, E. J. (1975). The illusion of control. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 32,
311–328.
Lau, R. R., & Russell, D. R. (1980). Attributions in the sports pages. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 39, 29–38.
Lazarus, R. S. (1993). From psychological stress to the emotions: A history of changing
outlooks. Annual Review of Psychology, 44, 1–21.
Leary, M. R., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000). The nature and function of self‐esteem: Sociometer
theory. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 32,
pp. 1–62). San Diego: Academic Press.
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
237

----- Page 56 (native) -----
Lerner, M. J. (1980). The belief in a just world: A fundamental delusion. New York: Plenum Press.
Liberman, A., & Chaiken, S. (1992). Defensive processing of personally relevant health mes-
sages. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 18, 669–679.
Liu, T. J., & Steele, C. M. (1986). Attributional analysis as self‐aYrmation. Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology, 51, 531–540.
Lockwood, P., Dolderman, D., Sadler, P., & Gerchak, E. (2004). Feeling better about doing
worse: Social comparisons within romantic relationships. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 87, 91–103.
Lockwood, P., & Kunda, Z. (1997). Superstars and me: Predicting the impact of role models on
the self. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 91–103.
Lord, C., Ross, L., & Lepper, M. R. (1979). Biased assimilation and attitude polarization: The
eVects of prior theories on subsequently considered evidence. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 37, 2098–2109.
Mackie, D. M., & Worth, L. T. (1989). Processing deﬁcits and the mediation of positive aVect in
persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 27–40.
Major, B., Spencer, S. J., Schmader, T., Wolfe, C., & Crocker, J. (1998). Coping with negative
stereotypes about intellectual performance: The role of psychological disengagement.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 34–50.
Markus, H. (1977). Self‐schemata and processing information about the self. Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 35, 63–78.
Markus, H., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implications for cognition, emotion,
and motivation. Psychological Review, 98, 224–253.
Martens, A., Johns, M., Greenberg, J., & Schimel, J. (2006). Combating stereotype threat: The
eVect of self‐aYrmation on women’s intellectual performance. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 42, 236–243.
Martin, L. L., & Tesser, A. (1996). Some ruminative thoughts. In R. S. Wyer (Ed.), Advances in
social cognition (Vol. 9, pp. 1–47). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Matz, D. C., & Wood, W. (2005). Cognitive dissonance in groups: The consequences of
disagreement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 22–37.
McEwen, B. S. (1998). Protective and damaging eVects of stress mediators. New England Journal
of Medicine, 338, 171–179.
McGregor, I., & Marigold, D. C. (2003). Defensive zeal and the uncertain self: What makes you
so sure? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 838–852.
McQueen, A., & Klein, W. (2005). Experimental manipulations of self‐aYrmation: A systematic
review. Manuscript under review.
Miller, D. T., & Ross, M. (1975). Self‐serving biases in the attribution of causality: Fact or
ﬁction? Psychological Bulletin, 82, 213–225.
Monin, B., & Miller, D. T. (2001). Moral credentials and the expression of prejudice. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 33–43.
Monteith, M. J., & Voils, C. I. (1998). Proneness to prejudiced responses: Toward understand-
ing the authenticity of self‐reported discrepancies. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 75, 901–916.
Morris, K. A., & Swann, W. B. (1996). Denial and the AIDS crisis: On wishing away the threat
of AIDS. In S. Oskamp and S. Thompson (Eds.), Safer sex in the ‘90s: Understanding and
preventing HIV risk behavior (pp. 57–79). New York: Sage.
Munro, G. D., & Ditto, P. H. (1997). Biased assimilation, attitude polarization, and aVect in
reactions to stereotype‐relevant scientiﬁc information. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 23, 636–653.
Murphy, G. (1947). Personality. New York: Harper and Brothers.
238
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 57 (native) -----
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., MacDonald, G., & Ellsworth, P. (1998). Through the looking
glass darkly? When self‐doubts turn into relationship insecurities. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 75, 1459–1480.
Murray, S. L., Bellavia, G., Feeney, B., Holmes, J. G., & Rose, P. (2001). The contingencies of
interpersonal acceptance: When romantic relationships function as a self‐aYrmational
resource. Motivation and Emotion, 25, 163–189.
Nail, P. R., Misak, J. E., & Davis, R. M. (2004). Self‐aYrmation versus self‐consistency: A
comparison of two competing self‐theories of dissonance phenomena. Personality and
Individual DiVerences, 36, 1893–1905.
Nisbett, R. E., & Ross, L. D. (1980). Human inference: Strategies and shortcomings of social
judgment. Englewood CliVs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Nisbett, R. E., & Cohen, D. (1996). Culture of honor: The psychology of violence in the South.
Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Nolen‐Hoeksema, S., & Morrow, J. (1991). A prospective study of depression and posttraumat-
ic stress symptoms after a natural disaster: The 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 115–121.
Norton, M. I., Monin, B., Cooper, J., & Hogg, M. A. (2003). Vicarious dissonance: Attitude change
from the inconsistency of others. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 47–62.
O’Brien, L. T., & Crandall, C. S. (2003). Stereotype threat and arousal: EVects on women’s
math performance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 782–789.
Otten, S. (2002). ‘‘Me and us’’ or ‘‘us and them’’? The self as heuristic for deﬁning minimal
ingroups. European Review of Social Psychology, 13, 1–33.
Paulhus, D. L. (1984). Two‐component models of socially desirable responding. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 598–609.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). The elaboration likelihood method of persuasion. In
L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology. (Vol. 19, pp. 123–205).
New York: Academic Press.
Petty, R. E., & Wegener, D. T. (1998). Attitude change: Multiple roles for persuasion variables.
In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, and G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology
(4th ed., pp. 323–390). New York: McGraw‐Hill.
Pyszczynski, T., & Greenberg, J. (1987). Toward and integration of cognitive and motivational
perspectives on social inference: A biased hypothesis‐testing model. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psycology (Vol. 20, pp. 297–340). New York: Academic Press.
Pyszczynski, T., Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., Arndt, J., & Schimel, J. (2004). Why do people
need self‐esteem? A theoretical and empirical review. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 435–468.
Pyszczynski, T., Solomon, S., & Greenberg, J. (2003). In the wake of 9/11: The psychology of
terror. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Raghunathan, R., & Trope, Y. (2002). Walking the tightrope between feeling good and being
accurate: Mood as a resource in processing persuasive messages. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 83, 510–525.
Reed, M. B., & Aspinwall, L. G. (1998). Self‐aYrmation reduces biased processing of health‐risk
information. Motivation and Emotion, 22, 99–132.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self‐image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
sity Press.
Ross, L., & Ward, A. (1995). Psychological barriers to dispute resolution. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 27, pp. 255–304). San Diego: Academic Press.
Schimel, J., Arndt, J., Pyszczynski, T., & Greenberg, J. (2001). Being accepted for who we are:
Evidence that social validation of the intrinsic self reduces general defensiveness. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 35–52.
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
239

----- Page 58 (native) -----
Schimel, J., Arndt, J., Banko, K. M., & Cook, A. (2004). Not all self‐aYrmations were created
equal: The cognitive and social beneﬁts of aYrming the intrinsic (vs. extrinsic) self. Social
Cognition, 22, 75–99.
Schmeichel, B. J., & Martens, A. (2005). Self‐aYrmation and mortality salience: AYrming
values reduces worldview defense and death‐thought accessibility. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 31, 658–667.
Sears, C. L., & Funk, C. L. (1991). Are we reaching undergraduates? A survey of course oVering
in political psychology. Political Psychology, 12, 559–572.
Seery, M., Blascovich, J., Weisbuch, M., & Vick, S. B. (2004). The relationship between self‐
esteem level, self‐esteem stability, and cardiovascular reactions to performance feedback.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 133–145.
Sherman, D. A. K., Nelson, L. D., & Steele, C. M. (2000). Do messages about health risks
threaten the self? Increasing the acceptance of threatening health messages via self‐ aYrma-
tion. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 1046–1058.
Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (2002). Accepting threatening information: Self‐aYrmation and
the reduction of defensive biases. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 11, 119–123.
Sherman, D. K., Cohen, G. L., Nelson, L. D., Bastardi, A., Nussbaum, A. D., & Ross, L. (2005).
AYrmed yet unaware: The role of awareness in the process of self‐aYrmation. Manuscript
under review.
Sherman, D. K., & Kim, H. S. (2005). Is there an ‘‘I’’ in ‘‘team’’? The role of the self in group‐
serving judgments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 108–120.
Sherman, D. K., Kinias, Z., Major, B., Kim, H. S., & Prenovost, M. (2005). Group identiﬁca-
tion, group aYrmation, and group‐serving judgments. Manuscript in preparation.
Sherman, D. K., Nelson, L. D., & Ross, L. D. (2003). Naı¨ve realism and aYrmative action:
Adversaries are more similar than they think. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 25,
275–290.
Shrira, I., & Martin, L. L. (2005). Stereotyping, self‐aYrmation, and the cerebral hemispheres.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 846–856.
Simon, L., Greenberg, J., & Brehm, J. (1995). Trivialization: The forgotten mode of dissonance
reduction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 247–260.
Smith, E. R., Coats, S., & Walling, D. (1999). Overlapping mental representations of self, in‐
group, and partner: Further response time evidence and a connectionist model. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 873–882.
Smith, E. R., & Henry, S. (1996). An in‐group becomes part of the self: Response time evidence.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22, 635–642.
Solomon, S., Greenberg, J., & Pyszczynski, T. (1991). A terror management theory of social behavior:
The psychological functions of self‐esteem and cultural worldviews. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 24, pp. 93–159). New York: Academic Press.
Spencer, S. J., Fein, S., & Lomore, C. D. (2001). Maintaining one’s self‐image vis‐a‐vis others: The
role of self‐aYrmation in the social evaluation of the self. Motivation and Emotion, 25, 41–65.
Spencer, S. J., Josephs, R. A., & Steele, C. M. (1993). Low self‐esteem: The uphill struggle for
self‐integrity. In R. Baumeister (Ed.), Self‐esteem: The puzzle of low self‐regard (pp. 21–36).
New York: Plenum Press.
Spencer, S. J., Steele, C. M., & Quinn, D. M. (1999). Stereotype threat and women’s math
performance. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35, 4–28.
Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., & Fong, G. T. (2005). Establishing a causal chain: Why experi-
ments are often more eVective than mediational analyses in examining psychological
processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 845–851.
Stanton, A. L., DanoV‐Burg, S., Sworowski, L. A., Collins, C. A., Branstetter, A., Rodriguez‐
Hanley, A., Kirk, S. B., & Austenfeld, J. L. (2002). Randomized, controlled trial of written
240
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN

----- Page 59 (native) -----
emotional expression and beneﬁt ﬁnding in breast cancer patients. Journal of Clinical
Oncology, 20, 4160–4168.
Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self‐aYrmation: Sustaining the integrity of the self. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 21, pp. 261–302). New
York: Academic Press.
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and
performance. American Psychologist, 52, 613–629.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat and the intellectual test performance of
African Americans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 797–811.
Steele, C. M., Hopp, H., & Gonzales, J. (1986). Dissonance and the lab coat: Self‐aVirmation
and the free‐choice paradigm. Unpublished manuscript, University of Washington.
Steele, C. M., & Liu, T. J. (1983). Dissonance processes as self‐aYrmation. Journal of Personali-
ty and Social Psychology, 45, 5–19.
Steele, C. M., Spencer, S. J., & Aronson, J. (2002). Contending with group image: The
psychology of stereotype and social identity threat. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in
experimental social psychology (Vol. 34, pp. 379–440). New York: Academic Press.
Steele, C. M., Spencer, S. J., & Lynch, M. (1993). Self‐image resilience and dissonance: The role
of aYrmational resources. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 885–896.
Stone, J., & Cooper, J. (2001). A self‐standards model of cognitive dissonance. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 37, 228–243.
Stone, J., & Cooper, J. (2003). The eVect of self‐attribute relevance on how self‐esteem moder-
ates dissonance processes. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 39, 508–515.
Swann, W. B., Jr., De La Ronde, C., & Hixon, J. G. (1994). Authenticity and positivity strivings
in marriage and courtship. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 857–869.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1986). The social identity theory of intergroup behavior. In S. Worchel
and W. G. Austin (Eds.), Psychology of intergroup relations (pp. 33–48). Chicago: Nelson‐Hall.
Taylor, S. E. (1983). Adjustment to threatening events: A theory of cognitive adaptation.
American Psychologist, 38, 1161–1173.
Taylor, S. E., & Brown, J. D. (1988). Illusion and well‐being: A social psychological perspective
on mental health. Psychological Bulletin, 103, 193–210.
Taylor, S. E., Lerner, J., Sherman, D. K., Sage, R., & McDowell, N. (2003). Are self‐enhancing
cognitions associated with healthy or unhealthy biological proﬁles? Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 85, 605–615.
Taylor, S. E., & Lobel, M. (1989). Social comparison activity under threat: Downward evalua-
tion and upward contacts. Psychological Review, 96, 569–575.
Taylor, S. E., & Sherman, D. K. (in press). Self‐enhancement and self‐aYrmation: The eVects of
positive self‐thoughts on motivation and behavior. Chapter to appear in J. Shah & W.
Gardner (Eds.) Handbook of motivation science. New York: Guilford Publications.
Taylor, S. E., Wood, J. V., & Lichtman, R. R. (1983). It could be worse: Selective evaluation as a
response to victimization. Journal of Social Issues, 39, 19–40.
Tesser, A. (1988). Toward a self‐evaluation maintenance model of social behavior. In L. Berkowitz
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (pp. 181–227). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Tesser, A. (2000). On the conﬂuence of self‐esteem maintenance mechanisms. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 4, 290–299.
Tesser, A., & Cornell, D. P. (1991). On the conﬂuence of self‐processes. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 27, 501–526.
Tesser, A., Crepaz, N., Collins, J. C., Cornell, D., & Beach, S. R. H. (2000). Conﬂuence of
self defense mechanisms: On integrating the self‐zoo. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 26, 1476–1489.
SELF‐AFFIRMATION THEORY
241

----- Page 60 (native) -----
Tesser, A., Martin, L. L., & Cornell, D. P. (1996). On the substitutability of self‐protective
mechanisms. In J. A. Bargh (Ed.), The psychology of action: Linking cognition and motiva-
tion to behavior (pp. 48–68). New York: Guilford Press.
Tesser, A., & Smith, J. (1980). Some eVects of task relevance and friendship on helping: You
don’t always help the one you like. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 16, 582–590.
Thibodeau, R., & Aronson, E. (1992). Taking a closer look: Reasserting the role of the self‐
concept in dissonance theory. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 18, 591–602.
Triandis, H. C. (1989). The self and social behavior in diVering cultural contexts. Psychological
Review, 96, 506–520.
Trivers, R. (2000). The elements of a scientiﬁc theory of self‐deception. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 907, 114–131.
Uhlmann, E., & Cohen, G. L. (2005a). Constructed criteria: Redeﬁning merit to justify discrim-
ination. Psychological Science, 16, 474–480.
Uhlmann, E., & Cohen, G. L. (2005b). I think it, therefore it’s true: Self‐perceived objectivity
licenses the expression of intergroup bias. Manuscript under review.
Weinstein, N. D., & Klein, W. M. (1995). Resistance of personal risk perceptions to debiasing
interventions. Health Psychology, 14, 132–140.
Wert, S. R. (2004). Negative gossip as a response to threatened social self‐esteem. Doctoral
dissertation, Yale University. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences
& Engineering, 65(3‐B), 1601.
Wert, S. R., & Salovey, P. (2004). A social comparison account of gossip. Review of General
Psychology, 8, 122–137.
Wiesenfeld, B. M., Brockner, J., & Martin, C. (1999). A self‐aYrmation analysis of survivors’
reactions to unfair organizational downsizings. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
35, 441–460.
Wills, T. A. (1981). Downward comparison principles in social psychology. Psychological
Bulletin, 90, 245–271.
Wilson, T. D. (2002). Strangers to ourselves: Discovering the adaptive unconscious. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Winkler, J. D., & Taylor, S. E. (1979). Preference, expectations, and attributional bias: Two ﬁeld
studies. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 9, 183–197.
Wortman, C. B., & Silver, R. C. (1989). The myths of coping with loss. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 57, 349–357.
Zarate, M. A., & Garza, A. A. (2002). In‐group distinctiveness and self‐aYrmation as dual
components of prejudice reduction. Self and Identity, 1, 235–249.
Zuwerink, J. R., & Devine, P. G. (1996). Attitude importance and resistance to persuasion: It’s
not just the thought that counts. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 931–944.
242
DAVID K. SHERMAN AND GEOFFREY L. COHEN