

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Encyclopedia of Quality of Life
and Well-Being Research

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Alex C. Michalos
Editor
Encyclopedia of Quality
of Life and Well-Being
Research
With 635 Figures and 575 Tables

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Editor
Professor Emeritus
Alex C. Michalos
University of Northern British Columbia
Prince George, BC, Canada
and
(residence) Brandon, MB, Canada
ISBN 978-94-007-0752-8
ISBN 978-94-007-0753-5 (eBook)
ISBN 978-94-007-0754-2 (print and electronic bundle)
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-0753-5
Springer Dordrecht Heidelberg New York London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2013956937
# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2014
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or
part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way,
and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software,
or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this
legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material
supplied speciﬁcally for the purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for
exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is
permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s location, in its
current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Permissions for
use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable
to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are
exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal
responsibility for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty,
express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

----- Page 4 (native) -----
To Deborah,
Love of my life,
Booster of its quality
Alex C. Michalos
With thanks to the many people
Who dedicated their lives
To serving the common good
Maurine Hatch Kahlke

----- Page 5 (ocr) -----


----- Page 6 (native) -----
Preface
When I began thinking about writing this introduction, about what readers
might want to know concerning the aims, scope, and structure of the ﬁrst-ever
Encyclopedia of Quality of Life and Well-Being Research (EQOLWR), it
occurred to me that I had never read the introduction or preface of any
encyclopedia throughout my career of over 50 years. Although written for
general, average, or imagined readers, practically nobody reads them, except
potential and/or actual encyclopedia editors and, occasionally, editorial board
members and authors. So, while this introduction is written from the point of
view of what an average reader might want to know, the average reader I have
in mind is an average editor or, maybe, a board member or author.
Before I wrote this introduction, I read several others with considerable
enthusiasm, interest, and beneﬁt. Without naming all the editors and their
volumes, I would like to begin by thanking them. I owe a special thanks to
a friend of many years, Carl Mitcham, the editor in chief of the Encyclopedia
of Science, Technology, and Ethics. He generously shared his experiences
producing that treatise and provided a ﬁne example of an encyclopedia
introduction. In the ﬁrst sentence of the conclusion of his introduction,
Mitcham wrote “In the world of high-intensity science and technology, how
does one lead the good life?” The EQOLWR may be regarded as
a comprehensive summary of ways to deﬁne, measure, and achieve a good
life for individuals and societies.
While the quantity of our lives is notoriously limited to one per person, its
quality is as varied as the perspectives from which it is viewed. Granting this,
the whole research ﬁeld of quality of life studies might be more accurately
called “qualities of life studies.” From this perspective, it is more accurate to
speak of “a” rather than “the” good life.
Aims
Without claiming any particular order of importance, the following aims are
most salient.
The ﬁrst aim is to display in one place the vast scope and complexity of
scientiﬁc and other scholarly research on quality of life over the last 50 years.
An encyclopedia is a good instrument for building a central repository of all
relevant exploration and knowledge over a particular period of time.
vii

----- Page 7 (native) -----
A second aim of the encyclopedia, which follows from the ﬁrst, is that the
diverse network of scholars contributing to and drawing from a common
source is likely to stimulate cross-disciplinary research, leading to a greater
progressive, comprehensive, and coherent vision of the ﬁeld. By assembling
a greater variety of building blocks, a greater variety of buildings will emerge.
An improved vision of the ﬁeld provides a rough road map giving some
direction to the next 10–20 years of research, a third aim of the encyclopedia.
Readers of an encyclopedia can get an overview of the density of research
in different areas, where the focus has been and where it might go next.
For example, in this encyclopedia, one can see that the impacts on the quality
of life are profoundly understudied regarding arts-related activities, natural
and human-crafted environments, sports, religion, sex, sustainability, and
good governance. Because the possession of a good measure of the quality
of life is a necessary condition for possessing a good measure of its sustain-
ability, I hoped to include more essays dealing with issues of sustainable
development. We have to measure what we want to sustain, what resources
are required to sustain it, and the rates of change of each relative to the other.
Fourth, the encyclopedia should provide an authoritative, well-informed
resource serving the needs not only of scholars and students, but of ordinary
citizens, elected and unelected government ofﬁcials, nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs), and socially responsible corporations. This is a huge
challenge for authors and readers with very different kinds of education, life
experiences, needs, wants, and goals. While all of those who helped build this
encyclopedia hope that most of it will be accessible and useful to most
interested readers, one cannot expect that every essay will serve the purposes,
interests, and education of every reader.
Notwithstanding the limitations just mentioned, the encyclopedia has been
built with an aim (the ﬁfth) to improving private and public policy analyses
and discussions leading to better decisions and policy making concerning the
quality of life of individuals and societies.
At a minimum, I hope that the treatise will contribute to the development
and spread of evidence-based and value-based decision and policy making.
In particular, it is hoped that a contribution will be made to democratic
practices and democracy in general.
Sixth, I aimed to have an international and multidisciplinary editorial
board of distinguished scholars and a collection of essays by equally distin-
guished authors. That would ensure that readers directed to this encyclopedia
would ﬁnd a comprehensive collection of relevant, reliable, and valid
research reports.
Seventh, I aimed to make maximum use of the latest technology to link
encyclopedia essays to other works available in electronic form. The strategy
of the encyclopedia is to have relatively short essays linked to relevant essays
across Springer’s approximately 200 other reference works, so readers can
build a package of information that most precisely ﬁts their needs. Besides
publication in hard copy and e-book versions, the encyclopedia will be
open-ended and online, allowing authors to update essays and editors to insert
additional essays. If and when the next edition of the encyclopedia is
produced, all updated and brand-new essays will be integrated into it.
viii
Preface

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Finally, while the focus is on the last 50 years of research, my aim was to
build a treatise worthy of its illustrious scholarly predecessors extending at
least to the ﬁfth century BCE. I would like to think that this is the sort of work
Plato or Aristotle might have appreciated and even produced if they had
access to resources available today.
Besides pursuing these seven relatively professional aims, there were
a couple of more personal motives for undertaking the work. One was simply
the attraction of the challenge of building such a large treatise. A second
motive was that building an encyclopedia would keep me as close to my ﬁrst
loves of learning and building as I could get at this stage of my life.
It is worth mentioning here that I have not aimed to produce a treatise free
of bias. On the contrary, I have a bias toward free discussion from diverse
perspectives. The encyclopedia is not intended to be free of controversial
assessments or of some repetition of discussions of various topics. In a work
of this sort and size, coming from authors with diverse backgrounds, interests,
and perspectives, writing on topics that usually do not have established
boundaries, one should not expect universal agreement. Like a great univer-
sity or a great scholarly journal, a great encyclopedia should provide a shared
public space for the exploration of what is true, beautiful, and morally good.
Structure and Scope
In this section, I will provide an overview of the procedural structure on which
the treatise has been built and upon which its contents rest. The procedure
adopted to determine the topics that should appear in the encyclopedia was
largely a consequence of the assumption made that a scientiﬁc ﬁeld of
research is whatever its key researchers say and/or show it is. Beginning
with that assumption, it is obvious that an empirical or inductive procedure of
selection is required.
Not limiting ourselves to the a priori criterion of relevance to quality of life
or well-being research, Springer and I produced approximately 17,800
candidate topics for the encyclopedia in July 2009. While deleting duplicates
and likely outliers, and combining near-synonyms, it rapidly became clear
that I would need additional help to continue all the sorting and culling
required over the next few months. So I invited my friend and colleague
Maurine Hatch Kahlke to join the editorial board as Associate Editor.
By November 2009, we had reduced the roughly 17,800 topics to 10,000.
From this number, we intended to get down to about 3,000. For this, we
estimated that we needed the help of about 200 board members.
We started with about 172 board Members in November 2009 and ﬁnally
ended with 154 in Jan 2014. Although board members have continued to
come and go over the life of the project, that number has been fairly steady to
the end. The board members not only had to vote to ﬁnalize the list of topics,
but also had to select around 15 topics each for which they would ﬁnd authors,
obtain essays, have two peer reviews of each, get any required revisions, and
ﬁnally approve them. The completion of these tasks required quite
a commitment in time from our members. Due to a lot of hard work and
Preface
ix

----- Page 9 (native) -----
time invested by them, by January 2011 we managed to decrease the number
of topics to 3,308, with 2,444 (74%) selected by some member. The January
report to all board members became the ﬁrst of reports released about
every two months for the remaining months of the project. When we
reached 28 February 2013, we closed the door on new submissions. We had
154 editorial board members, 2,165 essays, and 1,272 authors. The 154 board
members were distributed across 32 countries as follows. There were 26 each
from Canada and the USA; 13 from the UK; 12 from Italy; 9 from the
Netherlands; 8 from Australia; 7 each from Germany and Spain; 5 from
China; 4 each from France and the Republic of South Africa; 3 each from
Greece and Israel; 2 each from Argentina, Chile, Ireland, Korea, Mexico,
Norway, Portugal, and Taiwan; and 1 each from Austria, Belgium, Brazil,
Colombia, Finland, Greenland, Iceland, Romania, Singapore, Sweden, and
Switzerland. A brief biography of each board member is included following
this introduction.
The 1,272 authors were distributed across 58 countries. From the USA
there were 334; from Canada 205; UK 98; Italy 69; Spain 57; Germany 53;
the Netherlands 49; Australia 42; China 33; Norway 22; Israel and Taiwan
18 each; Brazil and South Africa 17 each; Switzerland 16; Sweden 15; France
and Portugal 14 each; Belgium, Finland, Greece, and Ireland 13 each; Mexico
10; Chile and Denmark 9 each; Japan and Korea 7 each; Austria, India, and
New Zealand 6 each; Argentina 5; Romania and Turkey 4 each; Columbia,
Croatia, Hungary, Lebanon, Luxembourg, and Malaysia 3 each; Czech
Republic, Ghana, Iceland, Indonesia, and Slovenia 2 each; and 1 each from
Algeria, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Egypt, Greenland, Iran, Latvia, Peru, Senegal,
Slovakia, Tanzania, United Arab Emirates, and Uruguay.
While our organizational structure was kept at a bare minimum, the
following members of the editorial board made extraordinary contributions
to the encyclopedia, writing essays and providing advice of various sorts:
Raymond Currie, Richard Estes, Wolfgang Glatzer, Bruce Headey, Michaela
Saisana, Carolyn Schwartz, Joe Sirgy, and Bruno Zumbo.
Springer’s team included Myriam Poort, Esther Otten, Tina Shelton,
Meetu Lall, Marta Janicki, Meghna Singh, and Vasuki Ravichandran
at SPi. The Springer reference works staff was responsible for making
contacts, reminding editors and authors to meet deadlines, copyediting mate-
rial written in different styles, working with unfamiliar software and essay
templates, and crafting a set of guidelines for authors and editors that appears
to provide more information than anyone would ever need.
On behalf of Maurine and myself, I would like to express again our
appreciation and thanks to all these people. Together I hope we have produced
a work of immediate and lasting value.
x
Preface

----- Page 10 (native) -----
About the Editors
Alex C. Michalos Editor-in-Chief and
emeritus professor in political science
from the University of Northern British
Columbia, where he taught from 1994 to
2001. He was professor of philosophy
at the University of Guelph, Ontario
(1966–1994), visiting professor of phi-
losophy at the University of Western
Ontario
(1974–1975),
University
of
Waterloo
(1971),
University
of
Pittsburgh (1969–1970), and Assistant
Professor at State University of New
York (1964–1966) and at State College,
St. Cloud (1962–1964).
He earned his PhD at the University of
Chicago (1965) specializing in philosophy of science, BD and MA from the
University of Chicago (1961) specializing in history of religions and logic,
respectively, and BA from Western Reserve University (1957) specializing in
history, philosophy, and religion.
He has published 26 books and over 115 refereed articles and founded or
co-founded 7 scholarly journals. Among the 7, he is editor-in-chief of the
Journal of Business Ethics, the most frequently cited journal in the world
devoted to business ethics, and Social Indicators Research, the ﬁrst scholarly
journal (1974) devoted to quality of life research. The other journals
include Teaching Business Ethics, Journal of Happiness Studies, Journal of
Academic Ethics, Applied Research on Quality of Life, and Asian Journal of
Business Ethics.
He is general editor and founder of the Social Indicators Research Book
Series (52 volumes), and Coeditor of Quality of Life In Asia Book Series
(2 volumes), and of Advances in Business Ethics Research Book Series
(2 volumes).
He was a chancellor of the University of Northern British Columbia
(2007–2010), president of the Canadian Commission for UNESCO’s Sectoral
Commission on Natural, Social and Human Sciences (2004–2008),
Academy II (Humanities and Social Sciences) of the Royal Society of Canada
(2000–2002), Society for Philosophy and Technology (1983–1985) and the
International Society for Quality of Life Studies (1998–2000), and has served
xi

----- Page 11 (native) -----
as director of research for the Canadian Index of Wellbeing (2006–2011).
He has won several awards of distinction, including:
•
Gold Medal for Achievement in Research (2004) from the Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council of Canada (the Council’s highest
honour)
•
Member of the Order of Canada, C.M. (2010)
•
Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Medal (2012)
•
Award for the Betterment of the Human Condition (2003) from the
International Society for Quality of Life Studies
•
Vincentian Ethics Scholar Award (2002) by the Vincentian Universities of
the USA
•
Award for Extraordinary Contributions to Quality of Life Research
(1996) from the International Society for Quality of Life Studies
•
Secretary of State’s Prize for Excellence in Interdisciplinary Research in
Canadian Studies (1984) for his ﬁve-volume treatise North American
Social Report: A Comparative Study of the Quality of Life in Canada
and the USA from 1964 to 1974
•
British Columbia Political Science Association Lifetime Achievement
Award (2005)
•
Honorary Doctor of Letters from Thompson Rivers University, B.C.
(2005)
•
Deryck Thompson Award for Community Social Planning (2006) from the
Social Planning and Research Council of B.C.
He is married to Dr. Deborah C. Poff, currently president and
vice-chancellor of Brandon University, and lives in Brandon, Manitoba.
xii
About the Editors

----- Page 12 (native) -----
Maurine Kahlke is Associate Editor
and a quality of life researcher with
a
background
in
psychology,
health
research, and computer science. She
is
currently
working
for
Dr.
Alex
C. Michalos as a research associate. She
has a master’s degree in computing sci-
ence, specializing in software engineering
and artiﬁcial intelligence, from the Uni-
versity of Alberta. Interested in applying
her skills in computer science toward
health
promotion,
Maurine
obtained
a master’s degree in psychology from the
University of Northern BC, with a concentration in quality of life, health,
and social psychology. For over 10 years, she has been involved in researching
the factors that improve human health and well-being. Maurine has been
actively involved in improving the quality of life of her community by
volunteering as both a community support counselor and a literacy tutor.
About the Editors
xiii

----- Page 13 (native) -----
Camilla Addey received her BA and MA in languages
and linguistics from the University of La Sapienza in
Rome. She went on to work at UNESCO in the Literacy
and Non-Formal Education section and taught English as
a Foreign Language at the British Council in Rome and
Paris. Camilla is now completing a PhD in international
education policy, focusing on international literacy
assessments in Mongolia and Lao PDR. She is based at the University of
East Anglia (UK) and has also spent time at Teachers College, Columbia
University, as a Visiting Dissertation Research Fellow. She is an advisor in
the Learning Metrics Task Force coordinated by UIS and Brookings, and is
the author of Readers and Non-Readers.
Fotios Anagnostopoulos is currently associate professor
of health psychology in the Department of Psychology,
Panteion University of Social & Political Sciences,
Athens, Greece. He studied psychology at the University
of Sussex, UK, where he trained in experimental psychol-
ogy at the Department of Experimental Psychology &
Centre
for
Research
on
Perception
and
Cognition
(1983) following courses taught by Professors Stuart Sutherland, Philip
Johnson-Laird, Alan Parkin, Nicholas Mackintosh, and Keith Oatley. In
1992, he received his PhD in health psychology from the Medical School of
the University of Athens, under the supervision of Professor C. Stefanis (former
president of the World Psychiatric Association) and Ass. Professor Gr.
Vaslamatzis (Hellenic Society of Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy). He also has
a master’s degree (MPhil) in health science from the University of Wales,
Swansea, UK. For more than two decades (1984–2006), Dr. Anagnostopoulos
had been a health psychologist in the National Health Care System (NHS) in
Greece. His research has focused on social cognition models of health behavior,
job burnout, quality of life issues, and patients with chronic illness.
His
publications
include
more
than
80
book
chapters
or
papers.
Dr. Anagnostopoulos is a member of the Hellenic Psychological Society and
the European Health Psychology Society (EHPS).
Sergiu Baltatescu received his PhD degree in sociology
from the University of Bucharest in 2007. His thesis,
published as a book titled Happiness in the Social Context
of Romanian Post-communist Transition was awarded
with the “Dimitrie Gusti” prize for Sociology by the
Romanian Academy. Since 1999, he had a teaching posi-
tion on University of Oradea. In 2009, he became associ-
ate professor at the same university and since 2012 he is the head of
Department of Sociology and Social Work. His main research interests are
social indicators, quality of life, culture, social change, and sociology of
transition. He is editor-in-chief of the Romanian Sociology, the journal of
the Romanian Sociological Association, and the founding co-director of the
xiv
About the Editors

----- Page 14 (native) -----
Journal of Social Research & Policy. He is also on the board of some of the
most important journals in his ﬁeld of research: Social Indicators Research,
International Journal of Happiness and Development, Journal of Happiness
and Well-Being, Calitatea viet¸ii (Quality of life), and Inovat¸ia Sociala˘ (Social
Innovation). He is member of the council of Romanian Sociological
Association.
Carla Bann received a PhD in quantitative psychology
from the L.L. Thurstone Psychometric Laboratory at the
University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill in 1999. She is
a fellow of statistics and psychometrics at RTI Interna-
tional and prior to her fellow appointment in 2009, served
as senior director of program evaluation and outcome
measurement at RTI. She has developed and psychomet-
rically evaluated numerous scales and indices related to quality of life and
well-being. Dr. Bann is an associate editor for the journal Quality of Life
Research and has served on the editorial board for the RTI Press and as an ad
hoc manuscript reviewer for over 20 additional journals.
Jeroen
Boelhouwer (born
1969)
works
at
the
Netherlands Institute for Social Research (SCP). His
research focuses on quality of life and well-being. He
publishes about the SCP life situation index and the life
situation of the Dutch population and about their happiness
and satisfactions. He is also involved in the Sustainability
Monitor of the Netherlands. Jeroen is one of the editors of
the biannual report “Social State of the Netherlands.” He is a member of the
Board of Directors of the International Society of Quality of Life Studies and
a member of the editorial board of Social Indicators Research.
He is a political scientist (University of Amsterdam) and received a PhD
degree in the social sciences from Utrecht University in 2010.
Norberto Bottani received a master in education from
University of Fribourg (Switzerland) in 1965. From 1965
to 1969 he taught philosophy of education at Teacher
College of Locarno, Switzerland. From 1969 to 1971 he
was a civil junior ofﬁcer at the Swiss Federal Chancellor
in Bern and from 1971 to 1975 he was in charge of the
development of Educational Research at Swiss Federal
Department of Research and Science and represented Switzerland at the
OECD Committee of Education. In1996, he joined OECD as senior staff
and he spent 21 years at OECD in Paris within the Centre for Educational
Research and Innovation (CERI) in charge of three international projects:
Early Childhood Development, Linguistic and Cultural Pluralism in Schools,
and Development of a set of International Indicators of Education Systems.
He left OECD in 1997 and became director of the Service for Educational
Research of the Ministry of Education of Geneva Canton, Switzerland, and
About the Editors
xv

----- Page 15 (native) -----
retired in 2005. He edited several books at OECD and published four books
in Italy on education policies, edited by “Il Mulino” in Bologna. He lives
in Paris.
Fiona Brooks is a medical sociologist and head
of adolescent and child health research at the University
of Hertfordshire, UK. Since 2008, she has been co-PI for
England on the WHO health behavior in school-aged
children
study
(HBSC).
Currently
she
is
leading
a number of projects addressing adolescents and chil-
dren’s voices in health encounters. She has published
widely on the determinants of health and well-being and assets for young
people. Since 2009, she has been editor and author of the biennial publication
Key Data in Adolescence. She is associate editor of the journal Health and
Social Care in the Community. She is a founder member of the UK charity
The Association for Young People’s Health (AYPH). She also holds a visiting
chair at Washington State University, USA.
Laura Camﬁeld trained as an anthropologist, but now
works collaboratively using qualitative and quantitative
methods and training others in their use, most recently
with the DFID-funded Young Lives longitudinal research
study in Ethiopia. Her research interests include explor-
ing, measuring, and understanding subjective well-being
in developing countries; studying experiences of poverty
and resilience using qualitative and mixed methods approaches; and children
and young people. Her current focus is on enhancing the quality of cross-
national methodologies used to collect qualitative and quantitative data on
poverty and vulnerability throughout the life course (funded by a grant from
the UK Economic and Social Research Council). She has been on the board of
ISQOLS since 2007, most recently as VP-Publications and is based at the
University of East Anglia.
Ferran Casas is senior professor of social psychology at
the University of Girona (Spain). He leads ERIDIQV
research team (Research Team of Children’s Rights and
their Quality of Life, http://www.udg.edu/eridiqv), at the
Research Institute on Quality of Life (IRQV), University
of Girona. His main research topics are children’s and
adolescents’ well-being and quality of life, children’s
rights, adolescents and audiovisual media, and adolescents-parents relation-
ships. The last 10 years he has been involved in 10 international research
projects, 3 of them supported by the European Commission. At present, he
participates in the International Survey of Children’s Well-Being (ISCWeB,
Children’s Worlds). He is a member of the boards of the International Society
for Child Indicators (ISCI) and of the International Society for Quality of Life
Studies (ISQOLS). From 1990 to 1993, he was the director of the Centro de
xvi
About the Editors

----- Page 16 (native) -----
Estudios del Menor in Madrid (Spain). From 1992 to 1996, he was the chair of
the Experts Committee on Childhood Policies of the Council of Europe
(Strasbourg, France). He was the ﬁrst president of the Advisory Board
of Childwatch International (Oslo, Norway) and the ﬁrst director of the
IRQV. He has been the director of the journal Intervencio´n Psicosocial
for 18 years.
Heather
Castleden received
an
MEd
Degree
in
Educational Policy Studies and a PhD in Earth and
Atmospheric Sciences from the University of Alberta in
2002 and 2007, respectively. From 2007 to 2009, she was
an SSHRC and NEARBC postdoctoral fellow at the Univer-
sity of Victoria, from 2009 to 2013 an assistant professor in
the School for Resource and Environmental Studies (SRES),
and is currently an associate professor in SRES at Dalhousie University.
She holds cross-appointments in the Department of Bioethics and the
Department of Community Health and Epidemiology at Dalhousie. She is
a health geographer with research interests in community-based participatory
environment and health research with marginalized populations on issues that
are important to them and her work has received several awards. She is
an Editorial Advisory Board member of the International Journal of
Indigenous Health, has served as a guest editor of The Canadian Geographer,
and serves on several national boards including the Canadian Association of
Geographers and the Aboriginal Health Research Network Secretariat among
others.
Ester Cerin was awarded a PhD in sport and exercise
psychology from The Nottingham Trent University (UK)
in 2001 and an MSc in Statistics from the University of
Queensland (Australia) in 2007. From 2004 to 2005, she
was a research fellow at the University of Queensland
(Australia), from 2006 to 2008 a research assistant pro-
fessor at the University of Hong Kong, from 2008 to 2009
an assistant professor at the Children’s Nutrition Research Center of Baylor
College of Medicine (Houston, Texas, USA), from 2009 an associate profes-
sor at the University of Hong Kong, and in 2013 became a professor in
physical activity and health in the School of Exercise and Nutrition Sciences
at Deakin University (Australia). Her research interests include measurement
and determinants of physical activity behavior in diverse populations, geo-
graphical locations, and age groups and the application of state-of-the-art
statistical methods to behavioral sciences. She is an editorial board member of
two international peer-reviewed journals (Mental Health and Physical Activ-
ity and Psychology of Sport and Exercise) and associate editor of another
two journals (BMC Public Health and Journal of Physical Activity and
Health). She is co-leader of the Council on the Environment and Physical
Activity (Senior).
About the Editors
xvii

----- Page 17 (native) -----
Maria Jose´ Chambel received her MS and PhD degrees
in Social Psychology from the University of Lisbon in
1991 and 1998, respectively. From 2006 to 2011 she was
coordinator of the Research Group “The individual, the
Work and the Family” at the Laboratory of The Clinical
and Experimental Psychology, in 2011 became coordina-
tor of the Research Group “Organizational Behavior and
Development” at the Laboratory of Psychology Research of University of
Lisbon, and in 2012 also became researcher at the Laboratory of Social, Work
and Organizational Psychology at University Rey Juan Carlos, Madrid,
Spain. From 1998 to 2011, she was assistant professor and in 2012 became
associate professor at Faculty of Psychology, University of Lisbon. Her main
research interests include subjects such stress and well-being at work,
employment relations, temporary workers, and human resource management.
She published in several international periodicals and as chair or co-chair for
international conferences.
Lisa C. Chase is the director of the Vermont Tourism
Data Center and Natural Resources Specialist with the
University of Vermont Extension. Her research and out-
reach focus on the intersection of environmental conser-
vation, economic development, and community capacity.
Working with farmers, forest owners, and rural entrepre-
neurs, Lisa conducts applied research to help communi-
ties make informed decisions about tourism development and impacts on
quality of life. Prior to working in Vermont, Lisa conducted research and
outreach in New York, Colorado, Costa Rica, and Ecuador, among other
places. She received her BA in economics from the University of Michigan,
her MS in resources economics from Cornell University, and her PhD in
natural resource management and policy from Cornell University.
Elvira
Cicognani received
the
PhD
degree
in
developmental social psychology from the University of
Padua in 1995. From 1997 to 2004, she was assistant
professor of social psychology at the Faculty of Psychol-
ogy of the University of Bologna, and since 2004 she
is associate professor of social and community psychol-
ogy. Her research interests are in the area of community
psychology (sense of community, participation, well-being) and health psy-
chology (prevention of risk behavior and promotion of healthy lifestyles;
quality of life in chronic illness). He is currently president of the Italian
Health Psychology Society and has been member of the Executive Commit-
tee of the European Health Psychology Society (EHPS). He serves as member
of the Scientiﬁc Committee of Italian Journals (Health Psychology, Commu-
nity Psychology, School Psychology) and Psychosocial Intervention. She has
been consultant for the European Commission in the area of youth policies
and health.
xviii
About the Editors

----- Page 18 (native) -----
Claudia Claes PhD, is a lecturer at the Faculty of Social
Work and Welfare Studies of University College Ghent and
a researcher at the Department of Orthopedagogics, Ghent
University (Belgium). Her research interests include quality
of life in the ﬁeld of intellectual disability, person-centered
planning, and individualized supports. She is coordinator of
E-QUAL, an expertise center on quality of life studies
associated to Ghent University College. She is a guest editor for a couple of
journals on quality of life research.
Alma Clavin has completed a BA (Mod.) in geography
(Trinity College Dublin) and MSc in town and country
planning (Queens University Belfast). She has worked for
a number of public, private and nongovernmental orga-
nizations in Ireland and the UK on planning, energy, and
sustainability issues. These include Colin Buchanan
and Partners (Planning and Engineering Consultancy),
Sustainable Northern Ireland (NGO based in Belfast) and the Severn Wye
Energy Agency (Registered Charity). Alma returned to academia in 2005 to
pursue her doctorate at the Oxford Institute for Sustainable Development
(Oxford Brookes University). She has a speciﬁc research interest in well-
being in urban environments. Her current role in geography at NUI Galway is
the development and delivery of ﬁeld-based learning, bridging theoretical
learning outcomes with the practical application of knowledge in the ﬁeld.
Karon Cook received her PhD degree in educational
psychology/quantitative methods from the University of
Texas at Austin in 1996. She is currently research asso-
ciate professor in the Department of Medical Social
Sciences,
Feinberg
Medical
School,
Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois. Dr. Cook’s research inter-
ests include psychometric applications such as scale con-
struction, computer adaptive testing, and scale linking. In addition, her work
includes psychometric methods research such as parameter recover, dimen-
sionality assessment, and impact of differential item function. Dr. Cook
is associate editor for Quality of Life Research and Journal of Applied
Measurement. She is president of the PROMIS Health Organization.
Robert A. Cummins holds postgraduate degrees in
physiology and psychology from the University of
Queensland and the University of Western Australia. He
was appointed to a Personal Chair in Psychology at
Deakin University in 1997. Professor Cummins has
published widely on the topic of quality of life and is
regarded as an international authority in this area. He is
a Fellow of the International Society for Quality of Life Studies (ISQOLS)
and the Australian Psychological Society. He is on the editorial board of
About the Editors
xix

----- Page 19 (native) -----
12 Journals and is Editor of the Journal of Happiness Studies. His current
research program is directed toward theory development concerning the
quality of life construct, and how such understanding can be used to improve
the life experience of people who are medically or socially disadvantaged. His
major current project, which has run for 12 years, is a biannual index of mood
happiness for the Australian population.
Frank
Cunningham is
Professor
Emeritus
of
Philosophy and Political Science at the University of
Toronto, from which he also received his PhD in 1970.
His main research and teaching are in the area of social
and political philosophy with a primary focus on demo-
cratic theory and, more recently, urban philosophy.
He has held visiting positions at the Universities of
Amsterdam and Rome and at Ritsumeikan University in Japan and Lanzhou
University in China. A Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, he has served
as president of the Canadian Philosophical Association and, at the University
of Toronto, chair of its Philosophy Department, principal of Innis College,
and acting director of the Centre for Ethics.
Raymond F. Currie is a dean emeritus, University
of Manitoba. Graduating from Fordham University,
New York (1973), in sociology, he served as department
head (1979–1984) and dean of arts at the University
of Manitoba (1991–1999). He founded and directed
the Winnipeg Area Study (1981–1991). He was executive
director of the Canadian Research Data Centre Network
(2002–2010). His publications include Fragile Truths, 25 Years of Sociology
and Anthropology in Canada (coeditor, 1992), Research Data Centres:
A Quantum Leap Forward in Social Science Research Capabilities
(2005 with Byron Spencer). Dr. Currie has lectured extensively on academic
leadership to deans and chairs across Canada. His awards include: 2013,
Governor General of Canada “Caring Canadian Award”; 2012, Honorary
Doctorate of Laws, McMaster University; 2010 Lise Manchester award,
The Statistical Society of Canada (“for excellence in statistical research
. . .which is potentially useful for formation of Canadian public policy”);
2002, Queen Elizabeth II Golden Jubilee Award; 1999, The Peter D. Curry
Chancellor’s Award (“for distinct contributions to University governance”);
1994, Canadian Association of University Business Ofﬁcers “Innovation in
Management Award”; 1994, Canadian Sociology and Anthropology Associ-
ation “Outstanding Contribution Award.” Dr. Currie published an autobiog-
raphy entitled Secure and Uncertain: A Father’s Story, Winnipeg, Anderson
Press, 2008.
xx
About the Editors

----- Page 20 (native) -----
Luca D’Acci won a Visiting Professorship in urban
studies at the Federal University of Santa Catarina starting
from the 2014. He has a PhD in the ﬁeld of economics,
a degree in architecture and a degree in engineering from
Politecnico di Torino, respectively, in 2007, 2003, and
2009. From 2008 to 2010 he researched in Italy, at
Politecnico di Torino; from 2010 to 2011, in Brazil, at
Universidade Estadual de Campinas; from 2012 to 2013, in Scotland, at the
University of Strathclyde; and he is going to research in Asia and America. His
interests include urban theories and models, societies and cities, quality of life,
spatial equilibrium and dynamics in cities, complexity science, urban simula-
tions, societies transitions, urban trasformations. His works about new models
and ideas for future cities achieved the journal’s cover page of the third
Latin American university. Quoting the prestigious MIT Technology Review,
D’Acci’s approach “rewrite rules for understanding city life” and “has the
potential to change the way planners think about city design”.
Megan Davidson has a bachelor’s degree in applied
science in physiotherapy from Curtin University in
Western Australia (1986) and a PhD from La Trobe
University in Victoria, Australia (2003). She worked
from 1986 to 1994 in community health services for
indigenous and migrant communities. In 1994, she joined
the staff of the School of Physiotherapy at La Trobe
University where she coordinated the clinical program for a number of
years before becoming course coordinator and then head of school from
2008 to 2013. Megan is an associate professor who teaches evidence-based
practice and who has research interests and numerous publications in patient-
reported outcome measures, low back pain, and clinical education.
Jill Dawson is a senior research scientist at the University
of Oxford, and visiting professor at Oxford Brookes
University. Following a nursing career, Jill read human
sciences at the University of Oxford in 1985, then com-
pleted an MSc in medical sociology and social research
methods applied to medicine at London University in 1986.
Her early research career initially focused on prospective
surveys of sexual behavior and the use of health-care services by homosexually
active men in relation to HIV infection, culminating in a doctorate in 1993.
Since 1987, she has worked chieﬂy in the University of Oxford, Department of
Public Health (now the Nufﬁeld Department of Population Health).
Since 1993, her research interests have focused on patient-reported health
status measurement and methodology – particularly in the context of
orthopedic outcomes. This work has involved cohort and case–control stud-
ies, and clinical trials, frequently in collaboration with orthopedic surgeons.
Jill is one of the key inventors of a number of internationally adopted
About the Editors
xxi

----- Page 21 (native) -----
patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs), namely, the Oxford Hip,
Knee, Shoulder and Elbow Scores, the Oxford Shoulder Instability Score,
and the Manchester-Oxford Foot Questionnaire (MOXFQ).
Jan Delhey is Associate Professor of Sociology at
Jacobs University in Bremen (Germany). He holds a
diploma degree in Sociology from Otto-Friedrich-
University Bamberg (1995) and received his PhD from
Free University Berlin (2000). Before joining Jacobs
University he was a researcher at the Social Science
Research Center Berlin (WZB). His main research topics
include cross-national comparisons of individual well-being, in particular
happiness and life satisfaction, and societal quality of life (trust, social
capital and social cohesion). He has authored an coauthored articles in
American Sociological Review, European Sociological Review, Social
Indicators, and Journal of Happiness Studies. He has also coedited the book
Human Happiness and the Pursuit of Maximization. Is More Always Better?
(Springer, 2013). He is on the editorial board of the Journal of Happiness
Studies and the Journal of Happiness Studies Book Series, elected member
of the board of directors of ISQOLS (International Society for Quality
of Life Studies), and elected member of the steering committee of the
section Social Indicators, a sub-division of the German Sociological Associ-
ation (DGS).
Antonella Delle Fave MD, specialized in clinical
psychology, is full professor of psychology at the Medical
School, Universita` degli Studi di Milano, Italy, since
2005. Her research interests include subjective experi-
ence ﬂuctuations in daily life and activities, optimal
experiences, as well as their role in the individual
developmental trajectory. Her cross-cultural studies
have produced the largest international data bank presently available on
these topics. She has developed and supervised intervention projects in
the domains of health and education, as well as international cooperation
programs aiming at resource implementation in conditions of disability
and social maladjustment. She actively contributed to the development
and dissemination of positive psychology, and was among the founders
of the Societa` Italiana di Psicologia Positiva (SIPP), the European
Network of Positive Psychology (ENPP), and the International Positive
Psychology Association (IPPA). She is currently past president of IPPA
and editor-in-chief of the Journal of Happiness Studies. She is author
of over 150 articles and chapters in international scientiﬁc journals and
peer-reviewed books, author/editor of 11 books, and director of 2 book series
focused
on
well-being
and
cross-cultural
advancements
in
positive
psychology.
xxii
About the Editors

----- Page 22 (native) -----
Nicola Dempsey received her PhD in architecture and
planning from Oxford Brookes University in 2006.
Between 2003 and 2011, Nicola worked as a researcher,
and since 2011 she has worked as lecturer in the
Department of Landscape at the University of Shefﬁeld.
Her research interests include sustainable urban develop-
ment, including sustainable urban form; quality of the built environment;
measurement of the physical environment; and examining how the (design of
the) urban environment supports social sustainability, quality of life, and well-
being. Nicola’s work has been published in numerous journals including Town
Planning Review, Planning Practice & Research, Built Environment and Pro-
gress in Planning. She co-edited the Future Forms and Design for Sustainable
Cities book in 2005 and most recently has co-edited the book Place-keeping:
open space management in practice, published by Routledge (2014).
Paddy Dolan is a sociologist currently lecturing in con-
sumer research and research methods at the Dublin Institute
of Technology, Ireland. His PhD thesis (“The Development
of Consumer Culture, Subjectivity and National Identity in
Ireland, 1900–1980”) from Goldsmiths College (University
of London) examined developing and contesting cultures of
consumption using the theories of Norbert Elias. He was
awarded a Government of Ireland Senior Research Scholarship in 2004–2005
by the Irish Research Council for the Humanities and Social Sciences. Paddy is
co-director of the DIT Centre for Consumption and Leisure Studies at the
Dublin Institute of Technology. His research interests include ﬁgurational
approaches to consumption, sport, emotions, organizations, identities, and
childhood. His work has been published in the British Journal of Sociology,
Journal of Consumer Culture, Journal of Historical Sociology, Journal
of Macromarketing, Sport in Society, Foucault Studies, Management &
Organizational History, Media Culture & Society, International Journal of
the History of Sport, Organization, and Sociology. He serves as book review
editor on the editorial board of Human Figurations.
Sonja Drobnicˇ received her diploma in sociology from
the University of Ljubljana, MA from Syracuse University,
and PhD from Cornell University. She was researcher at the
University of Ljubljana, Slovenia; guest researcher at
Stockholm University, Sweden; senior researcher and assis-
tant professor at the University of Bremen, Germany; vis-
iting fellow at the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study at
Harvard University, USA; associate professor at the University of Erfurt,
Germany; professor at the University of Hamburg. Since 2013, she has been
professor of sociology at the University of Bremen, Germany. Her research
interests include quality of life and work, social networks and social capital,
social stratiﬁcation, and gender inequalities in the households and in the labor
market. Drobnicˇ is an elected fellow of the European Academy of Sociology.
About the Editors
xxiii

----- Page 23 (native) -----
Jason D. Edgerton received his MEd from the Univer-
sity of Alberta in 1997 and his PhD from the University of
Manitoba in 2010. He is currently assistant professor
in the Department of Sociology at the University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada. His research interests
include understanding the various dimensions of social
inequality and related disparities in quality of life.
Michael Eid received his doctorate in psychology from
the University of Trier in 1994. He was a professor of
quantitative psychology at the University of Koblenz-
Landau
(Germany)
and
the
University
of
Geneva
(Switzerland), and he is now a professor of methods and
evaluation at the Free University of Berlin. His main
research
interests
concern
the
analysis
of
change,
multimethod assessment, item response theory, and structural equation model-
ing. His more applied research deals with subjective well-being, health psychol-
ogy, and personality psychology.
Mona Eklund received a diploma in occupational ther-
apy in 1978. From 1981 to 1993, she was teacher at the
Occupational Therapy Program at Lund School of Health
Professions. After having completed her PhD in psychol-
ogy from Lund University in 1996 she became associate
professor of psychology in 1999 and associate professor
of occupational therapy in 2001. She became full profes-
sor at Lund University in 2004. Her research interests encompass meaningful
activities and quality of life among people with severe mental illness;
activity-based interventions for people with minor as well as major mental
disorders; and development of instruments assessing people’s everyday
activities in a broad sense. Her work has received three awards and she has
published about 130 original peer-reviewed articles in journals. She is
editorial board member of the Journal of Occupational Science and the
Scandinavian Journal of Occupational Therapy, International Advisory
Board member of the Quality of Life Research and is frequently consulted
as an external reviewer, nationally and internationally, to assess applications
for academic positions and major grants. She is a member of the World
Federation of Occupational Therapists and is active in its subunit The
International Advisory Group for Mental health.
Merwan Engineer graduated with a PhD degree from
Queen’s University in 1988. He taught at the University
of Guelph starting in1988 and moved to the University of
Victoria in 1995 where he was promoted to Professor in
2001. He is associate editor of the Indian Growth &
Development Review, senior fellow of The Rimini Centre
xxiv
About the Editors

----- Page 24 (native) -----
for Economic Analysis, and research afﬁliate at the Centre for Studies in
Demography and Ecology. Dr. Engineer’s research over the past decade has
focused in the areas of demographic methods and overlapping generations
models as well as social well-being as measured by human develop indexes.
He continues to work on theories of economic growth and stability in models
which include money and banks. He has some earlier papers on political
economy and problems of despotism.
Richard J. Estes is Professor of Social Welfare in the
School of Social Policy & Practice of the University of
Pennsylvania. Dr. Estes received his AB from La Salle
University (philosophy and English literature), a Master
of Social Work degree (MSW) from the University of
Pennsylvania, and a Doctorate in Social Welfare degree
(DSW) from the University of California, Berkeley.
Dr. Estes’ research interests include international and comparative social
development, international and comparative social welfare, development
trends occurring in various world regions and, in recent years, development
challenges confronting Islamic nations. Dr. Estes also is a specialist in
international trafﬁcking of human being, especially that of children smuggled
into countries for purposes of sexual exploitation. Dr. Estes has received
many awards for his research including the Rhoda G. Sarnat Award from
the National Association of Social Worker, the Partner in International
Education Award of the Council on Social Work Education, and the Distin-
guished Quality of Life Researcher Award of the International Society for
Quality of Life Studies.
Montse Ferrer is a qualiﬁed physician and nurse
specialized in preventive medicine and public health,
and doctor in medicine (1998) at the Universitat
Autonoma of Barcelona (UAB). She is a senior researcher
in the Health Services Research Group at the IMIM
(Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute) since 1999, working on devel-
opment, adaptation, and validation of different instruments; their application
to patients with chronic conditions; and the evaluation of therapeutic inter-
ventions. Dr. Ferrer is an associate professor at the Autonomous University of
Barcelona (UAB) since 2007, teaches at the Interuniversity Master in Public
Health UPF-UAB, and at courses on measuring quality of life, perceived
health, and other patient-reported outcomes.
Dr. Ferrer’s publications include over a hundred articles published mainly in
magazines in the ﬁrst and second quartile of the specialty, which have received
a total of 2,488 citations (h-index: 26, 02.04.2013). She acts as a reviewer for
national and international funding institutions and scientiﬁc journals.
She was a member of the Board of Directors of the International Society
for Quality of Life Research (ISOQOL) in 2007–2010 and has participated in
the Scientiﬁc Committee of several editions of the Annual Conference of the
ISOQOL and the Spanish Society of Epidemiology (SEE).
About the Editors
xxv

----- Page 25 (native) -----
Elsa Fontainha earned her PhD in economics from the
School of Economics and Management of the Technical
University of Lisbon (ISEG-UTL), where she is an
academic. Her recent research has focused on quality of
life and well-being, time use, Portuguese Well-Being
Index (under construction by Statistics Portugal), and household economics
and ﬁnance. She uses both qualitative and quantitative methodologies. She
has a long and rich experience on interdisciplinary and international research
collaboration and coauthoring.
For the past decade she has been the coordinator or a team member
on multi-institutional and interdisciplinary projects funded by the British
Council (2009–2011), the International Council for Canadian Studies
(2008–2009), the Portuguese Science Foundation (2004–2007), and the
Ministry of Industry (1994–2000). The results of her research have been
presented in Portugal and abroad. She received a Distinguished Visiting
Scholarships Scheme (2013) from the Information School of University of
Shefﬁeld (UK). In 2005, she spent her sabbatical at St. Mary’s University,
Halifax, Canada, and in 2008 received the Canadian Studies Faculty Research
Award, International Council for Canadian Studies.
Her publications include scholarly articles (e.g., Review of Economics of
the Household, Small Business Economics, European Review of Labour and
Research Library High Tech, eLearning Papers-European Commission) and
books. She has also coauthored economics textbooks.
Anne
Gadermann is
a
Canadian
Institutes
of
Health Research and Michael Smith Foundation for
Health Research postdoctoral fellow at the Centre
for Health Evaluation and Outcome Sciences, University
of British Columbia. Prior to this, she completed a
postdoctoral fellowship in the Department of Health
Care Policy at Harvard Medical School. Dr. Gadermann
received her doctorate from the University of British Columbia in the
Measurement, Evaluation, and Research Methodology program. Her research
focuses on the social determinants of mental health and quality of life in
vulnerable populations, including children, adolescents, and homeless
persons.
Rich Gilman received his PhD in school psychology
from the University of South Carolina in 1999. He has
been a faculty member at the Georgia State University
and the University of Kentucky, and is currently professor
in the Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital and the University of
Cincinnati
Medical
School.
He
has
authored
over
80 publications investigating quality of life topics among children and adoles-
cents, and his scholarship has been formally recognized by the American
Psychological Association. He is a fellow of Division 16 (school psychology)
xxvi
About the Editors

----- Page 26 (native) -----
in the APA and a fellow in the International Society of Quality of Life Studies.
He is associate editor of Behaviour Change and School Psychology Review, and
he is an editorial board member of Personality and Individual Differences,
Journal of Happiness Studies, Journal of Youth and Adolescence, and the
Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology.
Wolfgang Glatzer professor of sociology (em.) at
the
Fachbereich
Gesellschaftswissenschaften,
Goethe
University Frankfurt am Main. He completed his diploma
in sociology, social policy, and economics at Frankfurt,
and Dr.Phil from the University of Mannheim. The main
topics of his life time research are social structural and
cultural change, quality of life and well-being, welfare
state, and household production. His recent book publications were Social
Change and Societal Monitoring, Rich and Poor, and Challenges for Quality
of Life in the Contemporary World. He is author and editor of some
100 scientiﬁc books and articles in 12 languages and of contributions to
broadcasting and television. He held key positions for a long time in the Special
Research Department “Microanalytical Foundations of Society,” founding
member of the international research group “Comparative Charting of Social
Change,” past president of the science network “International Society for
Quality of Life Studies,” and fellow at the Hanse Wissenschaftskolleg. His
recent research interests are global well-being and quality of life (more at http://
www.gesellschaftswissenschaften.uni-frankfurt.de/institut_1/wglatzer/).
Vanna Gonzales received her PhD in political science
from the University of California at Berkeley in 2006. She
is currently an assistant professor in the faculty of Justice
and Social Inquiry within the School of Social Transfor-
mation at Arizona State University. She is also a faculty
afﬁliate of the Schools of Public Affairs and Transborder
Studies and the director of ASU’s Undergraduate Certiﬁ-
cate in Economic Justice. Dr. Gonzales’ research and teaching interests include
the development of the third sector and social enterprises in Europe and the
USA, the transformation of the welfare state, governance, and community
development. Dr. Gonzales has published a number of peer-reviewed articles,
book chapters, and conference proceedings related to these research interests
including a coedited volume Cooperatives and Community Development
(Routledge, 2013). In 2010, she was a visiting scholar at the Collegio Carlo
Alberto (Montecalieri, Italy) and in 2011 launched Social Economy Arizona,
an online hub designed to advance interdisciplinary research and teaching
in areas that connect social entrepreneurship to community development,
social and
economic justice
and
ecological sustainability.
Currently,
Dr. Gonzales is working on a book manuscript focused on cooperatives and
social service partnerships in northern Italy.
About the Editors
xxvii

----- Page 27 (native) -----
Mo`nica Gonza´lez received her PhD in psychology from
Girona University in 2004. In 2010, she became tenured
assistant professor at the same university. She is a
researcher at the Quality of Life Research Institute
(IRQV) and member of the Research Team on Childhood,
Adolescence, Children’s Rights and their Quality of
Life (ERI´DIQV). Her research interests include subjective
well-being and complexity theories, children’s social participation, children at
risk, adolescence and the use of new technologies of information and commu-
nication, children’s rights and quality of life of the youth, elderly people, and
women. She obtained the Extraordinary Doctoral Prize in Psychology in 2006
from the Girona University and the Honorable Mention to the Best Dissertation
Award 2007 by the ISQOLS.
Enrique Gracia received his PhD degree in psychology
from the University of Valencia in 1991. From 1993 to
1995, he was research fellow at the Department of Exper-
imental Psychology of the University of Oxford. He was
associate professor at the Department of Social Psychol-
ogy of the University of Valencia until 2008 when he
became professor of social psychology. His research
interests include intimate partner violence and women and child maltreat-
ment, with particular emphasis on public perceptions and attitudes and social
environment-related variables such as neighborhood social disorder and
community integration and support. He also conducts research on parents’
socialization practices and children outcomes. He has served in the editorial
board of the Journal of Marriage and Family. He is editor of the journal
Psychosocial Intervention.
Jill L. Grant received her MA and PhD degrees in
regional planning and resource development from the
University of Waterloo in 1980 and 1991, respectively.
From 1979 to 2001 she taught environmental planning at
the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design. In 2001, she
became professor of planning at Dalhousie University.
Her recent research focuses on the design and planning of
residential environments, the application of creative cities ideas in local
economic development, and the relationship between youth health and the
built environment. Her work has been recognized with awards from the
Canadian Institute of Planners, the Association of Collegiate Schools of
Planning, and the Japan Foundation. She is a book series editor for the
RTPI Library Series (Routledge) and serves on the editorial boards of several
scholarly journals.
xxviii
About the Editors

----- Page 28 (native) -----
Martin Guhn received a PhD in human development
from the University of British Columbia, and holds
degrees in psychology, music, and music psychology.
From 2009 to 2012, he was a Michael Smith Foundation
for Health Research postdoctoral research fellow, at the
Human Early Learning Partnership, UBC. In 2012, he
became Assistant Professor at the Human Early Learning
Partnership, School of Population and Public Health, UBC, with a cross-
appointment in the Faculty of Education. Since 2011, Dr. Guhn has been the
National Research Lead for the Canadian Network of Early Child Develop-
ment Monitoring, funded by the Lawson Foundation. His research interests
include population-level analyses of children’s developmental health and
well-being, developmental health trajectories, social and contextual assets
of children’s developmental health, measurement validation, educational
reform, and change over time analyses.
Jon Hall has been championing the development – and
use – of new metrics of progress for the past 14 years.
He was the principal architect and lead author of the Aus-
tralian Bureau of Statistics “Measures of Australia’s Pro-
gress.” This was the ﬁrst attempt by a national statistical
ofﬁce to deﬁne and measure progress, which went on to win
a national award as the most innovative social project in
Australia in 2003. According to one journalist, it came “as close to the meaning
of life as a statistician can get.” Hall moved to Paris and the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) in 2005 to set upthe OECD’s
Global Project on Measuring the Progress of Societies, which he managed for 4
years, in the process building a global network of people interested in measuring
progress and organizing major international conferences in Istanbul and Busan.
He now works for the United Nations Development Program in New York,
where he runs a unit supporting national human development reporting around
the world. Jon has spoken about measuring progress and development in more
than 40 countries, and has degrees in mathematics, statistics, and public service
administration. An Australian and British citizen, he spends most of his spare
time searching for some of the planet’s rarest wildlife.
Daniel M. Haybron is associate professor of philoso-
phy at Saint Louis University. He received his PhD in
philosophy at Rutgers University. His research focuses on
ethics and the philosophy of psychology, with an empha-
sis on well-being and its psychology. He has published
numerous articles in these areas. He is the author of The
Pursuit of Unhappiness: The Elusive Psychology of Well-
Being (Oxford University Press) and, most recently, Happiness: A Very Short
Introduction (Oxford University Press).
About the Editors
xxix

----- Page 29 (native) -----
Bruce Headey specializes in research on the determi-
nants of life satisfaction and, in particular, on panel
survey evidence about the causes of change in satisfac-
tion. He has authored and coauthored articles on life
satisfaction in Social Indictors Research, The Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, and Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences (USA). He has also
used panel survey data to analyze the impact of public policy on social and
economic outcomes; see The Real Worlds of Welfare Capitalism (Cambridge
University Press, 1999) coauthored with Robert E. Goodin and Ruud Muffels.
He is a principal fellow at the Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and
Social Research, University of Melbourne, and a research professor at the
German Institute for Economic Research (DIW) Berlin.
E. Jeffrey Hill is professor in the School of Family Life
at Brigham Young University. His research examines ﬁnd-
ing harmony between paid work and family life. Dr. Hill
graduated from the BYU Marriott School of Management
in Organizational Behavior then received a PhD in Family
and Human Development from Utah State. Before coming
to BYU, he was a work and family subject matter expert at
IBM where he pioneered many ﬂexible work options including telecommuting,
paternity leave, and part-time employment. Dr. Hill recently developed and
analyzed the 2010 IBM Global Work-Life survey with respondents from 78
countries. He has published four books and more than 60 scholarly articles and
book chapters. Jeff and his wife Tammy have been married 8 years and are
joyfully blending a family of 12 children and 21 grandchildren.
Roderick Hill received the MA and PhD degrees in
economics from the University of Western Ontario in
1981 and 1990, respectively. From 1987 to 1989, he
was a lecturer at the University of Windsor, from 1989
to 1990 at the University of Regina. He has been at the
University of New Brunswick since 1990 and professor of
economics there since 2003. His research interests
include taxation, subjective well-being, and economics education. He is
coauthor, with Tony Myatt, of The Economics Anti-Textbook: A Critical
Thinker’s Guide to Microeconomics (Zed Books, 2010). He has been
a member of the editorial board for the Canadian Tax Journal.
Meg Holden received her PhD degree in public and
urban policy from the New School for Social Research
in 2004, following an MSc in geography from Rutgers
University and a BSc (Hons) in Geography from
the University of Victoria. Beginning as a faculty
member in urban studies and geography at Simon
Fraser University (Canada) in 2003, she became an
xxx
About the Editors

----- Page 30 (native) -----
associate professor at SFU in 2011. Her research interests include the
construction of actionable theories of sustainability in contemporary cities;
the design and use of sustainability indicator projects and sustainability
assessment protocols; structures, processes, and outcomes of model urban
sustainable neighborhood projects internationally; the role of mega-events
on sustainability policy agendas and implementation; and emerging
popular
cultures
and
values
surrounding
sustainability.
She
is
an
editorial board member of the journals Urban Studies Research and
Applied Research in Quality of Life. She is an elected board member of the
Community Indicators Consortium since 2009 and directs the Regional
Vancouver Urban Observatory. In addition, she has been an advisor to
Metropolis (The World Association of Major Metropolises) Commissions 5
(Metropolitan Performance Measures, 2005–2008) and 2 (Metropolitan
Growth Management, 2008–2011) and the MITACS/Accelerate Canada
College of Reviewers (2007–2011).
Anita Hubley earned her master’s degree in psychol-
ogy with a specialization in life-span development and
aging from the University of Victoria in 1991 and her
PhD degree in psychology with a specialization in
human assessment from Carleton University in 1995.
She is currently a full professor of Measurement, Eval-
uation, and Research Methodology (MERM) and direc-
tor of the Adult Development and Psychometrics Lab in the Department of
Educational and Counselling Psychology and Special Education (ECPS) at
the University of British Columbia (UBC) in Vancouver, Canada. Her
research interests include test development and validation, quality of life,
neuropsychological assessment, depression, age identity, and homelessness.
She has also developed several clinical, health, and psychological tests,
including the Memory Test for Older Adults (MTOA), Modiﬁed Taylor
Complex Figure (MTCF), and Quality of Life in Homeless and Hard-to-
House Individuals (QoLHHI), to name a few. Dr. Hubley is a former
member of the Executive Council of the International Test Commission
(ITC), which provides guidance in testing practices to individuals and
organizations around the world, and former editor of their publication
Testing International.
E. Scott Huebner received his PhD from Indiana
University in 1983. He is currently a professor and direc-
tor of the school psychology program in the Department
of Psychology at the University of South Carolina.
He is a fellow in Division 16 of the American Psycho-
logical Association and the International Society for
Quality of Life Studies as well as an elected member of
the Society for the Study of School Psychology. He has also been the recipient
of the award for Outstanding Contributions to School Psychology from
About the Editors
xxxi

----- Page 31 (native) -----
the
South
Carolina
Association
of
School
Psychologists
and
the
Distinguished Alumni Award from the Indiana University College of Educa-
tion. His scholarly interests focus on the conceptualization, measurement,
and application of positive psychology constructs in children and adolescents,
particularly subjective well-being, with an emphasis on school-based
applications.
Thomas Hyphantis is a general adult psychiatrist and
associate professor of psychiatry in the Medical School of
the University of Ioannina, Greece. He is trained in fam-
ily systems therapy and psychodynamic psychotherapy.
He has contributed to the development of Community
Psychiatry in Greece and especially in the development
of units which provide mental health care in remote rural
areas (Mobile Mental Health Units) and he has established the ﬁrst indepen-
dent psychodynamically oriented Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry Unit in
Greece within the University Hospital of Ioannina. His research is focused
on the complex relations of personality traits, ego defense mechanisms,
psychological distress, and quality of life in patients with medical illnesses
and he has published more than 70 papers in international peer-reviewed
journals. He is the secretary of the Consultation-Liaison Sector of the
Hellenic Psychiatric Association, a member of the European Association of
Psychosomatic Medicine (EAPM) and of the European Association for
Somatisation and Medically Unexplained Symptoms (EURASMUS). He is
an advisory board member of the Journal of Psychosomatic Research and an
editorial board member of the Case Reports in Psychiatry.
Patrick R. Ireland received his BA degree, summa cum
laude, in government/international relations and modern
languages from the University of Notre Dame in 1983 and
his MA and PhD degrees in government from Harvard
University in 1985 and 1990. He also earned an MPH
from the University of Texas in 2005. He has taught at
Connecticut College, the University of Denver, and
Georgia Tech in the USA and at the American University of Beirut in
Lebanon and was a senior Fulbright scholar at the Universite´ Mohammed
V Faculte´ des Sciences Juridiques in Rabat, Morocco, in 2000. Since 2007,
he has been professor of political science at the Illinois Institute of Technol-
ogy in Chicago. He has written extensively on migration in Europe,
North America, and the developing world, with his research supported by
the American Institute for Sri Lankan Studies, the European Commission,
the French government’s Bourse Chateaubriand, the German Academic
Exchange Service, the German Marshall Fund, the Krupp Foundation, the
Rockefeller Foundation, and the Social Science Research Council.
xxxii
About the Editors

----- Page 32 (native) -----
Florence Jany-Catrice is an economist. Professor at the
Lille1 University, she is a researcher at the Clerse´ (Centre
lillois
d’e´tudes
et
de
recherches
e´conomiques
et
sociologique). Her researches concern mainly the economy
of quality: quality of labor and employment; quality of
output, wealth and their quantiﬁcation. She is the director
of a French Academic Review, Revue franc¸aise de socio-e´
conomie (French Review of Socioeconomics), and an active member of the
French Association of Political Economy (Afep/FAPE). She also directs
a master’s in social economy. She published numerous articles and books,
among which are The New Indicators of Wealth and Development (Palgrave
MacMillan) 2006, with J. Gadrey, and Les services a` la personne (2009, with
FX. Devetter and T. Ribault) (La De´couverte). Her last book is entitled La
performance
totale:
nouvel
esprit
du
capitalisme?
(2012,
Presses
universitaires du Septentrion).
Leo W. Jeffres is professor emeritus in the School of
Communication at Cleveland State University, where he
has taught since 1975. He received his doctorate from the
University of Minnesota; Minneapolis, his master’s from
the University of Washington, Seattle; and his bachelor’s
from the University of Idaho, Moscow. His interests
include communication technologies, media effects,
neighborhoods and urban communication systems, and ethnic communica-
tion. He is the author of four books, including Mass Media Processes (1994),
Mass Media Effects (1997), and Urban Communication Systems: Neighbor-
hoods and the Search for Community (2002). He is the author of some 100
refereed journal articles and book chapters and has served in numerous
administrative roles. He was a Fulbright scholar and is a past president of
the Midwest Association for Public Opinion Research.
Maria
Jeria received
the
Diplome
d’Etudes
Approfondies (DEA) in 1989 and doctorate degree in
applied mathematics to the social sciences from the
Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales, Paris
(1994), respectively. She also received the DEA in
sociology and social sciences from Lyon University
Lumie`re (1988).
She was assistant professor andresearcher at the Department of Mathematics,
University of Santiago de Chile (1994–1998). She was also UNDP program
consultant for Chile’s Human Development Report.
She worked as chief statistician at Service de la Recherche en Education
du Canton de Gene`ve, Switzerland (1998– 2000) and at In focus Program on
Socio-Economic Security at the International Labour Organization, Geneva,
Switzerland (2000–2002).
About the Editors
xxxiii

----- Page 33 (native) -----
She was associate professor at the Sciences Institute, University Diego
Portales, Chile (2003– 2008) and was consultant and member of the Scientiﬁc
Committee at the Asociacio´n Chilena de Seguridad (2008–2010). She was
chief of the Research Unit and Evaluation in Health Technologies at the
Chilean National Health Institute (2010–2012).
Currently, she is associate researcher at the Sciences Institute, University
Diego Portales, Chile, and member of Chilean Statistical Society (SOCHE).
Ron Johnston has BA and MA degrees in geography
from the University of Manchester (1962 and 1964) and
a PhD from Monash University (1967). After three years
at Monash (1964–1966) he worked at the University of
Canterbury (1967–1974) and then at the University of
Shefﬁeld (1974–1992); he was vice-chancellor of the
University of Essex (1992–1995) before joining the
School of Geographical Sciences at the University of Bristol (1995–present).
His main research interests are in electoral studies, urban social geography,
and the history of human geography. He has twice been honored for his
achievements by the Royal Geographical Society (Murchison Award, 1984;
Victoria Medal, 1990) and the Association of American Geographers
(Research Honors, 1991; Lifetime Achievement, 2010); he was awarded
the Prix Vautrin Lud by the Festival International do Ge´ographie and
elected a Fellow of the British Academy in 1989. He was named the Political
Studies Association Political Communicator of the Year and made
an Ofﬁcer of the Order of the British Empire for services to scholarship
in 2011.
Sakari Kainulainen received his MSc and PhD degrees
in sociology from the University of Kuopio (later
University of Eastern Finland) in 1995 and 1999. While
doing his master’s studies, he joined Professor Pauli
Niemel€a’s research group concentrating on human insecu-
rity in Finnish population as well as in speciﬁc age-groups
in Estonia, Poland, and Germany. From 1996 to 2001,
Dr. Kainulainen was a researcher at the national research institute STAKES
(later merged into THL) doing studies on the well-being of different
populations in Finland. At the same time he ﬁnalized his doctoral thesis
concerning satisfaction with life. From 2001 to 2012, he was director of
research at Diaconia University of Applied Sciences in Finland and from
2013 as a senior specialist at the same University. In the University of Applied
Sciences, his tasks have been related to research and development activities in
Finland. He has also done ﬁeldwork in Russia, Nepal, and Swaziland. He is an
adjunct professor in social policy and sociology in the ﬁeld of empirical well-
being research. He was a president of Social Policy Association in Finland
from 2004 to 2009.
xxxiv
About the Editors

----- Page 34 (native) -----
Seoyong Kim received MS and PhD degrees in public
administration from Korea University in 2000 and 2004.
He was research associate at Institute of Governmental
Studies at Korea University, from 2001 to 2004, and in
2004, became assistant professor at Ajou University.
Currently, he is professor in department of public
administration, Ajou University, Korea. His research
interests include the public policy and quality of life, risk society and quality
of government, and art/culture and subjective well-being. He has published
several papers in Policy Science, Social Indicators Research, and Journal of
Happiness Studies.
Youngmee Kim received her PhD in social and person-
ality psychology from the University of Rochester in
1998. She completed 2 years of postdoctoral fellowship
at the University of Rochester School of Medicine during
1999–2000 and was on the faculty of the Ruttenburg
Cancer Center at Mount Sinai School of Medicine
from 2000 to 2002. She was director of Family Studies
at American Cancer Society from 2003 to 2008 and adjunct Associate
Professor of Behavioral Science and Health Education at the Rollins School
of Public Health, Emory University, since 2004. She is currently Associate
Professor of psychology and Member of the Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer
Center at the University of Miami. Her research focuses on the quality of life
of cancer patients/survivors and their family caregivers. She is also interested
in determining biobehavioral mechanisms of the link between cancer-related
stress and health at the individual as well as family and dyadic levels.
Her work has been supported by the American Cancer Society Intramural
and Extramural Research Programs. She is associate editor of Quality of Life
Research.
Kenneth C. Land received his PhD degree in Sociology
and Mathematics from the University of Texas at Austin
in 1969 and was a Social Science Research Council
fellow in Mathematical Statistics at Columbia University
in New York City during 1969–1970. From 1970 to 1973,
he was a lecturer in sociology at Columbia, from 1973 to
1981 associate professor and professor at the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, from 1981 to 1986 professor at the Univer-
sity of Texas at Austin, and in 1986 became Professor at Duke University. His
research interests include statistical models and methods, demography, crim-
inology, and social indicators/quality of life studies. He has received the Paul
F. Lazarsfeld Award of the Methodology Section of the American Sociolog-
ical Association and the Distinguished Quality of Life Researcher Award
from the International Society for Quality of Life Studies. He has been elected
a fellow of the American Statistical Association, the American Association
for the Advancement of Science, the Sociological Research Association,
About the Editors
xxxv

----- Page 35 (native) -----
the American Society for Criminology, and the International Society for
Quality of Life Studies. He has served as editor of Demography and is
a member of the editorial boards of several journals.
Joan
Nymand
Larsen studied
economics
at
the
University of Copenhagen, and received her PhD in
Economics from University of Manitoba, Canada, in
2002. She has been involved in research on the Arctic
economy, global change impacts, and Arctic human
development since the mid-1990s, and has worked
as senior scientist at the Stefansson Arctic Institute,
Akureyri, Iceland, since 2002. Her current research focuses on the impact of
industrial development and global change processes for Northern regions and
local and coastal communities, and on the study and assessment of living
conditions and quality of life, and the construction and measurement of
Arctic-speciﬁc social indicators. She is project leader and coeditor of the
Arctic Human Development Report (AHDR 2014); Arctic Social Indicators
(ASI 2013); and coordinating lead author for the IPCC AR5 on Polar Regions.
She was project manager and coeditor of the ﬁrst Arctic Human Development
Report, 2004. She served as president of the International Arctic Social
Sciences Association, 2008–2011. She has served on the steering committee
of LOICZ – Land Ocean Interactions in the Coastal Zone since 2010, and is
a board member on the Arctic Futures Programme with the Swedish Founda-
tion for Strategic Environmental Research.
Anna Lau received her PhD degree and Bachelor in
Occupational Therapy with Honors distinction from
University of Queensland, Australia. Dr. Lau is director
of research in the Australian Centre on Quality of Life
and honorary fellow in the School of Psychology at
Deakin University, since 2010. She formerly worked as
an academic at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University for
many years. Her research expertise and publications are in QOL/subjective
well-being. Having lived, studied, and worked in different cultures within
Asia Paciﬁc, Dr. Lau has special expertise in cross-cultural sensitivity.
She co-founded the International Wellbeing Group in 2001, with Professor
Robert Cummins, and produced test manuals on the Personal Wellbeing
Index for the adult population under the auspice of the Group. In joint
authorship, also with Professor Cummins, she also produced three other par-
allel forms of the index for people with cognitive impairment and children
(English and Chinese) in 2004–2006. Dr. Lau is China regional coordinator and
Hong Kong principal researcher of the International Wellbeing Group. She is
also a board member of International Society for QOL Studies (ISQOLS) and
co-founder of the Hong Kong Society for QOL. Dr. Lau is a recipient of
ISQOLS’ distinguished QOL research fellow award.
xxxvi
About the Editors

----- Page 36 (native) -----
Paul S. N. Lee is the dean of social science and professor
of the School of Journalism and Communication at the
Chinese University of Hong Kong. He received his PhD
in communication from the University of Michigan. His
research interests include international communication,
telecoms policy, new media, and media Analysis.
Professor Lee has published widely at major international
venues, with 15 authored and edited books and many book chapters. He was
appointed as a member of the Broadcasting Authority in 1990–1992 by the
Hong Kong Government. In 1999 he became Associate Fellow of the interna-
tional communication network of the UNESCO, Orbicom. Professor Lee was
also the founding chief editor of the Chinese Journal of Communication (SSCI
since 2008).
Shlomit
Levy attained
her
academic
degrees
BA
(sociology),
MA
(contemporary
Jewry),
and
PhD
(Jewish identity), from the Hebrew University of
Jerusalem in 1962, 1973, and 1986, respectively. From
1966 to 1996, she was a senior research associate in the
Guttman Institute of Applied Social Research, and was
Louis Guttman’s closest collaborator in developing facet
theory. From 1978 to1989, she served as research consultant in the Social
Science Faculty of the Hebrew University and taught in the School of Social
Work (1992–2000). Since 2002, she is a visiting researcher at the Institute of
Contemporary Jewry of the Hebrew University.
Her major interest is in facet theory concerning the integration of theory
construction with data analysis. In this context, her work on well-being
included developing multivariate conceptualization and comparative study
of the structural perception of well-being. She presented at international
conferences and participated in tutoring many workshops on facet theory in
Israel, Europe, and the USA. She served as the president of the International
Facet Theory Association (FTA), from 2001 to 2003.
She has published extensively, inter alia, on facet theory, well-being,
social indicators, values, Jewish identity, and intelligence.
Panagiotis
Liargovas received
his
MA
and
PhD
degrees in economics from Clark University in 1988
and 1991, respectively. He has been a Fulbright scholar
(1991), a Bakalas Foundation scholar (1988–1991), a
teaching assistant scholar (Clark University) (1987–1991),
and a European Commission trainee (stage), Brussels 1987.
He has taught in many universities including Clark
University, Bologna University; the universities of Athens, Patras, and Crete;
and the Athens University of Economics and Business. He is currently professor
of economics and Jean Monnet chair holder in “European Integration and
Policies” at the University of Peloponnese as well as Head of the Parliament
About the Editors
xxxvii

----- Page 37 (native) -----
Budget Ofﬁce at the Hellenic Parliament. He is Member of the Board of
Directors of the “European Regional Master’s Degree in Democracy and
Human Rights in South-East Europe” (participating 10 European Universities).
He is the author of 45 refereed articles in English, 11 books (two in English),
and the editor of 2 books in English. He has published various articles in areas
such as open economy macroeconomics, regional economics and European
economics.
Niels Lind is an engineer, University of Waterloo
distinguished professor emeritus; lives in Victoria, British
Columbia, Canada. Born and grew up in Copenhagen,
Denmark, Lind holds an MSc in civil and structural
engineering (Technical University of Denmark) and
a PhD in theoretical and applied mechanics (University of
Illinois). He was the founding director of the Institute
for Risk Research. He is a fellow of the Royal Society of Canada and the
American Academy of Mechanics. He has published about 250 scientiﬁc papers
and coauthored ﬁve books on safety and risk management (Methods of Struc-
tural Safety, Managing Risks in the Public Interest, Affordable Safety by
Choice, Energy for 300 Years, and Engineering Decisions for Life Quality).
Tanja van der Lippe is professor of sociology of
Households and Employment Relations at the Depart-
ment of Sociology and Research School (ICS) of Utrecht
University, head of the Department of Sociology and
research director ICS Utrecht, The Netherlands. Her
research interests are in the area of work-family linkages
in Dutch and other societies, for which she received
a number of large-scale grants from Dutch and European Science Foundation.
She has published extensively on the division of labor between spouses, time
use and time pressure in a comparative way, and labor market positions of
men and women in Western and Eastern European countries. Her publica-
tions include Women’s Employment in a Comparative Perspective (Aldine de
Gruyter, 2001), Competing Claims in Work and Family Life (Edward Elgar,
2007), and Quality of Life and Work in Europe (Palgrave, 2011).
Tanja Lischetzke received her diploma in psychology
in 1999 from the University of Trier and the PhD
in psychology in 2003 from the University of Koblenz-
Landau, Germany. From 1999 to 2001, she was research
assistant at the University of Trier, from 2001 to 2003
research and teaching assistant at the University of
Koblenz-Landau, from 2003 to 2006 research associate
at the University of Geneva, and from 2006 to 2011 research and teaching
associate at the Freie Universit€at Berlin. In 2011, she became assistant
professor at Freie Universit€at Berlin and in 2012 professor of research meth-
odology and evaluation research at the University of Koblenz-Landau. Her
xxxviii
About the Editors

----- Page 38 (native) -----
research interests include affective processes (mood and emotion perception
and regulation), personality and subjective well-being, as well as modeling
multimethod data and intensive longitudinal (ambulatory assessment) data.
Filomena Maggino is professor of social statistics at the
University of Florence.
Coordinator of the International II level master
“QoLexityMeasuring, Monitoring and Analysis of Qual-
ity of Life and its Complexity” (University of Florence).
Her main research interests concern: (i) data produc-
tion (in particular, subjective data assessment), (ii) data
analysis (in particular, multivariate and dimensional analysis, scaling models
and construction of composite and synthetic indicators), and (iii) data pre-
sentation and dissemination (with particular reference to deﬁning a model
aimed at assessing the quality of communication in statistics). Main ﬁeld of
application is quality-of-life and wellbeing measurement and analysis.
Author of many publications on those topics.
President and co-founder of the Italian Association for Quality-of-Life
Studies (AIQUAV).
Past-president of the International Society for Quality-of-Life Studies
(ISQOLS).
Component of the Global Project Research Network on Measuring the
Progress (established at OECD).
Component of the Scientiﬁc Committee for the Measurement of Wellbeing
(Commissione scientiﬁca per la misura del benessere) established at Italian
National Institute of Statistics (ISTAT, BES project).
Component of the Expert Group on Quality of life, established at Eurostat
– European Commission.
She cooperates with and is advisor of the Italian National Institute of
Statistics (ISTAT) with reference to quality-of-life and wellbeing issues.
She is member of several international associations, many scientiﬁc
journals’ editorial board, scientiﬁc committees and session organizer/chair
of numerous international conferences.
Editor-in-Chief (from 01/01/2014) of Social Indicators Research journal
(Springer).
Claudia Manzi is Assistant Professor of Social Psychol-
ogy at the Catholic University of Milan. She received a
PhD in Social and Developmental Psychology at the
Catholic University of Milan in 2004. Since 2000 she
works as researcher for the Athenaeum Centre for Family
Studies. Since 2007 she collaborates with the Centre for
the Study of Youth and Political Violence, University of
Tenneessee. She is part of many international research teams for the study
of family relations and identity processes, such as the “Motivated identity
construction in cultural context” project funded by the Economic and Social
Research Council. She has also taken part in several national projects funded
About the Editors
xxxix

----- Page 39 (native) -----
by the Italian Ministry of Research and University. She has been working for
several years with both public and private social services for the intervention
on identity and identity changes in problematic and risky realities for indi-
viduals and families.
Robert W. Marans is a research professor at the Insti-
tute for Social Research and a professor emeritus of
architecture and urban planning at the University of
Michigan. He is a registered architect and urban planner
and active in recreation policy and planning in southeast-
ern Michigan. Dr. Marans is the author or co-author of
7 books and more than 100 articles and technical reports.
His most recent book (co-edited with R. Stimson) is Investigating Quality of
Urban Life: Theory, Methods, and Empirical Research. He currently serves
on the editorial boards of several professional journals (Environment and
Behavior, Journal of Architectural and Planning Research, International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, Asian Journal of
Environment-Behaviour Research) and has lectured extensively throughout
the US, and in Europe, Asia, South Africa, South America, Australia, and the
Middle East. Among his many honors, he is the recipient of the 2012
Environmental Design Research Association Career Award. His current
research considers the impact of the built and natural environments on quality
of urban life and issues of sustainability and energy conservation in institu-
tional settings and cities.
Craig McKie received a BA degree from Glendon
College, York University, in Toronto in 1967 and an
MA degree from York University in sociology in 1969.
He received a PhD from the University of Toronto in
1974. From 1972 to 1977, he was an assistant professor
of sociology at the University of Western Ontario in
London, Ontario, concurrently serving for the last
2 years as a senior researcher for the Royal Commission on Corporate
Concentration for the Government of Canada in Ottawa. From 1977 to
1989, he served in several capacities at Statistics Canada, the national statis-
tical agency of Canada, the last 4 years as editor-in-chief of Canadian Social
Trends, the periodic social statistical reporting vehicle of the Government of
Canada, and as a visiting professor at several institutions including the
University of Waterloo. From 1989 until his retirement in 2003, Dr. McKie
was an associate professor of sociology at Carleton University in Ottawa.
In 1995, he established and still maintains the ﬁrst social sciences metasite
on the web, Research Resources for the Social Sciences, hosted by
McGraw-Hill. He now lives in retirement in rural British Columbia. His
interests remain in the intermingled impacts of demography, social history,
and political economy.
xl
About the Editors

----- Page 40 (native) -----
William Michelson received his AM and PhD degrees
in sociology, Department of Social Relations, from
Harvard University in 1963 and 1965, respectively.
From 1964 to 1966, he was on the Sociology faculty at
Princeton University. He has been on the faculty of the
University of Toronto since 1966 and is currently
S.D. Clark professor of sociology emeritus. Between
1980 and 1983, he simultaneously served as a full professor of social ecology
at the University of California-Irvine. He was elected to the Royal Society of
Canada in 1994 and received a career contribution award from the Section on
Environment and Technology of the American Sociological Association. His
specialties are urban sociology, environmental sociology/social ecology, and
time –use. He was a founding member of the Environmental Design Research
Association and of the research group that evolved into the International
Association of Time Use Research.
Valerie Møller is professor emeritus of quality of life
studies at Rhodes University, Grahamstown, South
Africa. Before that she was director of the Institute of
Social and Economic Research at Rhodes University
(1998–2006) and headed the Quality of Life Research
Unit at the University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South
Africa, in the 1990s. Her LicPhil and DPhil degrees,
majoring in sociology, are from the University of Z€urich. She has lived and
worked in Southern Africa since 1972 and has studied South African quality
of life by means of attitude and household surveys, in-depth and focus group
interviews, time-use studies, narratives, and writing competitions. In the late
1970s, she developed the ﬁrst survey instruments to measure objective and
subjective well-being among South Africans from all walks of life. The South
African Quality of Life Trends Study has tracked happiness and life satisfac-
tion from apartheid to the transition to democracy (1983–2012). She has
published over 200 research articles, book chapters, and monographs and
serves on the editorial boards of leading quality of life journals. She acted as
president of the International Society for Quality of Life Studies (2007–2008)
and hosted its 7th conference in South Africa in 2006.
Adolfo Morrone received a degree in Sociology from
University of Salerno. He has 15 years of experience in
the ﬁeld of statistics and national surveys. Senior
researcher at Italian National Statistical ofﬁce, he works
in the ﬁeld of measuring well-being. Until 2010, he was
senior researcher at the OECD Global Project on
Measuring
the
Progress
of
Societies,
coordinating
a project on the notion and role of trust in modern societies, ﬁnally producing
an OECD Statistics Working Paper. He worked on a Eurostat-founded project
on measuring economic and social vulnerability in OECD countries. He was
head of the Task Force on cultural participation within the Eurostat
About the Editors
xli

----- Page 41 (native) -----
Leadership Group on Culture statistics and member of the Eurostat’s Task
Force designing the guidelines for new European surveys on measuring long
life learning, and also designing the formal questionnaire and methodological
guidelines to be used at a European level to measure the use of ICT by
families and individuals. Morrone’s international collaborations include the
evaluation of the cultural statistics systems in different countries in Asia and
Africa, carried out by the UNESCO Institute for Statistics. He produced
a report on measuring cultural participation in developing countries which
has been the base for the UNESCO 2009 framework on cultural statistics.
Stephen Morse received degrees his BSc at the Univer-
sity of Wales, MSc and PhD at the University of Reading,
and PhD at the University of Southampton. From 1990 to
1998 he was a lecturer/senior lecturer at the University of
East Anglia, from 1999 to 2010 a reader/professor at the
University of Reading, and since 2010 he has held a chair
in systems analysis for sustainability at the Centre for
Environmental Strategy, University of Surrey. He has a background in
applied ecology and the environment, and his research and teaching interests
are broad, spanning both the natural and social sciences. Steve has been
involved in research and sustainable development projects across Europe,
the Mediterranean, Africa, and Asia. He is an editorial board member for
a number of journals, including Sustainable Development. He is a charted
biologist (CBiol), a member of the Development Studies Association, and
a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society (FRGS), the Institute of Biology
(FBiol), and the Higher Education Academy.
Ruud Muffels received his MSc in economics in 1979
and his PhD from Tilburg University in 1993. He was
appointed professor of aging studies in 1993 and full
professor of socioeconomics (labor market and social
security) at the Department of Sociology in 1998. He is
currently a professorial fellow at the research institutes
ReﬂecT (Tilburg), DIW (Berlin), and IZA (Bonn). He
was visiting professor at ANU and Melbourne University and consultant of
Eurostat and the European Commission. From 2008 to 2012, he was editorial
board member of the British journal Work, Employment and Society and is
from 2013 a member of the international advisory board. He was awarded the
2000 best paper award of Social Indicators Research and the 2001 German
Socio-Economic Panel Prize 1999–2001. He has published more than
300 articles and book chapters and edited a number of books. He is recurrent
editor for many journals such as Social Forces, Work, Employment and
Society, Journal of Happiness Research, Social Indicators Research, Acta
Sociologica, Journal of Economic Inequality, Research on Income and
Wealth, Journal of Economic Psychology, Journal of Common Market Stud-
ies, European Sociological Review, etc.
xlii
About the Editors

----- Page 42 (native) -----
Nazeem Muhajarine is a social epidemiologist, direc-
tor of Saskatchewan Population Heath and Evaluation
Research Unit (SPHERU), and leads SPHERU’s Healthy
Children research program. His research focus on ques-
tions related to community and family contextual inﬂu-
ences in child development and health, risk in the prenatal
period, and developing community-university research
partnerships to improve knowledge creation, transfer and application. Exam-
ples of current research includes evaluations of population-level early child-
hood intervention programs and the Smart Cities, Healthy Kids projects
assessing the built and food environments and their impact on children’s
health. He particularly cherishes the mentoring role and works closely
with junior colleagues and graduate students. He is the recipient of several
awards of distinction, including his province’s 2009 Health Research
Achievement Award and the CIHR Knowledge Translation Award. He is
a professor and Chair in Community Health and Epidemiology, University of
Saskatchewan.
Elizabeth Nisbet received her MA and PhD in psychol-
ogy from Carleton University in Ottawa, Canada, in 2005
and 2011, respectively. From 2008 to 2012, she was an
instructor in the Psychology Department at Carleton
University, and since 2012 has been an adjunct professor
of psychology at Carleton. In 2012, she became an
assistant professor of psychology at Trent University in
Peterborough, Canada. Her research encompasses personality, health, social,
and environmental psychology, exploring individual differences in “nature
relatedness” and the links between human-nature relationships, happiness,
health, and environmentally sustainable behavior. Her work is supported by
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC).
She teaches courses on environmental psychology, health psychology,
emotion and motivation, personality, and environmental health. She is
serving as chair-elect for the Environmental Section of the Canadian
Psychological Association from 2012 to 2014, and will be section chair
from 2014 to 2016.
Heinz-Herbert Noll is head of the Social Indicators
Research Centre of GESIS - Leibniz Institute for the
Social Sciences in Mannheim, Germany. He graduated
in sociology, economics, and statistics at the University
of Frankfurt a.M. and received his doctorate at the
University of Mannheim. He has taught sociology at the
universities of Heidelberg and Mannheim and courses on
“Social Indicators” and “Quality of Life” at various European universities.
H.-H. Noll has published widely on topics related to social indicators, quality
of life, subjective well-being, and social inequality also in international
comparison. Noll has been the coordinator of the EuReporting-Project, and
About the Editors
xliii

----- Page 43 (native) -----
he was one of the principal investigators of the “German Welfare Survey”. He
is also a past president of the Research Committee “Social Indicators” of the
International Sociological Association as well as of the “International Society
for Quality of Life Studies” and a member of the editorial boards of the
international journals Social Indicators Research and Applied Research in
Quality of Life. H.-H. Noll is currently a participant in the e-Frame project
(European Framework for Measuring Progress), funded by the European
Commission until 2014, and a member of its “Leading Committee”.
Giampaolo Nuvolati is associate professor at the
University of Milan Bicocca (Italy) where he teaches
Urban Sociology and has developed and coordinated
several theoretical studies and empirical research on
social indicators and quality of life. He has been part of
many European research projects oriented to deﬁne and
to measure living conditions in urban contexts. In
2003–2004, he was member of the Italian Governmental Commission on
Statistical Information for the Program: “Statistics for Metropolitan Areas,
Proposals for an Integrated System” where he studied and compared different
approaches for analyzing resident and nonresident metropolitan populations.
He has developed studies concerning the relationships between spatial and
temporal mobility, between services accessibility and quality of life in local
communities, and between sociology, urban spaces, and literature. He is
author of many publications on social indicators and quality of life. He is
member of the Board of Directors of ISQOLS (The International Society for
the Quality of Life Studies) and is vice-president of Aiquav (Italian Society
for Quality of Life Studies).
Bienvenido Ortega received his MA and PhD degrees
in economics from Universidad Carlos III de Madrid and
Universidad de Ma´laga in 1993 and 1995, respectively.
He is an associate professor of applied economics at
Universidad de Ma´laga since 1996. His research interests
include development, tourism regional and quality of life
studies.
Jan Ott studied sociology and law at the Erasmus Uni-
versity Rotterdam (EUR). He specialized in social eco-
nomic
policy,
constitutional
law,
and
public
administration. He worked as a policy adviser for the
Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment from 1984
to 2004. He was involved in the promotion of entrepre-
neurship and employability, the reduction of labour mar-
ket discrepancies, and the evaluation of public bodies. He participated as a
government representative in conferences of the International Labor Organi-
zation (ILO) on “Tripartite consultation” and “Job creation in small and
medium sized enterprises”. Since 2004 he has worked as a social researcher
xliv
About the Editors

----- Page 44 (native) -----
at the Erasmus University, ﬁrst at the Faculty of Social Sciences and currently
at the Erasmus Happiness Economics Research Organization (EHERO) of the
Erasmus School of Economics (ESE). The importance of the quality of
government for the quality of life is a central issue in his research. On the
27th of November 2012 he graduated on his dissertation “An Eye on Happi-
ness; happiness as an additional goal for citizens and governments”.
Johan H. L. Oud studied sociology and research meth-
odology at the Radboud University Nijmegen (Nijmegen,
the Netherlands) from 1962 to 1968 and received his PhD
degree from the same university in 1978. He is associate
professor at the Behavioural Science Institute of the
Radboud University Nijmegen. His research interests
are in monitoring system construction, structural equa-
tion modeling (SEM), longitudinal research, and, recently, continuous time
analysis by means of SEM. He has published a large number of papers, book
chapters, and edited several books in these ﬁelds.
Chong-Min Park received MA in public administration
from Korea University in 1981 and PhD in political
science from the University of California, Berkeley, in
1989. He was professor of public administration at
Chungnam National University from 1993 to 1996 and
at Korea University from 1996 to the present. His
research interests include the role of government, politi-
cal trust, and quality of governance and bureaucracy. He has directed Asian
Barometer Survey in South Korea. He is currently Dean of the College of
Political Science and Economics and Dean of Graduate School of Policy
Studies at Korea University.
Trevor R. Parmenter From 1997 until his retirement in
late 2009, Professor Emeritus Trevor R. Parmenter, AM
BA PhD, held the Foundation Chair of Developmental
Disability Studies in the Sydney Medical School, Univer-
sity of Sydney. He is honorary professor in the Faculties
of Education and Social Work and Health Sciences at the
University of Sydney, and adjunct professor in the School
of Rural Medicine, University of New England. He held the conjoint position
of director of the Centre for Disability Studies at the Royal Rehabilitation
Centre Sydney. Former positions include professorial fellow and director of
the Unit for Community Integration Studies at Macquarie University; prior to
which he held teaching and administrative positions in the New South Wales
Department of Education and Training from 1953. In 2005, Professor
Parmenter was appointed a member of the Order of Australia for his contri-
butions to research, teaching, and services to people with developmental
disabilities. He has been involved in a wide range of international activities
including the WHO and the ILO and president of the International
About the Editors
xlv

----- Page 45 (native) -----
Association for the Scientiﬁc Study of Intellectual Disabilities from 1996
to 2000. He remains active in research and teaching within the Sydney
Medical School following his appointment as Professor Emeritus.
Donald Patrick received his PhD and MSPH degrees
from Columbia University in social science and health.
He is professor of health services at the University of
Washington, with appointments in the Departments of
Epidemiology, Sociology, Rehabilitation Medicine and
Pharmacy. Dr. Patrick directs the Seattle Quality of Life
Group (www.seaqolgroup.org). He is a full member of
the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center. Over the past four decades,
Dr. Patrick has published widely on the assessment of health status and quality
of life. He has developed many preference-based and descriptive generic and
condition-speciﬁc measures of QOL, often with cross-cultural applications. He
was the inaugural president of the International Society for Quality of Life
Research and has served on the Board of Directors of the International Society
for Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes Research. Dr. Patrick is a member of
the Institute of Medicine, National Academy of Sciences.
Rhonda Phillips served as professor of community
resources and development at Arizona State University,
and has recently been appointed as inaugural dean of the
Honors College at Purdue University. Her work focuses
on community well-being and quality of life studies,
including community indicator systems, as well as com-
munity and economic development planning. She is
a recipient of the International Society for Quality of Life Studies’ Distin-
guished Researcher 2012 award, and is a two-time Fulbright scholar, serving
in Northern Ireland and Panama. She has been author or editor of 15 books;
she also is editor of Springer’s Community Quality of Life Indicators and
Routledge’s Community Development Research and Practice book series.
Rhonda earned her doctorate from the Georgia Institute of Technology, and
holds master’s degrees in economics and economic development. She is
a member of the American Institute of Certiﬁed Planners (AICP).
Ralph L. Piedmont received his PhD in personality
psychology from Boston University. He completed
a postdoctoral fellowship at the National Institute on
Aging, where he was trained in taxonomic models
of personality and their relevance for understanding men-
tal and physical outcomes. Dr. Piedmont is a full profes-
sor in the department of Pastoral Counseling and Spiritual
Care at Loyola University Maryland. His current research centers on the
measurement of spirituality as an independent dimension of personality and
how this construct impacts psychosocial functioning. He is also interested
in understanding how spiritual and religious constructs may contribute to
xlvi
About the Editors

----- Page 46 (native) -----
psychopathological experiences. He is currently the founding editor of the
American Psychological Association (APA) journal, Psychology of Religion
and Spirituality. He is a fellow of the APA and a member of the American
Counseling Association (ACA).
Anke Plagnol is an interdisciplinary social scientist
with an interest in subjective well-being, female labor
force participation and life course studies. She received
her BA in European Economic Studies from Otto-
Friedrich-Universit€at Bamberg, Germany, in 2001 and
an MA and PhD in Economics from the University of
Southern California, USA, in 2005 and 2007, respec-
tively. Following her PhD, she was a postdoctoral researcher at the University
of Cambridge. At Cambridge, she was ﬁrst a research associate working with
Professor Jacqueline Scott in the Department of Sociology. She then had an
Early Career Fellowship from the Leverhulme Trust and the Isaac Newton
Trust, Cambridge, from 2010 to 2013. She was also a research fellow at
Darwin College, Cambridge. She joined the Psychology Department at City
University London in May 2013 as a lecturer.
Deborah C. Poff holds a doctorate in philosophy from
the University of Guelph. Since 2009, she has been the
president and vice-chancellor of Brandon University.
Prior to that she was the vice-president academic and
provost at the University of Northern British Columbia
where she was also the founding dean of the Faculty of
Arts and Science.
Dr. Poff is the co-founder and editor of the Journal of Business Ethics and is
editor-in-chief of the Journal of Academic Ethics. She is the editor of Business
Ethics in Canada now in its 4th edition. She serves and has served on numerous
national and international boards and councils. Most recently, she was elected
as a council member on the Committee on Publication Ethics, an international
resource network dedicated to the ethical publication of research in all aca-
demic ﬁelds. Her areas of research are: leadership; business and professional
ethics; and health-care ethics. As well, she does research on social justice issues
and women’s studies. In 1995, she was awarded a lifetime honorary member-
ship by the Canadian Research Institute for the Advancement of Women in the
category of “outstanding contribution to feminist scholarship.”
Birger Poppel received an MA in Economics from the
University of Copenhagen (1978). He worked as an
economic consultant in Denmark and from 1984 in Green-
land for the Home Rule Government until 1989 where he
became the ﬁrst head of Statistics Greenland. He served as
chief statistician from 1989 to 2004. Since 2004, he has
been Project Chief of SLiCA (Survey of Living Conditions
in the Arctic) at Ilisimatusarﬁk, University of Greenland.
About the Editors
xlvii

----- Page 47 (native) -----
His research interests include social indicators, living conditions,
individual well-being, and quality of life of Arctic residents, especially the
Inuit, Sami, and other indigenous peoples of the Arctic; the economic, social,
cultural, and political development in the Arctic region; and the mixed
subsistence-market economies. He is currently engaged in a number of
research projects: SLiCA, Arctic Human Development Report (AHDR II),
Arctic Social Indicators (ASI II).
He has been serving on the editorial board of Social Indicators Research
SIR since 2004.
Birger Poppel has been a member of the council of IASSA (International
Arctic Social Sciences Association) since 2001 (in the term 2004–2008 as
vice-president). He was the chairman of the Greenland IPY (International
Polar Year) Committee 2005. He was a member of the Board of Governors of
Ilisimatusarﬁk 2008–2012.
Carmel Proctor completed her PhD in psychology
from the University of Leicester, UK, in 2011 and MA
in measurement, evaluation, and research methodology
from the University of British Columbia in 2002. For her
ﬁrst degree she attended Simon Fraser University, BC,
Canada and was awarded a Certiﬁcate of Liberal Arts in
1996 and a BA in psychology in 1997. Before relocating
to the UK, Carmel worked as a psychometrician and research assistant on
psychological research studies conducted at the Vancouver Hospital and
Health Science Centre located at the University of British Columbia, Canada,
from 1998 to 2002. Carmel is a chartered psychologist with the British
Psychological Society and director of the Positive Psychology Research
Centre Ltd (PPRC). Carmel is coauthor of Strengths Gym (PPRC, 2009)
a character strengths-based educational course for children and adolescents.
She has also written and co-written several research papers and book chapters
and is a member of the editorial board of Social Indicators Research.
Her interests are primarily in the areas of positive psychology, applied
positive psychology, values, character, personality, existential psychology,
and well-being. However, the main focus of her work has centered around
adolescent and youth life satisfaction and well-being. Currently, Carmel is
also training as an existential psychotherapist.
Daniel Rainham is an associate professor in the
Environmental Science Program, is a research associate
with the Atlantic Health Promotion Research Centre, and
holds a joint appointment with the College of Sustain-
ability at Dalhousie University. He has a PhD in popula-
tion health from the University of Ottawa and holds
cross-appointments in community health and epidemiol-
ogy, health and human performance, resource and environmental studies,
earth sciences, and planning. He is also an associate with the GIS Centre at
Dalhousie University.
xlviii
About the Editors

----- Page 48 (native) -----
His interests focus on environmental patterns and changes as determinants
of human health with a purpose to understand how these patterns are created,
how they vary in space and time, and how they are changing, particularly in
the context of environmental sustainability. He also has an active interest in
the development and deployment of geospatial technology in support of
epidemiological inquiry, in particular with respect to exposure assessment,
place and health, and environmental correlates of health. These interests form
the basis for the work conducted in the Spatial Intelligence for Health
Knowledge Laboratory (SILK-LAB).
Carla Rampichini is professor of Statistics at the
Department of Statistics, Informatics and Applications
“G. Parenti” of the University of Florence. She is the
director of the BA in statistics, and she is a member of
the PhD in economics of the University of Florence. She
graduated in Economics and Business Administration in
1991 and earned a PhD in Applied Statistics in 1995 from
the University of Florence. Her research interests relate to random effects
models for multilevel analysis, program evaluation, and causal inference.
Her methodological work is joined with applications on real data, often
concerning the effectiveness of universities (e.g., student ratings, evaluation
of university grants, graduates satisfaction, job placement of graduates). She
is fellow of the Royal Statistical Society and of the Italian Statistical Society.
She was associate editor of Statistical Methods and Applications and she has
served as referee for many national and international journals.
Uzi Rebhun (PhD) is an associate professor and head,
The Harman Institute of Contemporary Jewry, The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem. His areas of interest
are
internal
migration,
immigration
adaptation,
religioethnic identiﬁcation, intermarriage, and population
projections, with special focus on Jews. His works were
published,
among
other
journals,
in
Demography,
European Journal of Population, Population Research and Policy Review,
Sociology of Religion, Journal for the Scientiﬁc Study of Religion, and
Research in Social Stratiﬁcation and Mobility. His most recent book (with
Lilach Lev Ari) is entitled American Israelis: Migration, Transnationalism,
and Diasporic Identity (Brill, 2010).
Rebecca Renwick is a physical therapy and occupa-
tional therapy graduate from the University of Toronto
(1969). She received a BA (psychology and English
literature) from St. Francis Xavier University (1976),
a BA honors equivalency in psychology from the Univer-
sity College of Cape Breton (1977), and a PhD in
psychology from the University of Lancaster (1986).
About the Editors
xlix

----- Page 49 (native) -----
She has been a Lecturer in the Department of Psychology at the University
College of Cape Breton (1980–1985). Since 1986, she has held various
academic appointments at the University of Toronto where she is currently
a Professor in the Department of Occupational Science and Occupational
Therapy and the Graduate Department of Rehabilitation Science, with
a cross-appointment to the Dala Lana School of Public Health Science. She
is also director of the Quality of Life Research Unit at the University of
Toronto. Her research has focused on quality of life, meaningful societal
inclusion, and civic engagement for people with disabilities, as well as media
representations of people with intellectual and developmental disabilities.
Her recent research draws upon critical social theory and participatory
methods to reﬂect the voices of people with disabilities.
Dennis Revicki received his PhD degree in quantitative
psychology at the University of North Carolina-Chapel
Hill in 1981. From 1981 to 1985 he was director of
research, East Carolina University School of Medicine,
from 1985 to 1987 a senior research scientist with the
Veterans Administration, from 1987 to 2005 senior
research scientist at Battelle and MEDTAP International,
and in 2005 a senior vice-president, United BioSource Corporation and in
2013 a senior vice president at Evidera. He has faculty appointments at the
University of North Carolina and University of Florida. His research interests
include health outcomes including applications of health-status assessment
and health-utility measures in clinical trials and outcomes research, and
mental health services research. He is co-editor-in-chief for Quality of Life
Research. He was formerly the treasurer and board member for the Interna-
tional Society for Quality of Life Research. In 2007, he received the ISOQOL
President’s award for his contributions to health outcomes research.
Robin Richards has completed a master’s degree in
geographical
and
environmental
sciences
and
has
a double honors in applied social sciences and human
resource management from the University of Natal,
South Africa. Over the past two decades, Robin has
worked for South African Universities (University of
Natal, Rhodes and Fort Hare universities in the Eastern
Cape) and the nonproﬁt sector as a researcher and policy analyst in Durban
and Johannesburg. Robin has a special interest in quality of life in cities and
towns in South Africa and whilst with the Institute of Social and Economic
Research, Rhodes University, he undertook the ﬁrst Buffalo City (Eastern
Cape) city-wide Quality of Life Survey to guide strategic planning for the
city. This was a project in partnership with Buffalo City Metropolitan
Municipality and the Swedish International Development Cooperation
Agency. He has also completed area-based quality of life surveys for the
city of Johannesburg. Robin currently works as an independent researcher
l
About the Editors

----- Page 50 (native) -----
and
policy analyst. His most recent
clients include
Oxfam
Italia,
the South African Presidency, Department of Performance Monitoring and
Evaluation, and the Human Sciences Research Council.
Benjamin
Roberts is
coordinator
of
the
South
African Social Attitudes Survey (SASAS) and a Research
Specialist in the Democracy, Governance and Service
Delivery (DGSD) research program at the Human
Sciences Research Council (HSRC, South Africa). He
has a BSc in town and regional planning from the
University of the Witwatersrand and an MSc in urban
and regional planning (development) from the University of Natal. From
1997 to 2002, he was a research fellow in the School of Development Studies
at the University of Natal, where he was involved in one of the country’s ﬁrst
large-scale panel studies, the KwaZulu-Natal Income Dynamics Study
(KIDS, 1998), as well as Department of Land Affairs’ Quality of Life surveys.
Joining the HSRC in 2002, he co-founded and has been coordinating the
annual SASAS series, which celebrated 10 years of existence in late 2012. His
research focuses on the study of social change, with particular interests
including subjective well-being, public attitudes to poverty and inequality,
social protection, as well as social and civic cohesion.
John Robinson is Professor of Sociology at the Univer-
sity of Maryland, where he directs the Americans’ Use
of Time Project and the Internet Scholars Program.
He received his doctoral degree in Mathematical and
Social Psychology at the University of Michigan.
Dr. Robinson founded and directed the Survey
Research Center at the University of Maryland. He
directed the original trend studies of how Americans spend time and the impact
of the Internet (with main support from the National Science Foundation), as
well as Americans’ participation in the arts (SPPA) for the National Endow-
ment for the Arts. He was the founding editor of IT&Society, an online journal
documenting the impact of new information technology on society.
He was co-author of Changing Rhythms of Family Life, which received
two best book awards from the American Sociology Association. He is the
senior author of Valuing Time, Time Use and Qualities of Life, Time for Life,
Measures of Political Attitudes, and Measures of Personality and Social
Psychological Attitudes and has published more than 100 articles in profes-
sional journals and books.
Dr. Robinson has been an ASA/NSF fellow at the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, a Fulbright scholar at Moscow State University, a Research Con-
sultant at the News Division of the British Broadcasting Corporation, and
Research Coordinator for the US Surgeons’ General Committee on Televi-
sion and Social Behavior. In 2010, he received the William Ogburn Career
Achievement Award from the Communication and Information Technology
section (CITASA) of the American Sociological Association.
About the Editors
li

----- Page 51 (native) -----
Mariano Rojas received his BA and MA degrees in
economics from Universidad de Costa Rica, and MS
and PhD degrees in economics from The Ohio State
University. He is professor at Facultad Latinoamericana
de Ciencias Sociales – Mexico and at Universidad Popu-
lar Auto´noma del Estado de Puebla. His research interests
include subjective well-being, happiness, economic
development, poverty, and industrial organization. He acts as coordinator of
the initiative “Measuring the Progress of Societies: A Mexican Perspective.”
Dr. Rojas has served the International Society for Quality of Life Studies
as vice-president of ﬁnance as well as vice-president of external affairs.
He is in the editorial board of Social Indicators Research, Applied Research
in Quality of Life, Journal of Social Research & Policy, Evidence Based
Human Resources Management, Perﬁles Latinoamericanos, and Economı´a
Mexicana.
Vicente Royuela received his PhD in economics from
the University of Barcelona, where is actually associate
professor in applied economics. In 2013, he was
accredited as full professor by the Spanish Ministry of
Education and Science. He teaches both at the undergrad-
uate and the master level and he supervises several PhD
theses. His research interests include regional and urban
economics, quality of life, labor economics and applied economics in general.
He publishes in international peer-reviewed journals and is author of several
books. He has participated in the Scientiﬁc Committee of international
conferences and belongs to the editorial board of international academic
journals. He is member of the European Organising Committee of the Euro-
pean Regional Science Association. He has been main researcher of several
research projects. He belongs to the Board of Directors of the Regional
Quantitative Analysis Research Group (AQR-IREA).
Stephen Rule received a master’s degree in population
geography from the University of Natal (1988) and PhD
in political geography from the University of the
Witwatersrand (1995). He is an independent research
consultant operating as Outsourced Insight. From 1986
to 1996 he lectured in urban and political geography at
Vista University (now University of Johannesburg). He
has authored reports, articles, and books on a range of topics. He has extensive
experience in the design and management of social and industry-related
surveys and data analysis throughout southern Africa. He has managed
quantitative and qualitative research on and monitoring and evaluation of
educational and developmental projects and religious and political issues.
He is a board member of the South African Monitoring and Evaluation
lii
About the Editors

----- Page 52 (native) -----
Association. Previously, he has been a director of surveys at the Human
Sciences Research Council; a research director for the Minister of Social
Development; and chairman of the research committee of the National
Development Agency (2003–2007).
Email: outsourced.insight@tiscali.co.za
Website: http://www.outsourcedinsight.co.za
Michaela Saisana is a Scientiﬁc Ofﬁcer at the Joint
Research Centre of the European Commission. She
conducts, supervises, and coordinates research on socio-
economic indicators for policy making. She is a trainer on
composite indicator development and has assessed over
60 composite indicators, upon invitation of international
organizations, including the United Nations, Transpar-
ency International, World Economic Forum, INSEAD, and World Intellec-
tual Property Organization. She has coauthored two books: 2008 OECD/JRC
Handbook on Constructing Composite Indicators and 2008 Global Sensitivity
Analysis: The Primer. Her publications deal with sensitivity analysis,
composite indicators, multicriteria analysis, multivariate analysis, data
envelopment analysis, and multi-objective optimization (20 peer-reviewed
publications, 40 working papers). In 2004 she was awarded the European
Commission – JRC Young Scientist Prize in Statistics and Econometrics in
recognition of her research on composite indicators. She has a PhD and an
MSc in chemical engineering.
Silvana Salvini is full professor of demography at the
University of Florence.
From March 2008 to December 2012, she was the
head of the Department of Statistics and from 2009
to 2011, president of the Italian Association for Population
Studies.
Her main research interests are: (a) study of Italian
fertility, with particular attention to the relations with
female labor force participation and with reference to the impact of the new
ﬂexible contractual types of works on family choices; (b) study of the
processes of demographic convergence/divergence between industrialized
and developing countries; (c) application of event history analysis in the
study of demographic processes; (d) study of marriage instability in Italy,
with an in-depth analysis of regional differences; (e) problems of population
of developing countries; (f) local demography: study and forecasting of
structures and behavior of the populations of metropolitan areas.
Salvini’s major publications are on: (a) health inequalities in international
reviews; (b) developing countries in monographs; (c) families behavior in
scientiﬁc journals and monographs.
About the Editors
liii

----- Page 53 (native) -----
Thomas W. Sanchez earned his PhD in city planning
from Georgia Tech in 1996 and has since taught at Iowa
State University, Portland State University, the Univer-
sity of Utah, and is currently professor of Urban Affairs
and Planning at Virginia Tech. Sanchez conducts
research in the areas of environmental justice, technol-
ogy, and the social aspects of planning and policy.
He also serves as editor of Housing Policy Debate and is a nonresident senior
fellow of the Brookings Institution. In 2012, Dr. Sanchez coauthored
Planning as if People Matter: Governing for Social Equity (Island Press)
and in 2007, The Right to Transportation: Moving to Equity (American
Planning Association) with Marc Brenman.
Willem Saris studied Sociology at the University of
Utrecht and earned his PhD from the University of
Amsterdam in 1979. He became full professor in political
science, especially the methodology of the social sciences
in 1983. Till 2001 he was working at the University of
Amsterdam. In 2001, he moved to Barcelona, where he
was director of the Research and Expertise Centre for
Survey Methodology (RECSM) at the Universitat Pompeu Fabra until
2012. His main specializations are structural equation modeling and the
methodology of survey research. As a member of the central coordinating
team of the European Social Survey, Dr. Saris became laureate of the
Descartes Prize 2005, for the best collaborative research. In 2009, he received
the Helen Dinerman award by the World Association of Public Opinion
Research in recognition for his lifelong contributions to the methodology of
public opinion research. He was the president and founder of the European
Survey Research Association. For more details and his publications we refer
to his home page http://saris.sqp.nl/saris/.
Richard Sawatzky holds a Canada research chair in
patient-reported outcomes at the School of Nursing of
Trinity Western University and is research scientist with
the Centre for Health Evaluation and Outcome Sciences
(CHE´OS) at Providence Health Care in British Columbia,
Canada. His program of research focuses on the valida-
tion and utilization of patient-reported outcome measures
(PROMs) in various contexts of health care, including those for people with
chronic life-limiting illness. His research interests include studies about the
challenges of diversity and response shift in the measurement of patient-
reported outcomes, the validation of computerized assessment systems, the
utilization of tablet devices for patient-reported outcomes assessment, and
nursing care delivery models and practice supports for palliative care.
liv
About the Editors

----- Page 54 (native) -----
Carolyn E. Schwartz earned a bachelor’s degree magna
cum laude in psychology (UCLA), a master’s degree in
clinical psychology (University of Connecticut), and
a Doctor of Science degree (Harvard School of Public
Health) with an emphasis on behavioral sciences, biosta-
tistics, and immunology/cancer biology. She completed
a postdoctoral fellowship in multiple sclerosis at Harvard
Medical School. She is currently president and chief scientist at DeltaQuest
Foundation (1999–present); research professor of medicine and orthopedic
surgery at the Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA; and adjunct
professor of Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, Oslo and Akershus
University College of Applied Sciences, Oslo, Norway. She has served as
co-editor-in-chief of the journal Quality of Life Research since 2009, is an ad
hoc reviewer for numerous journals and international granting agencies,
and is a fellow of the Society of Behavioral Medicine and of the Consortium
of Multiple Sclerosis Centers. A specialist in outcomes research and mea-
surement development with over 130 publications, her interdisciplinary and
methodological research focuses on understanding what patients can do to
have an impact on the course of their disease and their well-being.
Daniel Shek received the BSSc and PhD degrees in
psychology from The University of Hong Kong in 1979
and 1983, respectively. From 1987 to 2009, he worked as
lecturer, senior lecturer, reader, and professor at The
Chinese University of Hong Kong. He is currently chair
professor of applied social sciences, The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University and Advisory Professor, East
China Normal University. His research interests include Chinese families,
adolescent development, positive youth development programs, quality of
life, evaluation, spirituality, and addiction. He is editorial advisor of the British
Journal of Social Work and an editorial board member of Social Indicators
Research, Journal of Adolescent Health, International Journal of Adolescent
Medicine and Health, and International Journal on Disability and Human
Development. He is chairman of the Action Committee against Narcotics,
chairman of the Family Council, and unofﬁcial justice of the Peace of the
Hong Kong Government of the Special Administrative Region, PRC.
Samuel Shye received his BA in physics and MA in
mathematical statistics from the University of California
at Berkeley; and his PhD (1976) in social and psycholog-
ical
measurement
from
the
Hebrew
University
of
Jerusalem, with Professor Louis Guttman as his advisor.
Professor Shye was a research director at the Israel Insti-
tute of Applied Social Research (1968–1996). Since 1996
he has been a senior research associate at the Van Leer Jerusalem Institute,
where he founded and headed the Center of Social Justice, and in 1999 he was
appointed full professor at Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheba, where he
About the Editors
lv

----- Page 55 (native) -----
served as research director at the Israel Center for Third Sector Research.
Since 1988 Professor Shye has been teaching facet theory, multiple scaling,
and systemic models for quality of life and for distributive justice at the Hebrew
University of Jerusalem. His research interests include: the development of
a faceted-systemic theory and of multiple scaling (partial order measurement)
for behavioral sciences and their application to research in quality of
life, distributive justice, intelligence and creativity, and offender proﬁling.
A member of several professional associations, Professor Shye is a founding
member of the International Facet Theory Association (FTA).
M. Joseph Sirgy is a management psychologist (PhD,
U/Massachusetts, 1979), professor of marketing, and
Virginia real estate research fellow at Virginia Polytech-
nic Institute and State University (Virginia Tech). He has
published extensively in the area of quality of life. He
co-founded the International Society for Quality of Life
Studies (ISQOLS) in 1995, served as its executive direc-
tor/treasurer from 1995 to 2011, and as development director (2011–2012). In
1998, he received the Distinguished Fellow Award from ISQOLS. In 2003,
ISQOLS honored him as the Distinguished QOL Researcher for research
excellence and a record of lifetime achievement in QOL research. He
co-founded the journal Applied Research in Quality of Life, the ofﬁcial
journal of the International Society for Quality of Life Studies, in 2005, and
he has served as its editor since 1995. In 2010, ISQOLS honored him for
excellence and lifetime service to the society. In 2012, he was awarded the
EuroMed Management Research Award for outstanding achievements and
groundbreaking contributions to well-being and quality of life research.
Bryan Smale received his PhD in geography from the
University of Western Ontario after receiving a master’s
and BA in recreation and leisure studies from the Univer-
sity of Waterloo. He is the director of the Canadian Index
of Wellbeing housed in the Faculty of Applied Health
Sciences at the University of Waterloo (UW) and a full
professor in the Department of Recreation and Leisure
Studies. He is a cross-appointed professor in the Department of Geography
and Environmental Management at UW, and is a research faculty associate in
the Waterloo Institute for Social Innovation and Resilience. He was elected as
a fellow to the Academy of Leisure Sciences in 2012. Bryan is currently the
president and chair of the Board of Directors of the Canadian Association of
Leisure Studies (CALS), a member of the Steering Committee of Research
Data Canada, and the current editor-in-chief of Leisure/Loisir. His research
program and teaching focus on the role of leisure in the health and well-being
of individuals and communities, leisure as a coping resource, the spatial
distribution and analysis of leisure in communities, time use allocation, social
indicators research, innovative applications of multiple research methods,
and multivariate statistical techniques and applications.
lvi
About the Editors

----- Page 56 (native) -----
Kelly B. Smith received her PhD in clinical psychology
from Queen’s University and completed predoctoral
internship and fellowship training in Behavioral Medicine
at
Massachusetts
General
Hospital/Harvard
Medical
School. She is currently a postdoctoral fellow in the
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology at the
University of British Columbia. Dr. Smith’s research
focuses primarily on chronic genital pain in women. She has received several
awards, including research awards from the Society for Sex Therapy and
Research (SSTAR) and the International Society for the Study of Women’s
Sexual Health (ISSWSH). Dr. Smith currently serves on the editorial board for
the Archives of Sexual Behavior. She has received postdoctoral fellowship
awards from the Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research and the
Canadian Pain Society.
Jamie Spinney received a BA at Saint Mary’s Univer-
sity (1992) and a BEd (1995) and a master’s of urban and
rural planning at Dalhousie University (1998) before
completing a PhD at McMaster University (2011). He is
an adjunct professor at Saint Mary’s University and was
an assistant professor at Trinity Western University from
2012 to 2013 and Mount Allison University from 2013 to
2014. He is an editorial board member for Environmental Management and
Sustainable Development, International Journal of Social Science Studies,
and Journal of Behavioral Health. He is best described as a geographer who is
trained as a teacher and land use planner with research interests and experi-
ence that focus on the application of spatial reasoning to address contempo-
rary social, economic, and environmental issues.
Mirjam A. G. Sprangers received a MS degree cum
laude (1984) in psychological methods and a PhD degree
(1989) from the University of Amsterdam, the Nether-
lands. She is presently full professor and deputy chair of
the Department of Medical Psychology, Academic
Medical Center, University of Amsterdam. She coordi-
nates a research line on quality of life. She is also foreign
adjunct professor of the Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatis-
tics at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, Sweden. Her research interests
include patient-reported outcomes, response shift, and the genetic disposition
of quality of life. She has been and currently is member of various scientiﬁc
and professional organizations. She is member of the editorial board of
the Journal of Clinical Oncology. She authored more than 250 papers
published in peer-reviewed journals that address the methodological, theo-
retical, and clinically applied aspects of quality of life research in a range of
chronic diseases.
About the Editors
lvii

----- Page 57 (native) -----
Nadia Steiber received her doctoral degree in sociology
from Nufﬁeld College, Oxford University, in 2007. From
2009 to 2012 she was postdoctoral fellow at the European
University Institute (EUI), Florence, Italy (ﬁrst Max
Weber
Programme
then
Marie
Curie
Fellowship).
Currently, she is assistant professor at the Department
of Economic Sociology, University of Vienna, Austria.
Her research interests include the sociology of work and life course, the
internationally comparative analysis of women’s and men’s skills and
employment, the quality of work and work motivation, work-life balance,
retirement decisions, and aging societies. Recent publications include: Insti-
tutional Reforms and Age-Graded Labour Market Inequalities in Europe
(2012). International Journal of Comparative Sociology 53(2): 97–119
(with Martina Dieckhoff); State of the Art: Advances in Explaining Women’s
Employment Patterns (2012). Socio-Economic Review 10(2): 343–367 (with
Barbara Haas).
Katherine
Stevens received
her
BSc
(Hons)
in
economics and MSc in health economics from the
University of York in 1999 and 2000, respectively. She
received her PhD in health economics from The Univer-
sity of Shefﬁeld in 2009. She has held a research post at
The University of Shefﬁeld since 2000 and is currently
a senior research fellow. Her research interests include
the measurement and valuation of health-related quality of life for use in
economic evaluation, in particular in children. Dr. Stevens has been the
holder of 2 UK Medical Research Council fellowships and developed the
Child Health Utility 9D as part of this. She is a member of the International
Health Economics Association and a reviewer for several peer-reviewed
journals and funding bodies.
Christian Suter is professor of sociology at the Univer-
sity of Neuchaˆtel, Switzerland. After receiving his PhD in
sociology from the University of Zurich in 1988, he was
lecturer of sociology and senior researcher at the Univer-
sity of Zurich, visiting scholar at the Colegio de Me´xico,
visiting professor at the Friedrich-Schiller University,
Jena, Germany, and assistant professor of sociology at
the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich. His actual research
interests include social indicators; social reporting; well-being and quality
of life in Switzerland, Europe, and Latin America; as well as social inequal-
ities, poverty, and deprivation. Earlier research has focused on sovereign debt
and global debt crises, globalization, social and political transformations in
Latin America, and social support and health, as well as on science and
technology studies. He has published and edited more than 25 books and
special issues, as well as many articles in international social sciences
journals, encyclopedias, and books. He is the winner of the Book Award
lviii
About the Editors

----- Page 58 (native) -----
of the American Sociological Association, Political Economy of the
World-System Section (1993), and has been awarded by a Fritz Thyssen
Prize for articles in social sciences journals (1998).
Raymond Swaray has BSc (Hons) degree from the
University of Sierra Leone and DPhil degree in econom-
ics. He is interested in the analysis and management of
ﬁnancial and macroeconomic risks associated with heavy
dependence on primary commodities in less-developed
countries. His work involves analytical tools involving
panel data and time series techniques that tracts
commodity-dependent countries’ exposure to price and quantity risks in
world markets. He is also interested in evidence-based research on crime
and public policy which involves modeling efﬁcient intertemporal trade-offs
between costs and beneﬁts of criminal justice interventions. He has published
widely in a number of reputable international journals and is on the editorial
board of Managerial and Decision Economics.
Stefano Tarantola graduated in engineering in 1992
and received his PhD in science and technologies for
engineering at the Polytechnic of Milan in 1996.
From 1996, he is scientiﬁc ofﬁcer at the Joint Research
Centre of the European Commission. He conducts and
coordinates methodological work in the ﬁeld of global
sensitivity analysis and statistical work on innovation
indicators for EU policy-making. He has experience in numerical modeling
and quasi Monte Carlo simulation. He combines sensitivity analysis and
participatory methods for the assessment of the robustness of indicators.
He is author of papers in the peer-reviewed literature and coauthor of
four books on sensitivity analysis and a handbook on composite indicators
development with the OECD. He organizes summer schools, training courses,
and conferences in sensitivity analysis.
Luci Teixeira-Salmela is a titular professor in the
Department of Physical Therapy at the Universidade
Federal of Minas Gerais in Brazil. She has a bachelor’s
degree in physical therapy in Brazil and has completed
her master’s and doctoral studies at Queen’s University in
Kingston, Canada and her postdoctoral studies at the
Universite´ de Montre´al in Montreal, Canada. She acted
as the director of the Department of Physical Therapy and of the Graduate
program in the Rehabilitation Sciences. She has supervised about 40 graduate
students and her research has been focused on QOL assessments and inter-
ventions with stroke survivors. She has led randomized controlled trials of
treatment methods on the effects of strengthening and conditioning programs
About the Editors
lix

----- Page 59 (native) -----
on QOL in elderly and stroke patients. She has published widely in Brazil, as
well as in international journals and is recognized worldwide as a leading
expert in stroke rehabilitation, with international presentations on QOL,
stroke rehabilitation, and physical therapy.
Caroline Terwee is an epidemiologist with expertise in
the development and evaluation of outcome measures.
She received her PhD from the University of Amsterdam
in 2000. Since then, she is working as an assistant profes-
sor at the Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics
at the VU University Medical Center (VUmc) in
Amsterdam. She is coordinator of the Knowledge Center
on Measurement Instruments of the VUmc which aims to optimize the quality
of measurement and the quality of measurement instruments used in medical
and health science research, though consultation, education, and research.
Her main expertise is the development and evaluation of Patient-Reported
Outcome Measures (PROMs). She was associate editor of Quality of Life
Research from 2008 to 2012. Caroline is founder of the COnsensus-based
Standards for the selection of health Measurement INstruments (COSMIN)
initiative (www.cosmin.nl), chair of ISOQOL-NL (www.isoqol.nl) and coor-
dinator of the Dutch-Flemish PROMIS group (www.dutchﬂemishpromis.nl).
Mara Tognetti Bordogna is associate professor and lec-
turer in health politics and migration politics, Department
of Sociology and Social Research, Faculty of Sociology,
University of Milan-Bicocca. mara.tognetti@unimib.it
Her research topics developed during past years con-
cern social politics, mostly focused on health care, health
systems, complementary medicine and medicines, health
inequality.
She was coordinator for the Science and Health series published by
FrancoAngeli.
Professor Tognetti’s recent publications include:
2011– Regionalizinghealth system public and private mix: The situation in Italy,
in “Journal of Sociology Study”, Vol. 1 n.5, pp. 376–388 (con A. Ornaghi)
2011 – A Comparative Analysis of Inequality in Health Across Europe, in
“Sociological Research Online, 16, (4),7 published 30 Nov http:/www.
socresonline.org.uk/16/4/7html (con S. Della Bella, M. Lucchini, S. Sarti)
2012 – The “Badanti” (Informal Cares) Phenomenon in Italy: Characteristics
and Peculiarities of Access to the Health Care System, in “Journal of
Intercultural Studies”, Vol. 33 n 1, pp. 9–22 (con A. Ornaghi)
2012 – The Role of Social Networks in Health, in “Sociology Study”, n. 1,
pp.60–67 (con S. Olivadoti)
2012 – The role of Social Networks in Health, in “Sociologi Study”
(ISSNN2159-5526), n. 1, pp.60-67 (con Olivadoti)
lx
About the Editors

----- Page 60 (native) -----
Graciela Tonon is PhD in political sciences and
magister in political sciences and a social worker. She is
member of the International Society for Quality of Life
Studies since 2000 and she is the vice president of Exter-
nal Affairs. She is the director of UNI-COM and the
Research Program in Quality of Life of the Faculty of
Social Sciences of Universidad Nacional de Lomas de
Zamora, Argentina. She is member of the Policy Board of the Applied
Research in Quality of Life and member of the editorial board of journals in
English and Spanish languages. She teaches in different graduate and post-
graduate programs at universities in Latin America. Her research interests
included qualitative studies in quality of life, the relation between quality of
life, democracy and public policies, young people’s quality of life, human
development, and social inequalities. She is professor and researcher of
qualitative methodology in the Universidad de Palermo, Argentina, and
consultor of INDES-BID and professor in the Political Sciences Program of
Universidad Nacional de La Matanza, Argentina. She is Information Ofﬁcer
elected by the Human Development and Capability Association.
Ming-Chang
Tsai received
his
PhD
from
State
University of New York at Stony Brook in 1992. He is
professor of sociology at the National Taipei University,
Taiwan. He previously served as editor of Taiwanese
Journal of Sociology and president of Taiwanese Socio-
logical Association. He is vice-president of Research
Committee of Social Indicators (RC 55) in International
Sociological Association, as well as vice-president in the International Soci-
ety for Quality of Life Studies. His current research focuses on comparing
quality of life across East Asian countries. His recent publications on well-
being appear in Applied Research in Quality of Life, Journal of Happiness
Studies, and Social Indicators Research. He also conducts research on com-
parative global exposure, a project that investigates the relations among
global mobility, transnational networking, and cosmopolitan values at
a micro level.
Penney Upton received an MA in psychology from
the University of St. Andrews in 1988, and a PhD
from the University of Shefﬁeld in, 2010. From 1988 to
1990, she was a psychology assistant at the National
Society for Epilepsy, from 1990 to 1994 a senior research
ofﬁcer at the Institute of Child Health in London, from
1994 to 2000 a part-time lecturer and research assistant at
the University of Wales Institute, Cardiff, from 2000 to 2003 research ofﬁcer
at the University of Swansea, from 2003 to 2006 research associate at the
University of Shefﬁeld, from 2006 to 2007 research fellow at the University
of Birmingham, and in 2007 moved to the University of Worcester where she
is a principal lecturer in psychology. Her research interests include human
About the Editors
lxi

----- Page 61 (native) -----
development and well-being across the life-span, in particular the impact of
chronic illness on health and quality of life in childhood, the well-being of
children in local authority care, and the development of psychometrically
sound measurement tools for health outcomes. A chartered researcher and
teacher, Dr. Upton is vice-chair for the British Psychology Society (BPS)
Division of Academics, Teachers and Researchers. She is an associate fellow
of the BPS and a fellow of the HEA.
Bernard M.S. Van Praag (born 1939) studied econo-
metrics at the University of Amsterdam where he
defended his dissertation on “Individual Welfare and the
Theory of Consumer Behaviour” cum laude in 1968. He
held chairs at Brussels, Leyden, and Erasmus University,
Rotterdam. In 2000, he became university professor at the
University of Amsterdam. He was the founding president
of the European Society for Population Economics (ESPE) and the Tinbergen
Institute. In 1999, he was elected as a member of the Royal Dutch Academy of
Sciences. His main research line is the measurement and explanation
of welfare and well-being. Van Praag is also active in econometric method-
ology, labor and health economics, conjoint analysis, and the economics
of aging.
He published in a wide range of journals, including the Review of
Economics and Statistics, European Economic Review, Journal of Public
Economics, Econometrica, Psychometrika, Journal of Econometrics, Journal
of Applied Econometrics, Economic Journal, Economica, Journal of Human
Resources, Journal of Economic Psychology, Health Economics, Journal of
Health Economics, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, Review
of Economics of the Household, Review of Income and Wealth, Journal of
Economic Inequality, Journal of Happiness Studies. He coauthored with Ada
Ferrer-i- Carbonell the monograph Happiness Quantiﬁed, a Satisfaction
Calculus Approach (2004, Oxford University Press).
Ruut Veenhoven (1942) studied sociology and is emer-
itus professor of social conditions for human happiness at
Erasmus University Rotterdam in the Netherlands, where
he works currently in the Erasmus Happiness Economics
Research Organization (EHERO). He is also an extraor-
dinary professor at North-West University in South
Africa where he is involved in the Optentia research
program. Veenhoven is director of the World Database of Happiness and
founding editor of the Journal of Happiness Studies. His research focuses on
conditions for happiness and aims at more informed choice in both public and
private matters.
Homepage: http://www2.eur.nl/fsw/research/veenhoven
lxii
About the Editors

----- Page 62 (native) -----
Jose de Jesus Garcia Vega is a professor of economics
at the Universidad de Monterrey, Mexico. He is the direc-
tor of the Center of Well-being Studies, which includes
research related to the subjective well-being and the quality
of life in Mexico. He is one of the 100 invited researchers to
contribute to The World Book of Happiness. He has con-
tributed to several books on happiness and quality of life in
Mexico and collaborated on the Handbook of the Economics of Happiness. He
has been invited to speak at several conferences in Mexico and overseas
regarding food consumption, international trade, and subjective well-being.
Jose graduated from Texas A&M University with a PhD in agricultural
economics in 1995 and earlier graduated from the Universidad Autonoma de
Tamaulipas in Tampico, Mexico, with a bachelor’s degree in accounting and an
MBA. He is member of the Board of Directors of the International Society of
Quality of Life Studies and of the Community Indicators Consortium.
Lı´a Rodriguez de la Vega holds a BA in oriental studies
and is Dr. in International Relations, Universidad del
Salvador, Argentina (2006) and she did postdoctoral stud-
ies at Rio Grande do Sul Federal University, Brazil
(2009). She is a member of the Board of Directors of the
International Society for Quality of Life Studies. She is
a researcher and coordinates the Area for Asian and Afri-
can Studies of UNI-COM, Social Sciences Faculty, Lomas de Zamora
National University, Argentina. Her research interests include diversity, iden-
tity, new agents in international relations (especially migration), and quality of
life. She is consulting editor of the Journal of Immigrant and Refugee Studies:
International, National, and Regional Theory, Research, and Practice
(editorial board), The Haworth Social Work Practice Press, and she has served
as chair or co-chair for several international conferences. She is a member of
the Commission of the Latin American Association for Asian and African
Studies and has also been the national coordinator of its Argentine Section.
She is joint and associate professor at Lomas de Zamora National
University and La Matanza National University (Argentina), respectively.
Aldo Vera is psychologist at the University Diego
Portales, in the same university he received MBA in
2001. In 2013, he received the degree of Doctor of Public
Health in the Public Health School Dr. Salvador Allende
of the University of Chile.
From 2006 until 2012 he was a fellow of the Interna-
tional Training Program in Environmental and Occupa-
tional Health (Fogarty International Center) of the Mount Sinai University,
New York, USA.
About the Editors
lxiii

----- Page 63 (native) -----
Professor Vera is also a founding member of the Network of
Researchers on Psychosocial Factors at Work A.C. (http://www.factoresp-
sicosociales.com/).
Professor Vera’s areas of interest are related to psychosocial factors at
work, such as mental health, fatigue, job stress. Since 2000, in the ﬁeld of
Public Health he has worked in the Divisions of Health Promotion and Health
Policy and Management at the School of Public Health Dr. Salvador Allende,
University of Chile. Currently, he is a professor and researcher at the
Occupational Health Program at the same university.
Joar Vittersø received his MS and PhD degrees in psy-
chology from Oslo University in 1992 and 1998, respec-
tively. From 1992 to 1999, he was a research scientist at
the Eastern Norway Research Institute, from 1999 to
2002 an associate professor at Tromsø University, and
in 2003 became a professor at Tromsø University. His
research interests include human well-being, positive
emotions, and intrinsic motivation. He is a board member of the International
Positive Psychology Association, the Country representative for Norway in
the European Network for Positive Psychology, and an editorial board mem-
ber of the Social Indicators Research. Vittersø has served as a vice-president
of Academic Affairs of the International Society for Quality of Life Studies.
Manuel Voelkle is a research scientist at the Max
Planck Institute for Human Development, Center for
Lifespan Psychology, in Berlin (Germany). Before join-
ing the Max Planck Institute he worked as a research
associate at the University of Mannheim from where he
also received his diploma and doctorate degree in psy-
chology. Manuel is particularly interested in the design
and analysis of multivariate empirical studies with an emphasis on the use of
structural equation models for the analysis of longitudinal data. Most of his
methodological work is concerned with continuous time modeling and
the analysis of the intricate relationship of between- and within-person
differences in various constructs as they evolve over time. His substantive
research revolves around cognitive and affective development as well as
evaluation research.
Udaya R. Wagle is associate professor (assistant pro-
fessor, 2005–2011) in the School of Public Affairs and
Administration at Western Michigan University. He
holds a PhD in public policy from the University of
Massachusetts Boston, where he also began his teaching
career. Previously, he has taught at Marist College in
New York. Dr. Wagle’s research interests include pov-
erty, inequality, social policy, and comparative policy analysis. The author
of Multidimensional Poverty Measurement: Concepts and Applications
lxiv
About the Editors

----- Page 64 (native) -----
(2008, Springer) and The Heterogeneity Link of the Welfare State and
Redistribution: Ethnic Heterogeneity, Welfare State Policies, Poverty, and
Inequality in High Income Countries (forthcoming, Springer), he has
authored and coauthored more than 30 journal articles, book chapters, and
book reviews. His professional activities include consulting with various
United Nations agencies, serving in the editorial board of Poverty & Public
Policy, and reviewing papers and grant proposals for various refereed inter-
national journals, publishers, and grant-makers.
Shannon Wagner is a professor in the School of Health
Sciences at the University of Northern British Columbia.
Her research focus is occupational mental health, espe-
cially as it relates to disability management, occupational
stress, trauma, and family-work interface. Her teaching
expertise is in disability management, including legal and
policy issues in the workplace, as well as courses in
occupational health, psychological diagnosis, statistics, and epidemiology.
She has published widely in the disability management ﬁeld and continues to
work actively on both research and practice related to workplace health,
especially diagnosis, and accommodations for mental health.
Astrid K. Wahl received her MS and PhD degrees in
nursing science from Bergen University in 1992 and
1999, respectively. She became a professor at the
University of Oslo in 2006. Throughout her research
career she has been focusing on illuminating health com-
petence and quality of life for people suffering from long-
term diseases and illness. She was one of the ﬁrst who
worked with quality of life research within medicine and health in Norway.
Especially in relation to psoriasis she was the ﬁrst in Norway and one of the
ﬁrst internationally who looked into this ﬁeld. Her research on quality of life
and chronic diseases has over the years illuminated important issues of
quality of life in a broad variety of patient groups (those with psoriasis, atopic
dermatitis, COPD, diabetes, kidney diseases, mental diseases, musculoskel-
etal disorders, coronary heart diseases, and chronic pain conditions).
Ruth Walker is a social gerontologist and senior
research fellow in the Southgate Institute for Health,
Society
and
Equity
at
Flinders
University,
South
Australia. She holds a ﬁrst class honors degree in psy-
chology (University of Otago) and a PhD in public health
(University of Adelaide). Her research interests include
aging and social relationships, migrant aging, women’s
health and aging within a gendered, life-course perspective. Dr. Walker has
been chief investigator on the Australian Longitudinal Study of Ageing
(ALSA) since 2007 and this work involves international collaborations with
researchers at the University of Humboldt (Germany) and University of
About the Editors
lxv

----- Page 65 (native) -----
British Columbia (Canada). In 2011, she was invited to serve on the
College of Reviewers for the Canada Research Chairs Program, and since
2008, she has served as an assessor for both the Australian Research Council
and National Health & Medical Research Council, and is recognized as
an expert of international standing (ARC Discovery International Reader).
She serves as peer-reviewer for the following journals: Gerontology;
Journal of Applied Gerontology, Women and Health, Health Policy, Medical
Journal of Australia, and the Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Public Health.
Xiaoli Wang received her bachelor’s and PhD degrees
in medicine and public health from Peking University in
1989 and 2006, respectively.
From 1989 to 2000, she was a teaching assistant and
instructor in Peking University School of Public Health,
from 2001 to 2006 an associate professor, and in 2006
became a professor at Peking University.
Her research directions include child early development, behavior of
women before, during, and after and pregnancy. Her teaching work includes
“Behavioral Medicine and the Applications in Maternal & Child Health,”
“Application of Medical Statistics,” and “The Statistics Method in the Data of
Scale” at Peking University Health Science Center. She is the standing
director of China Health Birth Science Association and Chinese Rural Health
Association.
Dave Webb earned his MBA and PhD degrees from the
University of Wales in 1991 and 1995. His PhD thesis
explored service quality issues in a policing context. In
1997, Dave moved from Wales to Australia to take up
a position at the University of Western Australia, where
he currently holds the position of Associate Professor.
While his research is varied, David’s primary interests are
in the domain of societal marketing, focusing in particular on the interface
between marketing and quality of life (QOL), self-determination theory, and
the psychology of consumption. David is a member of the Board of Directors
for the International Society for Quality of Life Studies (ISQOLS). He is also
the Senior Personal Well-Being (PWB) researcher for the Tibetan ethnic
regions of Western China, coeditor of the religion, spirituality, and quality
of life section of the Applied Journal for Research in Quality of Life Studies
(USA), coeditor of the Social Indicator Research Series book Subjective Well
Being and Security and the editor of the “Best Practice in Quality of Life
Studies” (Springer) book series. David was awarded “Distinguished Research
Fellow” of ISQOLS in 2010 for his contributions to QOL research.
lxvi
About the Editors

----- Page 66 (native) -----
Kristi Williams received a PhD from the University
of Texas, Austin, in 2000 followed by a postdoctoral fel-
lowship at the University of Chicago. In 2002, she became
assistant professor of Sociology at the Ohio State Univer-
sity, where she is currently associate professor. She studies
the inﬂuence of intimate unions, parenthood, and other
social relationships on health and well-being with atten-
tion to social structural variation and inequality in these patterns. Her work has
received awards from the American Sociological Association, The National
Council on Family Relations, and the International Society of Behavioral
Medicine. She is deputy editor of Society and Mental Health and has served
on the editorial board of Journal of Health and Social Behavior and the
Advisory Board of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth.
Eduardo
Wills-Herrera received
his
PhD
in
organizational behavior and a master’s degree in man-
agement from Tulane University, New Orleans in 1999
and 2003 respectively. He earned also a Master in
Development Studies from the Institute of Social Studies
(Erasmus University,) the Netherlands.
He is a full professor (profesor titular) at the
Management School at Universidad de los Andes in Bogota´, Colombia,
where he has been working since 2006. In fact, he is the director of the PhD
program of that School. Previously he was the head of the Interdisciplinary
Center for Development Studies and Research CIDER at Universidad de los
Andes and an associate professor in that center since 1993.
His main research interests are related to subjective well-being at the
individual, organizational, and societal level. He has published extensively
in journals such as Journal of Happiness Studies, Applied Research in Quality
of Life, and Journal of Socio-Economics. He is in fact a board member
of ISQOLS (International Society of Quality of Life Studies) and served as
vice-president for professional affairs of ISQOLS. He is also a member of the
International Positive Psychology Association (IPPA).
Cecilia Wong graduated from the Chinese University of
Hong Kong and received her master’s degree and PhD
from the University of Liverpool and the University of
Manchester, respectively. She is currently professor of
spatial planning and director of the Centre for Urban
Policy Studies at the University of Manchester. She has
been an Academician of the UK Academy of Social
Sciences since 2009 and is a member of the Royal Town Planning Institute.
She has over 25 years’ research expertise on developing quantitative indica-
tors, policy monitoring and analysis, strategic spatial planning, and urban and
regional development policies. She has provided expert advice to the UN
About the Editors
lxvii

----- Page 67 (native) -----
Habitat, the European Commission, and the UK government and has
conducted major research projects for UK central government departments,
the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, the Economic and Social Research Council,
the Royal Town Planning Institute, the Homes and Community Agency, and
other regional and local bodies. She has published three books, including her
2006 book Quantitative Indicators for Urban and Regional Planning: The
Interplay of Policy and Methods and over 40 international peer-reviewed
journal papers in the urban and regional planning ﬁeld. She is a coeditor of the
Town Planning Review.
Alison Woodcock was awarded a BA (Hons) in psychol-
ogy (Reading, England, 1973), a Postgraduate Certiﬁcate
of Education (Warwick, 1974), and a PhD in primate
social behavior (Reading, 1981). She worked in education
and training until the late 1980s, with a range of students,
including those with behavioral problems and those with
limited numeracy and literacy. She held a series of
research posts in health psychology at the University of Southampton from
1989, further developing skills in quantitative and qualitative research
methods and project management. Already chartered by the British Psycho-
logical Society, she became a BPS Chartered Health Psychologist in 1997. She
joined the Department of Psychology at Royal Holloway, University of
London in 1998, where she taught undergraduates and postgraduates until
retiring in 2012. Alison’s research interests include health behavior change
and quality of life of older people, those with chronic diseases, and those living
in developing countries. She has some expertise in questionnaire design and
validation. A keen cross-country runner and sailor, she works on the evaluation
of projects using sport to improve people’s lives worldwide. She currently
volunteers on an inspirational project to enhance the independent living skills
and quality of life of people with learning difﬁculties.
Tarah Wright received a BES from the University of
Waterloo
(1996),
MES
from
Dalhousie
University
(1998) and PhD (2001) from the University of Alberta.
Dr. Wright is director of the Education for Sustainability
Research Group and associate professor in the Faculty of
Science at Dalhousie University, Canada, where she has
played a pivotal role in the successful creation of the
Environmental Science Program and the innovative College of Sustainability.
Her research focuses on the emerging ﬁeld of education for sustainable devel-
opment and she has published numerous papers covering a wide range of issues
in sustainability and higher education. She serves on the editorial board of the
International Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education. Tarah and her
family live in the city of Halifax, originally the traditional lands of the Mic Mac
people, in the Acadian Forest Bioregion, at the edge of the Atlantic Ocean.
lxviii
About the Editors

----- Page 68 (native) -----
Grace Yao received her BS in occupational therapy
from National Taiwan University in 1984, MS in thera-
peutic science from University of Wisconsin at Madison
in 1988, MS in statistics and MS and PhD degrees in
psychometrics from the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign in 1992, 1993, and 1995, respectively. In
1995, she was a lecturer, from 1996 to 2007 she was an
associate professor, and since 2007 she became a professor in the Department
of Psychology, National Taiwan University. Her research interests include
the applications of psychometrics in the research of behavioral science,
health/medical sciences, and education. She is an editorial board member of
Social Indicators Research, associate editor for Taiwan Journal of Public
Health; and multiple disciplinary advisory board member of The Journal of
Nursing and the Journal of Nursing and Healthcare Research (Taiwan).
Wei-Jun Jean Yeung is a professor at the Department of
Sociology and the Asia Research Institute, National Uni-
versity of Singapore (NUS). Before joining NUS in 2008,
she has been at the University of Michigan and New York
University. She is afﬁliated with Peking University and
University of Michigan. Professor Yeung was a co-
principal investigator of the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics, one of the longest running social science panel surveys. Her
research interests are in family demography, education, and stratiﬁcation in
the USA and Asia. She is the Cluster Leader of the Changing Family in Asia
research cluster in Asia Research Institute and the Family, Children, and Youth
cluster in the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences in NUS. Professor Yeung is
on the editorial board of Demography, Journal of Marriage and Family,
Journal of Family Issues, and numerous scientiﬁc review committees. She
has received many awards, including those from the National Science Foun-
dation, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, and
National Institute on Aging. She serves as a board of trustee member of the
Institute for Southeast Asian Studies in Singapore and an international aca-
demic advisor to the Institute of Social Science Studies at Peking University.
Vasoontara Yiengprugsawan received a BA in eco-
nomics
from
Thammasat
University
in
Thailand
(1997–2000) and an MA in international relations from
Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs in New
York, USA (2001–2003). She then worked as an associate
migration policy ofﬁcer at the International Organization
for Migration in Geneva, Switzerland (2002–2005). In
2008, she completed a PhD in epidemiology, economics, and population
health at the Australian National University. She is currently a research fellow
at the National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, working on
a large prospective longitudinal cohort of Thai adults funded by the National
Health and Medical Research Council (Australia) and Wellcome Trust (UK).
About the Editors
lxix

----- Page 69 (native) -----
Since 2005, she has led a number of peer-reviewed academic publications on
inequalities in health outcomes and health service use, social determinants of
health, and quality of life outcomes.
Ieva Zake received an MA from the Ohio State Univer-
sity and a PhD from University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, in 1999 and 2004, respectively. As of 2004 she
is a professor of sociology at Rowan University, NJ. Since
2010 she has also served as the associate dean of College of
Liberal Arts and Sciences and later College of Science and
Mathematics at Rowan University. Her research lies in the
areas of comparative and historical political sociology, speciﬁcally national-
ism, radical political movements, Cold War, intellectuals, political emigration,
and post-Communism. She has published four books and numerous refereed
articles in academic journals. She has served as guest editor of the Journal of
American Ethnic History and the Journal of the Institute of Latvia’s History.
Peng Zhou received his PhD degree in industrial and
systems
engineering
from
National
University
of
Singapore in 2008. From 2008 to 2009, he was a fellow
at the Energy Studies Institute, National University of
Singapore. From 2008, he became a professor of Nanjing
University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, China. Since
2013, he also served as the assistant dean at College of
Economics and Management, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astro-
nautics. His research interests include energy economics and policy, perfor-
mance measurement and sustainable development. He is an associate editor
of Energy Economics, and editorial board member of International Journal of
Performability Engineering.
Bruno D. Zumbo received his BSc at the University
of Alberta and then his MA and PhD at Carleton University
focusing in Mathematical Psychology and Statistics. Dr.
Zumbo has been a professor in measurement, statistics,
psychology, and applied mathematics at the University of
Ottawa (1990–1994), the University of Northern British
Columbia (1994–2000), the University of British Colum-
bia (UBC) (2000–present). At UBC his primary appointment is in the MERM
Program with additional appointments in the Department of Statistics and the
Institute of Applied Mathematics. His teaching and research appointments are
in the Departments of ECPS, Statistics and the Institute of Applied Mathemat-
ics at UBC. He is the former editor of the International Journal of Testing as
well as editorial board member for 11 research journals and an American
Educational Research Association fellow. He has received the 2010 Interna-
tional Society for Quality of Life Studies (ISQOLS) Research Fellow Award,
the 2005 Samuel J. Messick Memorial Lecture Award, the 2012 Killam
Teaching Prize at UBC, and 1998 UNBC Excellence in Teaching Award.
lxx
About the Editors

----- Page 70 (native) -----
Contributors
Leif Edvard Aarø Division of Mental Health, Norwegian Institute of Public
Health, Oslo, Norway
Neil Aaronson Division of Psychosocial Research and Epidemiology,
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, CX, The Netherlands
Katherine Abbott Department of Sociology and Justice Studies Program,
University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH, USA
Saamah Abdallah Centre for Well-being, New Economics Foundation,
London, UK
Ahmed M. Abdel-Khalek Department of Psychology, Faculty of Arts,
University of Alexandria, Alexandria, Egypt
Abdella Abdou Department of Economics, Brandon University, Brandon,
MB, Canada
Lazim
Abdullah Department
of
Mathematics,
University
Malaysia
Terengganu, Kuala Terengganu, Terengganu, Malaysia
Anja-Kristin
Abendroth Sociology/SFB
882,
Bielefeld
University,
Bielefeld, Germany
Bruce Abernethy School of Human Movement Sciences, University of
Queensland, St Lucia, QLD, Australia
Sylvia Abonyi University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada
Shannon Acevedo Urban and Environmental Planning, Arizona State
University, Mesa, AZ, USA
Peter
Achterberg Erasmus
University
Rotterdam,
Rotterdam,
NA,
The Netherlands
Catherine Acquadro Mapi Research Trust, Lyon, France
Daniela Acquadro Maran Department of Psychology, Universita` di
Torino, Torino, Italy
Marc A. Adams Exercise and Wellness, School of Nutrition and Health
Promotion, Arizona State University, Phoenix, AZ, USA
Isaac
Addai Social
Science
&
Humanities
Department,
Lansing
Community College, Lansing, MI, USA
lxxi

----- Page 71 (native) -----
Marcelo F. Aebi School of Criminal Sciences, University of Lausanne –
Institute of Criminology and Criminal Law, Lausanne, Switzerland
Ferdinand Ahiakpor Department of Economics, University of Cape Coast,
Cape Cost, Ghana
Sara Ahmed Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC,
Canada
Aaron
Ahuvia Department
of
Management
Studies,
University
of
Michigan-Dearborn, Dearborn, MI, USA
Yeliz Akkus Kars School of Health Services, Kafkas University, Kars,
Turkey
Namtip Aksornkool Namtip Aksornkool and Associates
Mamun Al Mahtab Department of Hepatology, Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujib Medical University Viral Hepatitis Foundation Bangladesh, Dhaka,
Bangladesh
Alex Alarco´n Hein Global Health Programme and Policy, Systems and
Health Management Programme, School of Public Health, University of
Chile, Santiago de Chile, Chile
Cinzia Albanesi Department of Psychology, University of Bologna – Alma
Mater Studiorum, Cesena, Italy
Sara Alﬁeri Psychology Department, Universita´ Catolica Del Sacro Cuore,
Milan, Italy
Karen Allen State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA
Robin Allyn Sociology, University of California at Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA
Elbert P. Almazan Department of Sociology, Anthropology, and Social
Work, Central Michigan University, Mount Pleasant, MI, USA
Olga Alonso-Villar Departamento de Economı´a Aplicada, Universidade de
Vigo, Vigo, Pontevedra, Spain
Nicholas O. Alozie Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
Laith
Alrubaiy Swansea
University
Speciality
Registrar
in
Gastroenterology
Abertawe
Bro
Morgannwg
University
NHS
Trust,
Swansea, UK
Ban Al-Sahab York University, Toronto, ON, Canada
Reuven Amar The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Karin Amit Ruppin Academic Center, Emek Hefer, Israel
Fotios Anagnostopoulos Department of Psychology, Panteion University of
Social & Political Sciences, Athens, Greece
Milena D. Anatchkova Quantitative Health Sciences, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA
lxxii
Contributors

----- Page 72 (native) -----
John Roger Andersen Faculty of Health Studies, Sogn og Fjordane
University College Førde Central Hospital, Førde, Norway
Kristin L. Anderson Department of Sociology, Western Washington
University, Bellingham, WA, USA
Laura Anderson College of Natural Resources, UW - Stevens Point,
Stevens Point, WI, USA
Elias Andreoulakis 3rd Department of Psychiatry, Medical School,
Aristotle
University
of
Thessaloniki
AHEPA
General
Hospital,
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece
Rhys Andrews Cardiff Business School, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK
Beng Wah Ang Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering,
National University of Singapore, Singapore
Laura Angelescu Department of Economics, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Viola Angelini Economics, Econometrics and Finance, University of
Groningen and Netspar, Groningen, The Netherlands
Holly Angelique Penn State Harrisburg, Middletown, PA, USA
Felix Angst Research, Rehabilitation Clinic (RehaClinic), Bad Zurzach,
Bad Zurzach, Switzerland
Schulthess Klinik, Zurich, Switzerland
Mark Anielski School of Business, University of Alberta, AB, Canada
Ellen Annandale Department of Sociology, University of York, York, UK
Jerry Anthony Urban & Regional Planning, University of Iowa, Iowa City,
IA, USA
Hans Antlo¨v The World Bank, Jakarta, Indonesia
Yukitoshi Aoyagi Exercise Sciences Research Group, Tokyo Metropolitan
Institute of Gerontology, Tokyo, Japan
Susan Arai Department of Recreation and Leisure Studies, University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Luisa Araujo Joint Research Centre, European Commission, Ispra, Italy
Instituto Superior de Educac¸a˜o e Cieˆncias, Lisbon, Portugal
Sara Arber Department of Sociology, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK
Noelia Somarriba Arechavala Department of Applied Economy, Faculty
of Social, Communication and Legal Sciences, University of Valladolid,
Segovia, Spain
Gal Ariely Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel
Neelam Ark Department of ECPS, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Contributors
lxxiii

----- Page 73 (native) -----
Tavinder Ark Department of ECPS, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Frank S. Arku Development Studies, Presbyterian University College,
Akuapem Campus, Akropong Akuapem, Ghana
Rachel Armitage Applied Criminology Centre, Institute for Research in
Citizenship and Applied Human Sciences, University of Huddersﬁeld,
West Yorkshire, UK
Heather Armstrong University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Catherine K. Arnold Institute on Disability and Human Development,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Bruno Arpino Department of Political and Social Sciences and RECSM,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Italy
Oliver Arra´nz Becker Institute for Sociology, Chemnitz University of
Technology, Chemnitz, Germany
Oscar Arteaga Division of Health Policy and Management, Escuela de
Salud Pu´blica, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile
Joaquı´n Arte´s Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
Kimlin Tam Ashing City of Hope, Duarte, CA, USA
Louise E. Askew The Centre for Urban and Regional Studies, The
University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia
Gordon J. G. Asmundson Department of Psychology, University of
Regina, Regina, SK, Canada
Jo Van Assche Centre for Sustainable Development, Ghent University,
Gent, Belgium
Konstantinos Assimakopoulos Department of Psychiatry, University of
Patras, Patras, Greece
Ron Avi Astor University of Southern California (USC), Los Angels, CA,
USA
Dave Atkin Communication Sciences, University of Connecticut, Storrs,
CT, USA
Arthur
E.
Attema iBMG/iMTA,
Erasmus
University
Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Adam
Augustine Deptartment
of
Clinical
and
Social
Sciences
in
Psychology, University of Rochester, Rochester, USA
Eric K. Austin Department of Political Science, Montana State University,
Bozeman, MT, USA
Margit Averdijk Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich (ETH),
Zurich, Switzerland
lxxiv
Contributors

----- Page 74 (native) -----
Nelly C. Ayala School of Public Health, Department of Health Services,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Melanie Ayres University of Wisconsin River Falls, River Falls, WI, USA
Darshini Ayton School of Psychology and Psychiatry, Monash University,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia
Juanita Bacsu Saskatchewan Population Health and Evaluation Research
Unit, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada
Mircea Badescu Area Research and Policy Analysis, Thessaloniki (Pylea),
Thessaloniki, Greece
Ann Bagchi College of Nursing, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ, USA
Amy K. Bailey Department of Sociology, Social Work & Anthropology,
Utah State University, Logan, UT, USA
Tamilyn Bakas Indiana University School of Nursing, Indianapolis,
IN, USA
David P. Baker Pennsylvania State University, Pennsylvania, USA
Frank Baker School of Social Work, University of Connecticut, West
Hartford, CT, USA
Mark Baker School of Environment and Development, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK
Miche`lle
Bal Social
Psychology,
Utrecht
University,
Utrecht,
The Netherlands
Albert Balaguer Medicine and Health Sciences School, Universitat
Internacional de Catalunya, Sant Cugat del Valle´s, Barcelona, Spain
Julie Marie Baldwin University of Arkansas at Little Rock, Little Rock,
AR, USA
Aleksey Balotskiy Trinity University, San Antonio, TX, USA
Sergiu Baltatescu Department of Sociology and Social Work and
Philosophy, University of Oradea, Oradea, Romania
Thilina Bandara Department of Community Health and Epidemiology,
College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada
Patricia A. Banks Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, MA, USA
Tanja B€anziger Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden
Carolyn Barber Division of Counseling and Educational Psychology,
School of Education, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City,
MO, USA
Jonathan Barker Department of Political Science, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada
Contributors
lxxv

----- Page 75 (native) -----
Helen Barnes Oxford Institute of Social Policy, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK
Anthony Barnett School of Exercise and Nutrition Sciences, Deakin
University, Burwood, VIC, Australia
Lynn A. Barnett Department of Recreation, Sport, and Tourism, College of
Applied Health Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Champaign, IL, USA
Rosalind
C.
Barnett Women’s
Studies
Research
Center,
Brandeis
University, Waltham, MA, USA
Raymond Barnhardt University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, AK, USA
Christopher Barrington-Leigh Institute for Health and Social Policy,
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
Anders Barstad Division for Demographic and Social Research, Statistics
Norway, Oslo, Norway
Stefano Bartolini Department of Economics, University of Siena, Siena,
Italy
Nekane Basabe Social Psychology and Methodology of Behavior Sciences,
University of the Basque Country, Vitoria/Gasteiz, Spain
Marta Bassi Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Cliniche Luigi Sacco,
Universita` degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy
Ana Soﬁa Bastos Philosophy Faculty of the Catholic University of
Portugal,
College
of
Educational
Sciences
of
Felgueiras,
Braga,
Felgueiras, Portugal
Lisa Bateman Department of Psychological and Social Foundations,
University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
William Batt Robert Schalkenbach Foundation, New York, NY, USA
Center for the Study of Economics, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Carrie Bauer Justice and Social Inquiry, Arizona State University, Santa
Clara, CA, USA
Sebastian Bauhoff RAND Corporation, Arlington, VA, USA
Janeen Baxter School of Social Science and Institute for Social Science
Research, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Saba Bazargan Department of Philosophy, University of California at
San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA
Barbara Beham Institute of Management, Humboldt-Universit€at zu Berlin,
Berlin, Germany
Constanze Beierlein GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences,
Mannheim, Germany
lxxvi
Contributors

----- Page 76 (native) -----
Christine M. Belden Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ,
USA
Simon Bell Communication and Systems Department, Open University,
Milton Keynes, Bucks, UK
Luna
Bellani Population
and
Employment,
CEPS/INSTEAD,
Esch-
sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
Asher Ben-Arieh Paul Baerwald School of Social Work and Social
Welfare, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Rami Benbenishty Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel
Luigi Benfratello Dipartimento di Scienze Economiche e Statistiche,
Universita` di Napoli Federico II, Napoli, Italy
Pazit Ben-Nun Bloom Department of Political Science, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Lisamarie
Bensman Department
of
Psychology,
Hilbert
College,
Hamburg, NY, USA
Anne
Ingeborg
Berg Department
of
Psychology,
University
of
Gothenburg, Go¨teborg, Sweden
Cynthia A. Berg Department of Psychology, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, UT, USA
Stefan Bergheim Center for Societal Progress, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany
G€unseli Berik Economics Department, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
UT, USA
Miha´ly
Berkics Institute
of
Psychology
Eo¨tvo¨s
Lora´nd
University,
Budapest, Hungary
Marc G. Berman The University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
Jan L. Bernheim Human Ecology, End-of-Life Care Research Group, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel, Brussel, Belgium
Anna Bertoni Catholic University of Milan, Milan, Italy
Irma Bertran Institut de Recerca sobre Qualitat de Vida, Universitat de
Girona, Girona, Spain
Katherine B. Bevans Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Geraldo Bezerra da Silva Jr. School of Medicine, Health Sciences Center,
University of Fortaleza, Fortaleza, Ceara, Brazil
Vernon Biaett School of Community Resources and Development, Arizona
State University, Phoenix, AZ, USA
Jerome Bickenbach Schweizer Paraplegiker-Forschung and University of
Lucerne, Nottwil, Switzerland
Contributors
lxxvii

----- Page 77 (native) -----
Liselotte Bieback-Diel Fachbereich 4: Soziale Arbeit und Gesundheit,
Fachhochschule Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
David S. Bieri Department of Urban & Regional Planning, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Silvia Bigatti Social & Behavioral Sciences, Fairbanks School of Public
Health Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN, USA
Philip Bigelow School of Public Health and Health Systems, University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Erik Bihagen Swedish Institute for Social Research, Stockholm University,
Stockholm, Sweden
Martin Binder Science and Technology Policy Research Unit, University
of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, UK
Max Planck Institute of Economics, Evolutionary Economics Group, Jena,
Thuringia, Germany
Luigi Bistagnino Department of Architecture and Design, Politecnico di
Torino, Turin, Italy
Jokob B. Bjorner National Institute of Occupational Health, Copenhagen,
Denmark
Derick Blaauw Department of Economics & Econometrics, University of
Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South Africa
Francisco J. Blancas-Peral Department of Economics, Quantitative
Methods & Economic History, Pablo de Olavide University, Sevilla, Spain
Alison Blay-Palmer Department of Geography and Environmental Studies,
Wilfrid Laurier University, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Rosemary Blieszner Human Development, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg,
VA, USA
Elizabeth Block Geography, Environmental Management and Energy
Studies, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South Africa
Winfried Blum Winfried E.H.Blum University of Natural Resources and
Life Sciences (BOKU), Vienna, Austria
Carme Montserrat Boada Research Institute of Quality of Life, University
of Girona, Girona, Spain
Janette Boazman Department of Education, University of Dallas, Irving,
TX, USA
Magdalena Bobowik Social Psychology and Methodology of Behavior
Sciences, University of the Basque Country, San Sebastia´n, Spain
Jeremy S. Boden Utah Valley University, Orem, UT, USA
Jeroen Boelhouwer The Netherlands Institute for Social Research|SCP,
The Hague, The Netherlands
lxxviii
Contributors

----- Page 78 (native) -----
Petra Bo¨hnke Department of Socio-Economics, School of Business
Administration, Economics and Social Sciences Hamburg University,
Hamburg, Germany
Karen E. Bond Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Franck
Bonnetain Centre
Hospitalier,
Universitaire
de
Besanc¸on,
Besanc¸on, France
Eric Bonsang Research Center for Education and the Labour Market,
Maastricht University and Netspar, Maastricht, The Netherlands
Jamila Bookwala Department of Psychology, Lafayette College, Easton,
PA, USA
Tabea Bork-Hueffer Asia Research Institute, National University of
Singapore, Singapore
Monique Borsenberger Research Unit Social Links at, CEPS/INSTEAD
International
Networks
for
Studies
in
Technology,
Environment,
Alternatives, Dev, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
Michael Bosnjak School of Economics and Management, Free University
of Bozen-Bolzano, Bozen/Bolzano, South Tyrol, Italy
Pauline Boss Family Social Science, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
St. Paul, MN, USA
Jennifer Bossio Department of Psychology, Queen’s University, Kingston,
ON, Canada
Henrietta
Bowden-Jones The
National
Problem
Gambling
Clinic,
London, UK
Angela Bowen College of Nursing, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,
SK, Canada
Nathan Bowling Psychology, Wright State University, Dayton, OH, USA
Christopher J. Boyce Behavioural Science Centre, Stirling Management
School, University of Stirling, Stirling, UK
Gerard Boyce University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, KwaZulu-Natal,
South Africa
Helen Boyce Department of Public Health, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK
Katarina Boye Swedish Institute for Social Research (SOFI), Stockholm
University, Stockholm, Sweden
Ste´phanie
Boyer Department
of
Psychology,
Queen’s
University,
Kingston, ON, Canada
Christopher Boyko ImaginationLancaster, Lancaster Institute for the
Contemporary Arts, Lancaster University, Lancaster, Lancashire, UK
Ernie Boyko Data Centre, Carleton University Library, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Contributors
lxxix

----- Page 79 (native) -----
David
Brackﬁeld Organization
for
Economic
Cooperation
and
Development, Paris, France
Thomas N. Bradbury Department of Psychology, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Kelsey M. Bradshaw Department of Psychology, University of Nevada,
Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV, USA
Maria Brambilla Department of Psychology, Athenaeum Centre for
Family Studies and Research, Catholic University of Milan, Milan, Italy
Marla R. Brassard Department of Health and Behavior Studies, Teachers
College, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
Virginia Braun School of Psychology, The University of Auckland,
Auckland, New Zealand
Angela Brayham Department of Recreation and Leisure Studies, University
of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Ingrid Brdar Department of Psychology, Faculty of Humanities & Social
Sciences, University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia
Marc Brenman Social Justice Consultancy, Kensington, MD, USA
Finbarr Brereton UCD Earth Institute, University College Dublin,
Belﬁeld, Ireland
Sally Brinkman Fraser Mustard Centre, Telethon Institute for Child Health
Research, Centre for Child Health Research, The University of Western
Australia, Perth, WA, Australia
Raquel Britto Physical Therapy, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais,
Belo Horizonte, Brazil
Hilke Brockmann School of Humanities and Social Sciences, Jacobs
University, Bremen, Germany
Meryl Brod The Brod Group, Inc, Mill Valley, CA, USA
Annette Brose Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for
Human Development, Berlin, Germany
Lori A. Brotto Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Werner B. F. Brouwer iBMG/iMTA, Erasmus University Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Abigail Brown Center for Community Research, DePaul University,
Chicago, IL, USA
Ivan Brown Centre for Applied Disability Studies, Brock University,
St. Catharines, ON, Canada
lxxx
Contributors

----- Page 80 (native) -----
Molly Brown Center for Community Research, DePaul University,
Chicago, IL, USA
Roy I. Brown University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada
Flinders University, Bedford Park, SA, Australia
University of New England, Madgwick, NSW, Australia
School of Child and Youth Care, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada
Shanique G. U. Brown Psychology, DePaul University, Chicago, IL, USA
Susan G. Brown
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Hilo,
Hilo, HI, USA
Bengt Br€ulde Dept of Philosophy, Linguistics and Theory of Science,
University of Gothenburg, Goteborg, Sweden
Isabelle Bruno Political Science, University of Lille 2 Lille Center for
Politics and Administration (CERAPS)-CNRS, Lille, France
Piera Brustia Department of Psychology, University of Torino, Torino,
Italy
Susan Brutschy Applied Survey Research, Watsonville, CA, USA
Fred B. Bryant Department of Psychology, Loyola University Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA
Jodi-Anne Brzozowski Statistics Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Sandra
Buchler Otto-Friedrich-University
of
Bamberg,
Bamberg,
Germany
Monica Budowski Department of Social Sciences, University of Fribourg,
Fribourg, Switzerland
Dovile Budryte Department of Political Science, Georgia Gwinnett
College, Lawrenceville, GA, USA
Carrie Bulger Department of Psychology, Quinnipiac University, Hamden,
CT, USA
Matthew P. Buman Exercise and Wellness Program, School of Nutrition
and Health Promotion Arizona State University, Phoenix, AZ, USA
Joelle Burbank The Fund for Peace, Washington, DC, USA
Brendan Burchell Sociology/HSPS, Cambridge University Magdalene
College, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, UK
Camelia Burciu Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ, USA
Elisabeth Burge University of Applied Sciences Western Switzerland,
Geneva, Switzerland
Contributors
lxxxi

----- Page 81 (native) -----
Helen Burke Department of Psychology, Division of Population Health
Sciences, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland
Paul Burnett Division of Research and Commercialisation, Queensland
University of Technology, Kelvin Grove, QLD, Australia
Michelle Nicole Burns Department of Preventive Medicine, Center for
Behavioral
Intervention
Technologies
(CBITs),
Feinberg
School
of
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA
Mel Burton University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, UK
Arndt
B€ussing Institute
of
Integrative
Medicine,
Witten/Herdecke
University, Herdecke, Germany
Jacqueline Butcher Centro de Investigacio´n y Estudios sobre Sociedad
Civil, A.C. (CIESC), Monterrey, Mexico
Carsten Butsch Department of Earth Science, Institute for Geography
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
Brenda Button Department of Medicine, Nursing and Health Sciences,
Melbourne, Department of AIRmed, Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, Monash
University, Prahran, VIC, Australia
Ira Byock Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH, USA
Michel Cabanac
Universite´ Laval, St-Jean-Xstome, QC, Canada
Angela Caldarera Department of Psychology, University of Torino,
Torino, Italy
Melania Calestani Primary Care and Population Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK
Laura Camﬁeld Department of International Development, University of
East Anglia, Norwich, UK
Elena Camisasca Department of Psychology, Catholic University of Milan,
Milan, Italy
Cristian Campagnaro Department of Architecture and Design, Politecnico
di Torino, Turin, Italy
Cameron J. Camp Center for Applied Research in Dementia, Solon,
OH, USA
Benjamin
Campbell Department
of
Anthropology,
University
of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI, USA
Meghan Campbell Private Practice, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Norah Campbell School of Business, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin,
Ireland
Rodrigo Cantarero Community and Regional Planning, University of
Nebraska–Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA
lxxxii
Contributors

----- Page 82 (native) -----
Rocio Canudas Facultad de Ciencias Polı´ticas y Sociales, Universidad
Nacional Auto´noma de Me´xico, Mexico City, Mexico
Catherine M. Capio Institute of Human Performance, The University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Daniel Carlson Department of Sociology, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, USA
Jill Carlton School of Health and Related Research, The University of
Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, South Yorkshire, UK
David Carment NPSIA, Carleton University CDFAI, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Alan
Carr Department
of
Psychology,
University
College
Dublin
Clanwilliam Institute, Dublin, Ireland
Deborah Carr Sociology and Institute for Health, Health Care Policy &
Aging Research, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA
Sarah June Carroll School of Family Life, Brigham Young University,
Provo, UT, USA
T. Patrick Carrabre´ School of Music, Brandon University, Brandon, MB,
Canada
Allison Carter Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Rowan
University, Glassboro, NJ, USA
Justin Carter University of the Rockies, Colorado Springs, CO, USA
Andre´ F. Carvalho Department of Clinical Medicina and Psychiatry
Research Group, Faculty of Medicine, Federal University of Ceare,
Fortaleza, Brazil
Vaˆnia Carvalho Department of Social and Organizational Psychology,
University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal
Charles S. Carver Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral
Gables, FL, USA
Daniela Casale School of Development Studies, University of KwaZulu-
Natal, Durban, South Africa
Ferran Casas Institut de Recerca sobre Qualitat de Vida, Universitat de
Girona, Girona, Spain
Filipa Castanheira Nova School of Business and Economics, Nova
University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal
David Castells-Quintana Grup de Rec¸erca AQR-IREA, Universidad de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
Heather Castleden School for Resource and Environmental Studies,
Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada
Alejandro Castro Solano Department of Psychology, University of
Palermo CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina
Contributors
lxxxiii

----- Page 83 (native) -----
Denise
Catalano Department
of
Rehabilitation,
Social
Work,
and
Addictions, University of North Texas, Denton, TX, USA
Richard F. Catalano School of Social Work, Social Development Research
Group, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Acquadro Catherine Mapi Research Trust, Lyon, France
Franco Cavallo Department of Public health and Pediatrics, University of
Torino, Torino, Italy
Corrado Celata OReD (Regional Observatory for Drug Dependence),
Milan, Italy
David Cella Department of Medical Social Sciences, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA
Ester Cerin Institute of Human Performance, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Nicole I. Cesnales College of Social Work, Florida State University,
Tallahassee, FL, USA
Jad Chaaban American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon
Lee
Chalmers Department
of
Social
Science,
University
of
New
Brunswick, Saint John, NB, Canada
Maria Jose´ Chambel Department of Social and Organizational Psychology,
University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal
Cecilia
Lai
Wan
Chan Department
of
Social
Work
and
Social
Administration, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s
Republic of China
Celia
Hoi
Yan
Chan Department
of
Social
Work
and
Social
Administration, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s
Republic of China
Chui Yi Chan Department of Psychiatry, The University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Eric K. H. Chan Department of ECPS, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Fong Chan Department of Rehabilitation Psychology, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA
Jenny W. H. Chan Department of Psychological Studies and Center for
Psychosocial Health and Aging, Hong Kong Institute of Education,
Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Timothy Hang Yee Chan Department of Social Work and Social
Administration, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s
Republic of China
Chin-fen Chang Institute of Sociology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
lxxxiv
Contributors

----- Page 84 (native) -----
Heng-Hao Chang Department of Sociology, National Taipei University,
Taipei, Taiwan
Hung-Hao Chang Agricultural Economics, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan
Lennon Y. C. Chang Department of Applied Social Studies, City
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Weining Chang Duke-National University of Singapore Graduate School of
Medicine, Singapore
Cheng-Yu
Chao Department
of
Philosophy,
National
Cheng-Chi
University, Taipei, Taiwan
Neena Chappell Department of Sociology, University of Victoria, Victoria,
BC, Canada
Evangelos
Charalambakis Economic
Research
Department,
Special
Studies Division, Bank of Greece, Athens, Greece
Susan
T.
Charles Psychology
and
Social
Behavior,
University
of
California, Irvine, CA, USA
Sarah Chartock Political Science Department, The College of New Jersey
(TCNJ), New York, NY, USA
Coro Chasco Economı´a Aplicada, Universidad Auto´noma de Madrid,
Madrid, Spain
Mark Chekola Department of Philosophy, Minnesota State University
Moorhead, Moorhead, MN, USA
Fei Chen School of Architecture, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
Li-Jung Chen Department of Exercise Health Science, National Taiwan
College of Physical Education, Taichung, Taiwan
Wan-Chi Chen Department of Sociology, National Taipei University,
New Taipei City, Taiwan
Wen-Hung Chen Center for Health Outcomes Research, United BioSource
Corporation, Bethesda, MD, USA
Yi-Fu Chen Department of Sociology, National Taipei University, San Shia
District, New Taipei City, Taiwan
Yin-Zu Chen Department of Sociology, National Taipei University,
New Taipei City, Taiwan
Sheung-Tak Cheng Department of Psychological Studies and Center
for Psychosocial Health and Aging, Hong Kong Institute of Education,
Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Adam Ka Lok Cheung Asia Research Institute, National University of
Singapore, Singapore
Sum Kwing Cheung Early Childhood & Elementary Education Division,
Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Contributors
lxxxv

----- Page 85 (native) -----
Nai-Wen Chi Institute of Human Resource Management, National Sun
Yat-Sen University, Taiwan, Kaohsiung City, Taiwan
Ruobing Chi SISU Intercultural Institute and the University of Hawaii at
Manoa, Honolulu, HI, USA
Enrica Chiappero-Martinetti Department of Political and Social Sciences,
University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy
HDCP–IRC, Institute for Advanced Study, Pavia, Italy
Cheng-Chun
Chien Department
of
Psychology,
National
Taiwan
University, Taipei Taiwan, Republic of China
Ching-Lan Chin Department of Psychology, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China
Mary Chinni Department of ECPS, The University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Danny I. Cho Goodman School of Business, Brock University, St.
Catharines, ON, Canada
Hyun-Sang Cho Department of Psychiatry, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea
Wen-Chi Grace Chou Department of Labor Relations, National Chung
Cheng University, Chiayi County, Taiwan
Yueh-Ching Chou Institute of Health and Welfare Policy, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan
Brian D. Christens School of Human Ecology, University of Wisconsin-
Madison, Madison, WI, USA
Michael Christopher Paciﬁc University, Forest Grove, OR, USA
Cody
Christopherson Department
of
Psychology,
Southern
Oregon
University, Ashland, OR, USA
Hoi-Wai Chua Hong Kong Council of Social Service, Wanchai, Hong
Kong, People’s Republic of China
Vincent Chua Department of Sociology, National University of Singapore,
Singapore
Heejung Chung School of Social Policy, Sociology and Social Research,
University of Kent, Canterbury, Kent, UK
Elvira Cicognani Department of Psychology, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy
Ma´rcia
Aparecida
Ciol Rehabilitation
Medicine,
University
of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA
Claudia Claes University College, Ghent University, Gent, Belgium
Peter Claeys Grup AQR IREA, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
lxxxvi
Contributors

----- Page 86 (native) -----
Miquel Clar Research gropu AQR-IREA, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain
David
M.
Clarke Department
of
Psychological
Medicine,
Monash
University, Monash Medical Centre, Clayton, VIC, Australia
Victoria Clarke Department of Psychology, University of the West of
England, Bristol, UK
Lauren Clary Department of Psychiatry & Pediatrics, Children’s National
Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA
Alma Clavin Department of Geography, National University of Galway,
Galway, Ireland
Jocelyne Clench-Aas Division of Mental Health, Norwegian Institute of
Public Health, Oslo, Norway
Yvan Clermont Statistics Canada DataAngel Policy Research
Alex Coad Science and Technology Policy Research Unit, University of
Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, UK
Department of Buisness and Management, Aalborg University, Aalborg, UK
Edviges Coelho Statistics Portugal, Lisbon, Portugal
Germa` Coenders Department of Economics, University of Girona, Girona,
Spain
Erik H. Cohen School of Education, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel
S. Robin Cohen Palliative Care Research, Oncology, Jewish General
Hospital and McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
Sheldon Cohen Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Steven Cohen Department of Epidemiology and Community Health,
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA
Charles Andrew Cole Department of Landscape Architecture, Penn State
University, State College, PA, USA
Denise Coles Existential Analysis Society of Canada, Vancouver, BC,
Canada
Matteo Colleoni Sociology and Social Research, University of Milan
Bicocca, Milano, Italy
S. Mitchell Colp Educational Studies in School Psychology, University of
Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada
Angelo Compare Department of Human Sciences, University of Bergamo,
Bergamo, Italy
Jennifer Connolly York University, Toronto, ON, Canada
John Connolly DCUBS, Dublin City University, Dublin, Ireland
Contributors
lxxxvii

----- Page 87 (native) -----
Marie Connolly De´partement des sciences e´conomiques, Universite´ du
Que´bec a` Montre´al, Montreal, QC, Canada
Sean Connelly Department of Geography, University of Otago, Dunedin,
New Zealand
Alessandra Conticini Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy
Katrin Conway Mapi Research Trust, Lyon, France
Terry L. Conway Department of Family and Preventive Medicine,
University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA
James Copestake University of Bath, Bath, UK
Luca Coscieme Department of Physical, Earth and Environmental Sciences,
University of Siena, Siena, Italy
Erik Costamagna DAD – Department of Architecture and Design,
Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy
Kathryn M. Coursolle Minnesota Population Center, University of
Minnesota, Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN, USA
Delphine Courvoisier Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva,
Switzerland
Joanne Cox Division of General Pediatrics, Boston Children’s Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA
Marcel Crahay University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Duncan Cramer Department of Social Sciences, Loughborough University,
Loughborough, Leics, UK
Carla Crespo Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, University
of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal
Eric Crettaz Center for the Understanding of Social Processes, University
of Neuchaˆtel, Neuchaˆtel, Switzerland
Susan Crichton Manitoba Healthy Living, Seniors and Consumer Affairs,
Seniors & Healthy Aging Secretariat, Winnipeg, MB, Canada
Crista
N. Crittenden Department of
Psychology,
Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Helen Crocker Department of Public Health, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK
E. Mark Cummings Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame,
Notre Dame, IN, USA
Robert A. Cummins School of Psychology, Deakin University, Melbourne,
VIC, Australia
Janaı´ne Cunha Polese Department of Physical Therapy, Universidade
Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
Physical Therapy, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
lxxxviii
Contributors

----- Page 88 (native) -----
Oriol Cunillera Health Services Research Unit, IMIM-Hospital del Mar,
Barcelona, Spain
Cliff Cunningham Liverpool, Merseyside, UK
Frank Cunningham Department of Philosophy, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada
George B. Cunningham Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA
Luı´s Curral Faculty of Psychology, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal
Melissa Curran The Norton School of Family & Consumer Sciences,
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA
Patrick J. Curran Department of Psychology, University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
Raymond F. Currie University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada
Nele De Cuyper Research Group Work, Organizational and Personnel
Psychology, Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium
Luca D’Acci Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas,
Brazil
University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK
Jens Dahl IWGIA, Copenhagen, Denmark
Thomas Damassa Climate and Energy Program, World Resources Institute,
Washington, DC, USA
Conchita D’Ambrosio Universita’ di Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy
Halvor Dannevig Western Norway Research Institute, Sogndal, Norway
Rosana Aparecida Spadoti Dantas Department of General and Specialized
Nursing, Ribeira˜o Preto College of Nursing, University of Sa˜o Paulo,
Ribeira˜o Preto, Brazil
Abhik Das Social, Statistical & Environmental Sciences Unit, RTI
International, Rockville, MD, USA
Saswati Das Economic Research Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata,
India
Irene
Daskalopoulou Department
of
Economics,
University
of
Peloponnese, Tripolis, Greece
Daiva Daukantaite Department of Psychology, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden
Melanie Davern McCaughey VicHealth Centre for Community Wellbeing,
Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, University of
Melbourne, Carlton, VIC, Australia
Gareth Davey Hong Kong Shue Yan University, Hong Kong, People’s
Republic of China
Contributors
lxxxix

----- Page 89 (native) -----
Eldad Davidov Institute of Sociology, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland
Bilha Davidson-Arad School of Social Work, Tel Aviv, Israel
Megan Davidson School of Physiotherapy, La Trobe University, Bundoora,
VIC, Australia
Gena Davies Graduate Program in Counselling Psychology, Trinity
Western University, Langley, BC, Canada
Jill Dawson Department of Public Health, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK
Ana Carolina de Aguiar Food Engineering, State University of Campinas,
Campinas, Brazil
Jenny De Jong Gierveld Netherlands Interdisciplinary Demographic
Institute, The Hague, The Netherlands
Yvonne de Kort Human–Technology Interaction, Eindhoven University of
Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Intelligent
Lighting
Institute,
Eindhoven
University
of
Technology,
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Willem de Koster Centre for Rotterdam Cultural Sociology (CROCUS),
Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Rayleen De Luca Department of Psychology, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada
Jessica De Maeyer Ghent University College, Faculty of Education, Health
and Social Work (E-QUAL), Gent, Belgium
Elisabeth De Schauwer Disability Studies and Inclusive Education, Ghent
University, Gent, Belgium
Henrica C. W. de Vet Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, VU
University Medical Center, EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
John de Vries Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Jolanda De Vries Department of Medical Psychology, Tilburg University
St. Elisabeth Hospital, Tilburg, The Netherlands
Hans De Witte Research Group Work, Organizational and Personnel
Psychology, Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium
Matthew DeBell Institute for Research in the Social Sciences, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA, USA
Edward Deci Department of Clinical and Social Sciences in Psychology,
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA
Kathleen Deering Divison of AIDS, Department of Medicine, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
xc
Contributors

----- Page 90 (native) -----
Mario del Lı´bano Work & Organizational Psychology, University Jaume I,
Castello´n, Spain
Helen Delacretaz Winnipeg Art Gallery, Winnipeg, MB, Canada
Jan Delhey School of Humanities and Social Sciences, Jacobs University,
Bremen, Germany
Antonella Delle Fave Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia Medico-Chirurgica e
dei Trapianti, Universita` degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy
Anita
DeLongis Department
of
Psychology,
University
of
British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Meliks¸ah
Demir Department
of
Psychology,
Northern
Arizona
University, Flagstaff, AZ, USA
Martin Dempster School of Psychology, Queen’s University Belfast,
Belfast, UK
Ian Denison Sector for External Relations and Public Information, United
Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization, Paris, France
Jefferey J. Derevensky International Centre for Youth Gambling Problems
and High-Risk Behaviors, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
James H. Derzon Center for Analytics and Public Health, Battelle
Memorial Institute, Arlington, VA, USA
Richard Desjardins OECD Directorate for Education, Paris, France
Paula Devine School of Sociology, Social Policy and Social Work, Queen’s
University Belfast, Belfast, UK
Caroline Dewilde Department of Sociology, Tilburg University, Tilburg,
The Netherlands
Ben D’Exelle University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK
Nimarta Dharni Department of Primary Care and Public Health Sciences,
Kings College London, London, UK
Paola Di Blasio Department of Psychology, Catholic University of Milan,
Milan, Italy
Joa˜o Marcos Dias Department of Physical Therapy, Universidade Federal
de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
Paulo C. Dias Philosophy Faculty of the Catholic University of Portugal,
Braga, Portugal
Rosaˆngela Dias Department of Physical Therapy, Federal University of
Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
Theresa
Dicke Department
of
Instructional
Psychology,
Faculty of
Educational Sciences University of Duisburg-Essen Weststadtt€urme, Essen,
Germany
Contributors
xci

----- Page 91 (native) -----
Paul Dickes Research Unit Social Links at, CEPS/INSTEAD International
Networks for Studies in Technology, Environment, Alternatives, Dev, Esch-
sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
Martina Dieckhoff Research Unit Skill Formation and Labor Markets,
Social Science Research Center, Berlin, Germany
Ana Paula Diogo National Accounts, Bank of Portugal, Lisboa, Portugal
Peter DiRita University of Sydney, Baulkham Hills, NSW, Australia
Joerg Dittmann Institute for Social Planning and Urban Development,
Hochschule School of Social Work, Basel, Switzerland
Michael J. Doane Interdisciplinary Ph.D. Program in Social Psychology,
University of Nevada, Reno, NV, USA
Marjorie Dobratz Nursing Program, University of Washington, Tacoma,
WA, USA
Alfred Michael Dockery Curtin Business School, Curtin University, Perth,
WA, Australia
Enis Dogan Assessment Research, Achieve, Washington, DC, USA
Denise Doiron Australian School of Business, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Paddy Dolan School of Marketing, College of Business, Dublin Institute of
Technology, Dublin, Ireland
Beth Doll Department of Educational Psychology, University of Nebraska–
Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA
Mo´nica Domı´nguez-Serrano Department of Economics, Quantitative
Methods & Economic History, Pablo de Olavide University, Sevilla, Spain
Ronnie Donaldson Department of Geography and Environmental Studies,
University of Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch, South Africa
Silvia Donato Catholic University of Milan, Cremona, Italy
Holly
Donohoe Department
of
Tourism,
Recreation,
and
Sport
Management, College of Health and Human Performance University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
Brad
Donohue Department
of
Psychology,
University
of
Nevada,
Las Vegas, NV, USA
Eve-Anne M. Doohan Department of Communication Studies, University
of San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
Kimberly
(Kadie)
Dooley Department
of
Educational
Psychology,
University of Nebraska–Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA
Eduardo Dopico Department of Education Sciences, University of Oviedo,
Oviedo, Asturias, Spain
xcii
Contributors

----- Page 92 (native) -----
Kelly L. Drake Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
William Drake Urban Affairs and Planning Program, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA, USA
Emanuela Dreassi Department of Statistics, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy
Rebecca Susan Dresser Washington University School of Law, St. Louis,
MO, USA
Sonja Drobnicˇ Bremen International Graduate School of Social Sciences
(BIGSSS), University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany
Kathleen T. Drucker TIMSS & PIRLS International Study Center, Boston
College, Chesnut Hill, MA, USA
Hongyan Du Research Institute, NorthShore University HealthSystem,
Evanston, IL, USA
Tatiana Dubayova Department of Special Education, Faculty of Education,
University of Presov, Presov, Slovakia
Dee Duffy Department of Marketing, Arthur Ryan Retail Centre, Dublin
Institute of Technology, Dublin, Ireland
Ge´rard Duhaime De´partement de Sociologie, Universite´ Laval, Que´bec,
QC, Canada
Adoree Durayappah University of Pennsylvania Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA, USA
Joan Durrant Faculty of Family Social Sciences, Mauro Centre for Peace &
Justice, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada
Francisca Dussaillant Facultad de Gobierno, Universidad del Desarrollo,
Santiago, Chile
Marion Dutre´vis Faculty of Educational Science, University of Geneva,
Geneva, Switzerland
Peter Easton Educational Leadership and Policy Studies, Florida State
University, Tallahassee, FL, USA
Asia A. Eaton Psychology and Women’s Studies, Florida International
University, Miami, FL, USA
Richard Eckersley Australia 21 Ltd, Canberra, Australia
Jason D. Edgerton Department of Sociology, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada
Richard Edlin Health Systems, School of Population Health, Faculty of
Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New
Zealand
Aquilla A. Edwards Department of Health and Behavior Studies, Teachers
College, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
Contributors
xciii

----- Page 93 (native) -----
Mark Edwards School of Public Policy, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR, USA
Mark G. Edwards Business School, University of Western Australia,
Crawley, WA, Australia
Todd C. Edwards Department of Health Services, Seattle Quality of Life
Group, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
EFA
Global
Monitoring Report
Team Education
for All
Global
Monitoring Report, UNESCO, Paris, France
Michael Eid Department of Education and Psychology, Free University of
Berlin, Berlin, Germany
Nı´els Einarsson Stefansson Arctic Institute, Akureyri, Iceland
Ahmet Ekici Faculty of Business Administration, Bilkent University,
Ankara, Turkey
Mona Eklund Department of Health Sciences, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden
Karma
El-Hassan Ofﬁce
of
Institutional
Research
&
Assessment,
American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon
Kamel
El-Hedhli College
of
Business
Administration,
Abu
Dhabi
University, Abu Dhabi, UAE
Antonio Elizalde CISPO Centro de Investigaciones Sociedad y Polı´ticas
Pu´blicas, Universidad de Los Lagos, Santiago, Chile
Daniel Elleker Department of Psychology, Vancouver Island University,
Nanaimo, BC, Canada
Andrew Elliot Department of Clinical & Social Sciences in Psychology,
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA
Marta Elliott University of Nevada, Reno, NV, USA
Susan Elliott Faculty of Applied Health Sciences, University of Waterloo,
Waterloo, ON, Canada
Christopher Ellison University of Texas, San Antonio, TX, USA
Paula Elosua University of the Basque Country, San Sebastian, Spain
Gerald R. Elsworth Population Health Strategic Research Centre, Deakin
University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
Rachel
Engler-Stringer Department
of
Community
Health
and
Epidemiology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada
Han Entzinger Department of Sociology, Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Dirk Enzmann Institute of Criminal Sciences, University of Hamburg,
Faculty of Law, Hamburg, Germany
xciv
Contributors

----- Page 94 (native) -----
Edgar
Erdfelder Lehrstuhl
Psychologie
III,
Universit€at
Mannheim,
Mannheim, Germany
Monica Eriksson Department of Nursing, Health and Culture, Folkh€alsan
Research Centre, University West, Trollh€attan, Sweden
Richard J. Estes School of Social Policy & Practice (SP2), University of
Pennsylvania, Narberth, PA, USA
Panagiotis Evangelopoulos Department of Economics, University of
Peloponnese, Tripolis, Greece
Meredyth Evans Center for Community Research, DePaul University,
Chicago, IL, USA
Marianne Ewertz Department of Oncology Odense University Hospital,
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
John Eyles School of Geography and Earth Sciences, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada
Fernando Fabris Derecho y Ciencia Polı´tica, Universidad Nacional de La
Matanza – Buenos Aires Primera Escuela Privada de Psicologı´a Social - Bs.
As., Ciudad Auto´noma de Buenos Aires, Argentina
Breanne Fahs Arizona State University, Avondale, AZ, USA
J€urgen Faik FaMa-Neue Frankfurter Sozialforschung, Frankfurt/Main,
Germany
Julie Falcon Institut des Sciences Sociales, Life Course and Inequality
Centre, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
George Fallis York University, Toronto, ON, Canada
Barbara Fallon Factor-Inwentash Faculty of Social Work, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Ulrike Famira-Muehlberger Labour Market, Income and Social Policy,
Austrian Institute of Economic Research, Vienna, Austria
Ali Farazmand Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL, USA
Christina Faria Department of Physical Therapy, Universidade Federal de
Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
Anete Farina Department of Social Psychology, University of S. Paulo,
Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil
James Farnam Farnam Associates, LLC, New Haven, CT, USA
Marco Fattore Department of Statistics and Quantitative Methods,
Universita` degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy
Giovanni A. Fava Dipartimento di Psicologia, Universita` di Bologna,
Bologna, Italy
Benjamin Fay Department of Psychology, Florida International University,
Miami, FL, USA
Contributors
xcv

----- Page 95 (native) -----
Ben Feldmeyer School of Criminal Justice, University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, OH, USA
Erika Felix Gevirtz Graduate School of Education, University of California,
Santa Barbara, CA, USA
Kaylene J. Fellows School of Family Life, Brigham Young University,
Provo, UT, USA
Roger Feltman Department of Clinical & Social Sciences in Psychology,
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA
Qiushi Feng Department of Sociology, National University of Singapore,
Singapore
Cath Fenton Public Health, CRIPACC, University of Hertfordshire Public
Health England, North Central London, UK
Marı´a Beatriz Fernan´ Dez Lorca Instituto de Sociologı´a, Pontiﬁcia
Universidad Cato´lica de Chile, Santiago, Chile
Rocı´o Fernandez-Ballesteros Department of Psychobiology and Health,
Autonomous University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain
Gloria Fernandez-Mayoralas Spanish National Research Council (CSIC),
Centre for Human and Social Sciences (CCHS), Institute of Economics,
Geography and Demography (IEGD), Madrid, Spain
Rajulton
Fernando Department
of
Sociology,
Western
University,
London, ON, Canada
Gema Ferna´ndez-Avile´s Department of Statistics of the Faculty of Law and
Social Sciences, University of Castile-La Mancha, Toledo, Spain
Enrique Ferna´ndez-Macias Department of Sociology, University of
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain
Pier
Alda
Ferrari Department
of
Economics,
Management
and
Quantitative Methods, Universita` degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy
Lara Noronha Ferreira University of the Algarve-ESGHT, Centre for
Health Studies and Research, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal
Pedro Lopes Ferreira Faculty of Economics, Centre for Health Studies and
Research, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal
Montserrat Ferrer Health Services Research Unit, IMIM (Hospital del Mar
Research Institute), Barcelona, Spain
Ada Ferrer-i-Carbonell Institut d’Ana`lisi Econo`mica (IAE-CSIC) &
Barcelona GSE, Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain
Mark
Ferro Department
of
Psychiatry
and
Behavioural
Neurosciences,
Offord
Centre
for
Child
Studies,
McMaster
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada
Priscilla Fialho Department of Economics, University College London,
London, UK
xcvi
Contributors

----- Page 96 (native) -----
Christiane Fiege Department of Educational Research and Educational
Psychology, Institute of Education, University of T€ubingen, T€ubingen,
Germany
Cristina Figuer Department of Psychology, University of Girona,
Girona, Spain
Holmes
Finch Department
of
Educational
Psychology,
Ball
State
University, Muncie, IN, USA
Chava Finkler School of Social Work, St. John’s College Memorial
University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, NL, Canada
Judith L. Fischer Department of Human Development & Family Studies,
Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX, USA
Anna Halloran Fisher University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Kimberly Fisher Centre for Time Use Research, Department of Sociology,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
William A. Fisher Department of Psychology and Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, University of Western Ontario, ON, Canada
EﬁFitriana Faculty of Psychology, Padjadjaran University, Jatinangor-
Sumedang, Indonesia
Constance A. Flanagan School of Human Ecology, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA
Kevin J. Flannelly Center for Psychosocial Research, Massapequa,
NY, USA
Charles Fleury De´partement de Sociologie, Universite´ Laval, Que´bec,
QC, Canada
Florian
Fliegner Unit
Inequality
and
Social
Integration
(USI),
Wissenschaftszentrum Berlin f€ur Sozialforschung, Berlin, Germany
Bertine M. J. Flokstra-de Blok Department of General Practice (GRIAC
Research Institute), University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
Cinthya
A.
Flores-Jimenez Unidad
de
Investigaciones
y Servicios
Psicolo´gicos, Universidad Auto´noma del Estado de Morelos, Cuernavaca,
Mexico
Yeung Yeung Fok The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
People’s Republic of China
Daniel Yee Tak Fong School of Nursing, LiKaShing Faculty of Medicine,
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Elsa Fontainha Department of Economics, ISEG – Technical University of
Lisbon, Lisboa, Portugal
Phil Foreman Special Education Centre, The University of Newcastle,
Callaghan, NSW, Australia
Contributors
xcvii

----- Page 97 (native) -----
Barry Forer University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Carlos G. Forero Health Services Research Unit, IMIM-Hospital del Mar,
CIBER Epidemiologı´a y Salud Pu´blica (CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain
Maria Joa˜o Forjaz National School of Public Health, Institute of Health
Carlos III and REDISSEC, Madrid, Spain
Christopher B. Forrest Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Leonard Davis
Institute of Health Economics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
USA
Nigel Forrest School of Sustainability, Arizona State University, Tempe,
AZ, USA
Ann Forsyth Department of Urban Planning and Design, Harvard
Universities, Ithaca, NY, USA
Lina Fortes-Ferreira School of Business Administration, Polytechnic
Institute of Setu´bal, Setu´bal, Portugal
Rachel Fouladi Department of Psychology, Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, BC, Canada
Renata Franc Institute of social sciences Ivo Pilar, Zagreb, Croatia
Leslie J. Francis University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
David John Frank Department of Sociology, University of California,
Irvine, CA, USA
Richard M. Frankel Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA
Bill Freedman Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS,
Canada
Brian F. French College of Education, Washington State University,
Pullman, WA, USA
Carly K. Friedman Department of Psychology, Samford University,
Birmingham, AL, USA
Elliot Friedman Department of Human Development and Family Studies,
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
Michael B. Frisch Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Baylor
University, Waco, TX, USA
Daniel Frynta Department of Zoology, Charles University of Prague,
Prague, Czech Republic
Ann Fudge Schormans School of Social Work, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada
Nicole Fuentes Department of Economics, Universidad de Monterrey,
Monterrey, Mexico
xcviii
Contributors

----- Page 98 (native) -----
Alejandra Fuentes-Garcı´a School of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Chile, Santiago, Chile
Sara M. Fulmer Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame,
Notre Dame, IN, USA
Bernard Funston Canadian Polar Commission, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Michael
Furlong Department
of
Counseling,
Clinical,
and
School
Psychology, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA
Adrian Furnham University College London, London, UK
Erica Gaddis SWCA Environmental Consultants Inc, Salt Lake City,
UT, USA
Anne Gadermann Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA, USA
Allison E. Gaffey Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame,
Notre Dame, IN, USA
Dario Galati Psychology Department, University of Turin, Turin, Italy
Tali Gal School of Criminology, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel
Kathleen Galek HealthCare Chaplaincy, New York, NY, USA
Karen Gallant School of Health and Human Performance, Dalhousie
University, Halifax, NS, Canada
Alexandra Ganglmair-Wooliscroft Department of Marketing, University
of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
Yang Gao School of Public Health and Primary Care, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Gustavo
Adolfo
Garcı´a
Cruz Department
of
Applied
Economics,
Universitat Auto`noma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
Elisa Garcia-Espan˜a Criminal Law and Criminology, University of
Malaga, Ma´laga, Spain
Eva Garcia-Vazquez Department of Functional Biology, University of
Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain
Michel
L.
Garenne Re´siliences,
Institut
de
Recherche
pour
le
De´veloppement, Paris, France
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa
Olatz Garin IMIM Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute, Barcelona,
Spain
Andrew Garratt Norwegian Knowledge Centre for the Health Services,
Oslo, Norway
Contributors
xcix

----- Page 99 (native) -----
Christelle Garrouste Laboratoire d’Economie d’Orle´ans (LEO), Orle´ans
University, Orle´ans, France
Ashley Gaskin Offord Centre for Child Studies, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada
Michael Gastrow Education, Science and Skills Development, Human
Sciences Research Council, Cape Town, South Africa
Christian Geiser Department of Psychology, Utah State University, Logan,
UT, USA
Claudia Geist Department of Sociology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
UT, USA
Pamela A. Geller Department of Psychology, Drexel University and Drexel
University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Marcella Gemelli Department of Sociology, Arizona State University,
Tempe, AZ, USA
Angela Genova Department of Economics, Society, Politics, University of
degli Urbino, Urbino, Italy
Melissa George Department of Psychology, University of South Carolina,
Columbia, SC, USA
Eva Gerino Department of Psychology, University of Torino, Torino, Italy
Jonathan Gershuny Centre for Time Use Research, Department of
Sociology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Dimitrios Giannias Business Administration, Hellenic Open University,
Patra, Greece
Jennifer Giarratano Dean’s Ofﬁce, Andrew Young School of Policy
Studies, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA, USA
Robert Gibbons Departments of Health Studies, Medicine, and Psychiatry,
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Chris L. Gibson University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
Robert Gibson Department of Environment and Resource Studies, Faculty
of Environment, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Brennan Gilbert Paciﬁc University, Forest Grove, OR, USA
Howard Giles Communication Department, University of California, Santa
Barbara, CA, USA
Jennifer
Gillies Alzheimer
Societies
of
Kitchener-Waterloo
and
Cambridge, ON, Canada
A. R. Gillis University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Richard C. Gilman Division of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics,
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA
c
Contributors

----- Page 100 (native) -----
Barbara Given College of Nursing, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, MI, USA
Kolja Glatzer University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna,
Austria
Wolfgang Glatzer Goethe-University Frankfurt am Main, Odra, Germany
Trish Glazebrook Department of Philosophy and Religion Studies,
University of North Texas, Denton, TX, USA
Judith
Gl€uck Department
of
Psychology,
Alpen-Adria
Universit€at
Klagenfurt, Klagenfurt, Austria
Troy D. Glover Department of Recreation and Leisure Studies, Healthy
Communities Research Network, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON,
Canada
Jan Goebel DIW Berlin Socio-Economic Panel Study, Berlin, Germany
Rajeev K. Goel Department of Economics, Illinois State University,
Normal, IL, USA
Francisco J. Goerlich Department of Economic Analysis, University of
Valencia and Instituto Valenciano de Investigaciones Economicas (IVIE),
Valencia, Spain
Achim Goerres University of Duisburg-Essen, Duisburg, Germany
Amede Gogovor Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal,
QC, Canada
Gustave Goldmann Faculty of Social Sciences, Department of Sociology
and Anthropology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Paul
Goldschagg University
of
the
Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg,
South Africa
Hugo Gomes School of Geography, Politics and Sociology, Newcastle
University, Newcastle, UK
Laura E. Gomez Department of Psychology, Universidad de Oviedo,
Oviedo, Spain
Vanna Gonzales Faculty of Justice and Social Inquiry, School of Social
Transformation, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
Mo`nica Gonza´lez Quality of Life Research Institute, University of Girona,
Girona, Spain
Nerea Gonza´lez Hospital Galdakao-Usansolo, Research Unit, Health
Services Research on Chronic Diseases Network (REDISSEC), Galdakao,
Spain
Eduardo Gonza´lez Fidalgo Department of Business Administration,
University of Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain
Alynn Gordon Radford University, Radford, VA, USA
Contributors
ci

----- Page 101 (native) -----
David L. A. Gordon School of Urban and Regional Planning, Queen’s
University, Kingston, ON, Canada
Janet C. Gornick Luxembourg Income Study (LIS), Luxembourg Graduate
Center, City University of New York, New York, NY, USA
Benjamin H. Gottlieb Department of Psychology, University of Guelph,
Guelph, ON, Canada
Konrad Go¨tz ISOE Institute for Social-Ecological Research, Frankfurt/
Main, Germany
Valdiney V. Gouveia Department of Psychology, Federal University of
Paraı´ba, Joa˜o Pessoa, Brazil
Reena Govindji Centre for Applied Positive Psychology, Coventry, UK
Enrique Gracia Department of Social Psychology, University of Valencia,
Valencia, Spain
Carol
Graham Global
Economy
and
Development
Program,
The
Brookings Institution; School of Public Policy, University of Maryland,
Washington, DC, USA
Oliver Gralla Urology/Andrology, Urological Practice Urologie-am-Ring,
Cologne, Germany
Jill L. Grant School of Planning, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS,
Canada
Marit Graue Centre for Evidence–Based Practice, Bergen University
College, Bergen, Norway
Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway
Silvana Greco Faculty of Sociology, Department of Sociology and Social
Research, University of Mailano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy
Gary Green Department of Community & Environmental Sociology,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA
Jeffrey H. Greenhaus Department of Management, LeBow College of
Business Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Arie T. Greenleaf Counselor Education, The University of Arkansas,
Fayetteville, AR, USA
Aiden Gregg School of Psychology, University of Southampton, England,
UK
Bent Greve Department of Society and Globalisation, Roskilde University,
Roskilde, Denmark
Sam Grey University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada
Donald Greydanus Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine,
Western Michigan University School of Medicine, Kalamazoo, MI, USA
Abigail Grifﬁn Oxford Outcomes, Oxford, UK
cii
Contributors

----- Page 102 (native) -----
James W. Grifﬁth Department of Medical Social Sciences, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA
Leonardo Grilli Department of Statistics ‘G. Paernti’, University of
Florence, Florence, Italy
Michael C. Grillo Political Science, Schreiner University, Kerrville,
TX, USA
Scott Grills Department of Sociology, Brandon University, Brandon,
MB, Canada
Michael Grimm Department of Economics, University of Passau, Passau,
Germany
Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), Bonn, Germany
Henrietta Gro¨nlund Department of Practical Theology, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
Peter P. Groenewegen Netherlands Institute for Health Services Research
(NIVEL), Utrecht, The Netherlands
Enzo Grossi Medical, Bracco, San Donato Milanese, Italy
Daphna Gross-Manos School of Social Work and Social Welfare, Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Frederick M. E. Grouzet Department of Psychology, University of
Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada
Alyson Grove Oxford Centre for Innovation, Oxford, UK
Sandeep Grover Department of Psychiatry, Post-Graduate Institute of
Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India
Bernie Grummell Education Department, NUI Maynooth, Kildare, Ireland
Joseph G. Grzywacz Department of Human Development and Family
Science, Oklahoma State University, Tulsa, OK, USA
Inmaculada Silla Guerola CIEMAT-CISOT, Research Centre for Energy,
Environment and Technology-Sociotechnical Research Centre, Barcelona,
Spain
Elisabeth Gugl Department of Economics, University of Victoria, Victoria,
BC, Canada
Martin Guhn Human Early Learning Partnership, School of Population and
Public Health, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Monica Guillen-Royo Centre for Development and the Environment,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
Jennifer Gulyas Institute for Social and Political Research Department of
Social Sciences, Goethe-Universit€at Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Contributors
ciii

----- Page 103 (native) -----
A. Birgitta Gunnarsson Unit for Research and Development, Kronoberg
County Council, V€axjo¨, Sweden
Eda Gurel-Atay School of Business and Leadership, University of Puget
Sound, Tacoma, WA, USA
Florencia Gutierrez The Annie E. Casey Foundation, Baltimore, MD, USA
Wencke
Gwozdz Department
of
Intercultural
Communication
&
Management, Copenhagen Business School, Frederiksberg, Denmark
Carolyn Gwyer Brandon University, Brandon, MB, Canada
Maria Haak Department of Health Sciences, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden
Johanna Haapam€aki Department of Gastroenterology, Helsinki University
Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland
Dwight Haase Department of Sociology and Anthropology, University of
Toledo, Toledo, OH, USA
Karmit Haber Israel Democracy Institute and Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Muhammad (Ahsan) Habib School of Planning, Department of Civil and
Resource Engineering (cross), Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada
Roland Habich Data Management, Social Science Research Center (WZB),
Berlin, Germany
Knut Arne Hagtvet Department of Psychology, Faculty of Social Sciences,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
Elizabeth Hahn Department of Medical Social Sciences, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA
Samira Halabi World Bank, Washington, DC, USA
Gert Martin Hald University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
Alicia Hall Department of Philosophy and Humanities, University of Alaska
Fairbanks, Fairbanks, AK, USA
Daniel L. Hall Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral
Gables, FL, USA
Elizabeth L. Hall Biola University, Rosemead School of Psychology,
La Mirada, CA, USA
Jonathan Hall Global Project on Measuring the Progress of Societies,
OECD, Paris, France
Kathryn Hall Private Practice, Princeton, NJ, USA
Pedro Hallal Postgraduate
Program in Physical Education, Federal
University of Pelotas, Brazil, Pelotas, RS, Brazil
Jeffrey Hallo Parks, Recreation, and Tourism Management, Clemson
University, Clemson, SC, USA
civ
Contributors

----- Page 104 (native) -----
Nancy A. Hamilton Department of Psychology, University of Kansas,
Lawrence, KS, USA
Mette Hammer Novo Nordisk Inc, Søborg, Denmark
Mary Hampton Psychology Department, Luther College, University of
Regina, Regina, SK, Canada
Karen S. Hamrick U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research
Service, Washington, DC, USA
Naheed Hanif Manchester, Greater Manchester, UK
Breffni Hannon Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health
Network, Toronto, ON, Canada
Mary C. Hano North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA
Dorte Gilsa˚ Hansen National Research Centre for Cancer Rehabilitation,
Research Unit of General Practice, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,
Denmark
Thomas Hansen Norwegian Social Research (NOVA), Oslo, Norway
Lars Hansson Department of Health Sciences, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden
Kristin Haraldstad Faculty of Health and Sport Sciences, University of
Agder, Kristiansand, Norway
Henry G. Harder School of Health Sciences, University of Northern British
Columbia, Prince George, BC, Canada
Mark Harniss Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle,
WA, USA
Stefan Harrendorf Institute of Criminal Law and Justice, Georg-August-
Universit€at Go¨ttingen, Go¨ttingen, Germany
Mark Harrison Manchester Centre for Health Economics, Institute of
Population Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
Patrick R. Harrison Department of Psychology, Loyola University
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Che Ismail Hasanah Department of Psychiatry, School of Medical Sciences
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kota Bharu, Malaysia
Ruth Hasberg Institute for Economics, Labour and Culture, Johann
Wolfgang Goethe-University, Frankfurt, Germany
Debbie Haski-Leventhal Macquarie Graduate School of Management,
Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, Australia
Elaine C. Hatﬁeld Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii,
Honolulu, HI, USA
Michael Hatﬁeld Statistics Canada Survey Management, Human Resources
and Skills Development Canada, Gatineau, Que´bec, QC, Canada
Contributors
cv

----- Page 105 (native) -----
Adrian Hatos Department of Sociology, Social Work and Philosophy,
University of Oradea, Oradea, Romania
Daniel Haybron Department of Philosophy, Saint Louis University,
St. Louis, MO, USA
Joseph Hayes Mental Health Sciences Unit, University College London,
London, UK
Benjamin
Hayter Department
of
Sociology,
University
of
Kansas,
Lawrence, KS, USA
R. David Hayward School of Public Health, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA
Bruce Headey Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social
Research, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
Bill Hebenton Centre for Criminology and Criminal Justice, School of Law,
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
Corinne
Heckmann Organisation
of
Economic
Co-operation
and
Development, Paris, France
Karen Heisler Department of Geography, Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, BC, Canada
Eric B. Hekler Nutrition Program, School of Nutrition and Health
Promotion, Arizona State University, Phoenix, AZ, USA
Timothy Edmund Heleniak Department of Geography, University of
Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
Sølvi Helseth Faculty of Health Sciences, Oslo and Akershus University
College of Applied Sciences, Oslo, Norway
Thorsten Henne Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Basel,
Basel, Switzerland
Todd I. Herrenkohl School of Social Work, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA
Marı´a
Soledad
Herrera
Ponce Instituto
de
Sociologı´a,
Pontiﬁcia
Universidad Cato´lica de Chile, Santiago, Chile
Paul Hess Department of Geography and Planning, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada
Francis Heylighen Evolution, Complexity and Cognition Group, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium
Bjo¨rn Hibbel Swedish Council for Information on Alcohol and Other Drugs
(CAN), Stockholm, Sweden
Anne Hickey Department of Psychology, Division of Population Health
Sciences, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland
Margo Hilbrecht Faculty of Applied Health Sciences, University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
cvi
Contributors

----- Page 106 (native) -----
Andrea Hildebrandt Department of Psychology, Humboldt-University at
Berlin, Berlin, Germany
E. Jeffrey Hill School of Family Life, Brigham Young University, Provo,
UT, USA
Roderick Hill Department of Social Science, University of New Brunswick,
Saint John, NB, Canada
Kimberly Hills Department of Psychology, University of South Carolina,
Columbia, SC, USA
Stephen Hincks Centre for Urban Policy Studies, School of Environment
and Development, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
Henry Hinkle Department of Psychology, Northern Illinois University,
DeKalb, IL, USA
Jeong-Hwa Ho Department of Sociology, Ajou University, Suwon,
Republic of Korea
Hannah Hoechner Department of International Development, University
of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Joeri Hofmans Work and Organizational Psychology, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel, Brussel, Belgium
Sarah J. Hogue School of Continuing Education, Columbia University,
New York, USA
Meg
Holden Urban
Studies/Geography,
Simon
Fraser
University,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Daniel Holgado Departamento de Psicologı´a Social, Universidad de
Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain
Elizabeth Holliday Centre for Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia
So¨ren Holmberg University of Gothenburg, Go¨teborg, Sweden
Sara Holton School of Public Health & Preventive Medicine, Monash
University, Clayton, VIC, Australia
Martin Holzhausen Institute of Biometry and Clinical Epidemiology,
Charite´ – Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany
Vera Hoorens Centre for Social and Cultural Psychology, University of
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Makiko Hori Department of Sociology, Wichita State University, Wichita,
KS, USA
Thelma S. Horn Department of Kinesiology and Health, Miami University,
Oxford, OH, USA
Pierre Horwitz School of Natural Sciences, Edith Cowan University,
Joondalup, Australia
Contributors
cvii

----- Page 107 (native) -----
Bryony Hoskins University of Southampton, Southampton, UK
Charles Hostovsky´ Catholic University of America, Washington, DC, USA
Seth Hothem Northeast Ohio Regional Sewer District, Cleveland, OH, USA
Jaclyn
D.
Houston Department
of
Psychology, DePaul
University,
Chicago, IL, USA
Grete K. Hovelsrud CICERO, Oslo, Norway
Andrea L. Howard Department of Psychology, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
Carrie Williams Howe Vermont Campus Compact, St. Michocel’s
College, Colchester, VT, USA
Patty Howell Healthy Relationships California, World Class Relationships
LLC, Leucadia, CA, USA
Hsin-Huang Michael Hsiao Institute of Sociology, Academia Sinica,
Taipei, Taiwan
Chi-Cheng Huang Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan
Department of General Surgery, Cathay General Hospital School of
Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, Taipei, Taiwan
Ching-Shui Huang Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan
Jason L. Huang Department of Psychology, Wayne State University,
Detroit, MI, USA
Wendy Y. Huang Department of Sports Science & Physical Education, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Yan-hua Huang Department of Occupational Therapy, California State
University, Carson, CA, USA
Richard Hu Faculty of Business and Government, University of Canberra,
Canberra, Australia
Shu
Hu Sociology
Department,
National
University
of
Singapore,
Singapore
Anita M. Hubley Measurement, Evaluation, & Research Methodology
(MERM), Adult Development and Psychometrics Lab, The University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Scott Huebner Department of Psychology, University of South Carolina,
Columbia, SC, USA
Chuck Humphrey University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada
Denis Huschka Rat f€ur Sozial- und Wirtschaftsdaten, Berlin, Germany
Lee Huskey Department of Economics, College of Business and Public
Policy, University of Alaska Anchorage, Anchorage, AK, USA
Hayley Hutchings College of Medicine, Swansea University, Swansea, UK
cviii
Contributors

----- Page 108 (native) -----
Jing-Shiang Hwang Institute of Statistical Science, Academia Sinica,
Taipei, Taiwan
Thomas Hyphantis Department of Psychiatry, University of Ioannina,
Ioannina, Greece
Apostolos Iacovides 3rd Department of Psychiatry, Medical School,
Aristotle
University
of
Thessaloniki
AHEPA
General
Hospital,
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece
Raffaella Iafrate Catholic University of Milan, Cremona, Italy
Mustapha Ibn Boamah Department of Social Science, University of New
Brunswick, Saint John, NB, Canada
Muradali Ibrahimo Department of Economics, Technical University of
Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal
Gregoris Iconomou Division of Oncology – Department of Medicine,
University of Patras Medical School, Patras, Greece
Lori Idlout Iqaluit, Nunavut, Canada
Domenica Fioredistella Iezzi Tor Vergata University – Rome, Rome, Italy
Ivars Ijabs Department of Political Science, University of Latvia, Riga,
Latvia
Nicola´s Silva Illanes School of Public Health, University of Chile, Santiago
de Chile, Chile
Marco
Ingrosso Department
of
Humanities
–
Ferrara
University,
Laboratory of Social Studies on Health and Social Wellness, Ferrara, Italy
Takashi Inoguchi University of Niigata Prefecture, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo,
Japan
Patrick R. Ireland Department of Social Sciences, Illinois Institute of
Technology, Chicago, IL, USA
Duncan Ironmonger Department of Economics, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, VIC, Australia
Anat Itay The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Gayle Y. Iwamasa Department of Veterans Affairs, Lafayette, IN, USA
Susanne Iwarsson Department of Health Sciences, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden
Yoshitaka Iwasaki Community-University Partnership for the Study of
Children, Youth, and Families, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB,
Canada
Anne M. Izod Department of Public Administrtation, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, NC, USA
Sue
Jackson Student
Support
Services,
Queensland
University
of
Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Contributors
cix

----- Page 109 (native) -----
Russell N. James III Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX, USA
Zoe James University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Yuri Jang The University of Texas, Austin, TX, USA
Magdalena Janus Offord Centre for Child Studies, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada
Florence Jany-Catrice Faculty of Economics and Sociology, University
Lille1 CLERSE and IUF, Villeneuve d’Ascq Ce´dex, France
Bonnie Janzen Department of Community Health & Epidemiology,
College of Medicine University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada
Haydn Jarrett Institute of Sport and Exercise Science, University of
Worcester, Worcester, UK
Leonard Jason Center for Community Research, DePaul University,
Chicago, IL, USA
Bonnie Jeffery Faculty of Social Work, University of Regina, Prince Albert,
SK, Canada
Leo W. Jeffres School of Communication, Cleveland State University,
Cleveland, OH, USA
Crispin Jenkinson Department of Public Health, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK
Jeffrey Jenson Graduate School of Social Work, University of Denver,
Denver, CO, USA
Maria Jeria Universidad Diego Portales, Santiago, Chile
Jochen Jesinghaus JJ, European Commission, Ispra, Italy
Guowei Jian School of Communication, Cleveland State University,
Cleveland, OH, USA
Yingchun Ji National University of Singapore, Singapore
Shane Jimerson UC-Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA
Glo´ria Jo´lluskin Human and Social Sciences Department, Fernando Pessoa
University, Porto, Portugal
Morgen Johansen Public Administration Program - University of Hawaii,
Honolulu, HI, USA
Geoffrey Johnson University of British Columbia, Faculty of Medicine,
Prince George, BC, Canada
University of Northern British Columbia, School of Health Sciences, Prince
George, BC, Canada
Joy L. Johnson Department of Nursing, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
cx
Contributors

----- Page 110 (native) -----
Laura Johnson School of Planning, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON,
Canada
Matthew Johnson Department of Politics, University of York, York, UK
Shanthi Johnson Faculty of Kinesiology and Health Studies, University of
Regina, Regina, SK, Canada
Grace Johnston School of Health Administration, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, NS, Canada
Ron Johnston School of Geographical Sciences, University of Bristol,
Bristol, UK
Blake
Jones Department
of
Human
and
Community
Development,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
Carys Jones School of Environment and Development (Planning &
Environmental Management), University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
Paul W. Jones Division of Clinical Science, St George’s, University of
London, London, UK
Thomas E. Jordan University of Missouri, St. Louis, MO, USA
Katja Joronen School of Health Sciences, University of Tampere,
Tampere, Finland
Alain Joseph Applied Research, Nova Scotia Community College NSCC
Applied Energy Research Lab, Dartmouth, NS, Canada
John T. Jost New York University, New York, NY, USA
Susyan Jou Graduate School of Criminology, National Taipei University,
New Taipei City, Taiwan
Dominique Joye Institut des Sciences Sociales, Life Course and Inequality
Centre, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
Andrea Juan Education, Science and Skills Development, Human Sciences
Research Council, Cape Town, South Africa
Arturo Juarez-Garcia Universidad Autonoma del Estado de Morelos,
Cuernavaca, Mexico
Georg Juckel Universitatsklinikum Bochum, Bochum, Germany
Allyson Jule Gender Studies Institute, Trinity Western University, Langley,
BC, Canada
Elia Kacapyr Department of Economics, Ithaca College, Ithaca, NY, USA
Konstantinos Kafetsios Department of Psychology, University of Crete,
Rethymno, Greece
Burcu Kaftanoglu School of Community Resources and Development,
Arizona State University, Phoenix, AZ, USA
P. Maurine Kahlke Coldstream, BC, Canada
Contributors
cxi

----- Page 111 (native) -----
Sakari Kainulainen Diaconia University of Applied Sciences, Helsinki,
Finland
Andreas P. Kakouris Department of Business Administration, University
of the Aegean, Chios, Greece
Charlene Marie Kalenkoski Department of Economics, Ohio University,
Athens, OH, USA
Michael Kalin Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
Ljiljana Kaliterna Ivo Pilar Institute of Social Sciences, Zagreb, Croatia
Matthijs Kalmijn University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Wim
Kalmijn Erasmus
Happiness
Research
Organization
EHERO,
Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Elisabeth Kals Social and Organizational Psychology, Catholic University
of Eichst€att-Ingolstadt, Eichst€att, Germany
Charles
Kamen Department
of
Radiation
Oncology,
University
of
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA
Yoshinori Kamo Department of Sociology, Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, LA, USA
Man Yee Kan Department of Sociology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Milosˇ Kankarasˇ Tilburg University, Tilburg, The Netherlands
Kostas
Karadakis Sport
Management
Department,
Southern
New
Hampshire University, Manchester, NH, USA
Katerina Karaivazoglou Department of Psychiatry, University of Patras,
Patras, Greece
John Karon The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Albuquerque,
NM, USA
Jeffrey
N.
Katz Medicine
and
Orthopedic
Surgery;
Epidemiology;
Orthopedic and Arthritis Center for Outcomes Research, Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, and Division of Rheumatology, Harvard Medical
School; Harvard School of Public Health; and, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
Joel Katz Department of Psychology, McGill University, Montreal, QC,
Canada
Jasleen Kaur Department of Humanities & Social Sciences, Indian Institute
of Technology, New Delhi, India
Bereket Kebede School of International Development (DEV), University of
East Anglia, Norwich, UK
Mary M. Keegin Psychology, DePaul University, Chicago, IL, USA
Renske Keizer Sociology, Faculty of Social Sciences, Erasmus University
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
cxii
Contributors

----- Page 112 (native) -----
Jody Koenig Kellas University of Nebraska–Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA
Nancy Kelley-Gillespie Grace Abbott School of Social Work, University of
Nebraska at Omaha, Omaha, NE, USA
Ivan W. Kelly Department of Educational Psychology & Special Education,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada
Mackenzie C. Kelly Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at
Manoa, USA
Matthew Kelly National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health,
ANU College of Medicine, Biology & Environment, The Australian National
University, Canberra, Australia
Lane Kendig Kendig Keast Collaborative, Sugar Land, TX, USA
Noel Keough Faculty of Environmental Design, University of Calgary,
Calgary, AB, Canada
David Keppler St. Thomas Aquinas College, Sparkill, NY, USA
Agim Enver Ke¨rc¸uku Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy
Siew-Ean Khoo Australian Demographic and Social Research Institute,
The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
Kim M. Kiely Centre for Research on Ageing Health and Wellbeing,
The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
Cheryl Kier Centre for Social Sciences, Athabasca University, Athabasca,
AB, Canada
William
Kilbourne Department
of
Marketing,
Clemson
University,
Clemson, SC, USA
Eunjoo Kim Department of Psychiatry, Seoul Metropolitan Eunpyeong
Hospital Yonsei University Graduate School, Seoul, South Korea
Hyung Min Kim Department of Political Science, Myongji University,
Seoul, South Korea
Seoyong Kim Department of Public Administration, Ajou University,
Suwon, South Korea
Youngmee Kim Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral
Gables, FL, USA
Miriam Kimel Center for Health Outcomes Research, United BioSource
Corporation, Bethesda, MD, USA
Leslie King School of Environment and Sustainability, Royal Roads
University, Victoria, BC, Canada
Michael King Mental Health Sciences Unit, University College London,
London, UK
G. Thomas Kingsley The Urban Institute, Washington, DC, USA
Contributors
cxiii

----- Page 113 (native) -----
Ulla Kinnunen School of Social Sciences and Humanities, University of
Tampere, Tampere, Finland
Andrei P. Kirilenko Department of Earth Systems Science and Policy,
University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND, USA
Marit Kirkevold Department of Nursing Science, University of Oslo,
Norway University of Aarhus, Denmark, Oslo, Norway
Julia Kish-Doto Health Communication, RTI International, Rockville, USA
Nand Kishor Department of ECPS, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Peter Kitchen McMaster Institute of Environment and Health, McMaster
University, West Hamilton, ON, Canada
Derrick Klaassen Graduate Program in Counselling Psychology, Trinity
Western University, Langley, BC, Canada
Joshua R. Klein Department of Criminal Justice, Iona College, New
Rochelle, NY, USA
Peggy J. Kleinplatz School of Psychology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
ON, Canada
Ellen Klemera Center for Research in Primary and Community Care,
Hertfordshire University, Hertfordshire, UK
Christine Klerian Forum for Early Childhood Development Monitoring,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Joanne Klevens Division of Violence Prevention, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA
Nina Knoll Freie Universit€at Berlin, Berlin, Germany
Carl Henrik Knutsen Department of Political Science, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway
Charles T. Koebel Urban Affairs and Planning, College of Architecture and
Urban Studies, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA
Kim Koh Faculty of Education, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada
Yee Woen Koh Department of Psychiatry, The University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Ulrich Kohler Department of Economic and Social Sciences, University of
Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany
Bishwa Koirala Department of Economics, John Cook School of Business,
St. Louis, MO, USA
Filippa Kolokotroni Department of Psychology, Panteion University,
Athens, Greece
Susanne Ko¨nig Department of Psychology, Alpen-Adria Universit€at
Klagenfurt, Klagenfurt, Austria
cxiv
Contributors

----- Page 114 (native) -----
Noriko Kono Padeco Co., Ltd, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan
Ma´ria Kopp Semmelweis University Institute of Behavioral Sciences,
Budapest, Hungary
Hanita Kosher Paul Baerwald School of Social Work and Social Welfare,
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Megan Kot Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada
Dana Kotter-Gr€uhn Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke
University, Durham, NC, USA
Kornelia Kozovska European Commission, Brussels, Belgium
Rabea
Kr€atschmer-Hahn Deutsches
Institut
f€ur
Internationale
P€adagogische Forschung, Frankfurt, Germany
Nana Kragh Novo Nordisk Inc, Søborg, Denmark
Michael J. Kral Psychology & Anthropology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL, USA
John Kramer Institute for Community Inclusion, University Massachusetts
Boston, Boston, MA, USA
Neal Krause School of Public Health, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA
Shlomo Kravetz Department of Psychology, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat
Gan, Israel
Jessie L. Krienert Criminal Justice Sciences, Illinois State University,
Normal, IL, USA
David Kriz Otto-Selz-Institute of the University of Mannheim, Mannheim,
Germany
Rhiannon A. Kroeger Population Research Center, The University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
Marvin D. Krohn University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
Christian Kroll Social Sciences, Jacobs University University of Bremen,
Bremen, Germany
Mareike Kroll Department of Earth Science, Institute for Geography
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
Katherine M. Krpan Department of Psychology, University of South
Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
Patrick
Krueger Department
of
Health
and
Behavioral
Sciences,
University of Colorado at Denver, Denver, CO, USA
Ivar Krumpal Department of Sociology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig,
Germany
Elizabeth J. Krumrei Department of Psychology, Social Science Division,
Pepperdine University, Malibu, CA, USA
Contributors
cxv

----- Page 115 (native) -----
Po-Wen Ku Graduate Institute of Sports & Health, National Changhua
University of Education, Changhua City, Taiwan
Carmen Kuhling Sociology, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland
Jan
K€uhling Department
of
Economics,
University
of
Oldenburg,
Oldenburg, Germany
Nicolas Kuhne Occupational Therapy Department, University of Applied
Sciences Western Switzerland, Lausanne, Switzerland
Susan Kuivalainen National Institution for Health and Welfare, Minimum
income unit, Helsinki, Finland
Parmanand Kulhara Department of Psychiatry, Post-Graduate Institute of
Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India
Steve
J.
Kulich The
SISU
Intercultural
Institute
(SII),
Shanghai
International Studies University, Shanghai, China
Samantha Kwan Department of Sociology, University of Houston,
Houston, TX, USA
Gerard Kyle Department of Recreation, Park and Tourism Sciences,
College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX, USA
Steven J. La Grow School of Health and Social Services, Massey
University, Palmerston North, New Zealand
Myle`ne Lachance-Grzela School of Psychology, Universite´ de Moncton,
Moncton, NB, Canada
Paul R. Lachapelle Department of Political Science, Montana State
University, Bozeman, MT, USA
Leon Lack School of Psychology, Flinders University, Adelaide, SA,
Australia
Leslie Laczko Sociology and Anthropology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
ON, Canada
Maxime
Ladaique Organization
for
Economic
Cooperation
and
Development (OECD), Paris, France
Rafael
Lalive Department
of
Economics,
University
of
Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland
Alessandra Lamas Granero Lucchetti Research Departament of Sa˜o
Paulo Medical Spiritist Association, Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil
Jack Lam Sociology Department and Minnesota Population Center,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA
Vicki L. Lamb Sociology, North Carolina Central University Duke
University, Durham, NC, USA
Kenneth C. Land Department of Sociology, Duke University, Durham,
NC, USA
cxvi
Contributors

----- Page 116 (native) -----
Jeanne M. Landgraf HealthActCHQ Inc., Boston, MA, USA
Eva Landova´ Department of Zoology, Charles University of Prague, Praha,
Czech Republic
Ivan Landripet Department of Sociology, Faculty of Humanities and Social
Sciences, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia
Eva Langeland Faculty of Health and Social Sciences, Bergen University
College, Bergen, Norway
Alfried L€angle International Society of Logotherapy and Existential
Analysis, Vienna, Austria
Alessandra Lanti Department of Psychology, University of Nevada,
Las Vegas, NV, USA
Margherita Lanz Department of Psychology, Atheneum Center for Family
Studies and Research Catholic University, Milan, Italy
Tracey A. LaPierre Department of Sociology, University of Kansas,
Lawrence, KS, USA
Jeffry Larson School of Family Life, Brigham Young University, Provo,
UT, USA
Joan Nymand Larsen Stefansson Arctic Institute, Akureyri, Iceland
Mona Larsen SFI - The Danish National Centre for Social Research,
Copenhagen K, Denmark
Edward L. Lascher Jr. Department of Public Policy and Administration,
California State University, Sacramento, CA, USA
Ge´rard Lassibille Institut de Recherche sur l’Economie de l’Education,
Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, Dijon, France
Rossalina Latcheva Institute of Sociology, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland
Janet D. Latner University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, USA
Anna Lau School of Psychology, Australian Centre on QOL, Deakin
University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
Mihaela Launeanu Existential Analysis Society of Canada University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Glenn Laverack Southgate Institute, Flinders University, Adelaide, SA,
Australia
Tom Lavers Department of Social and Policy Sciences, University of Bath,
Bath, UK
Justin A. Lavner Department of Psychology, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Francisco Lavolpe Faculty of Social Sciences, Universidad Nacional de
Lomas de Zamora Universidad Nacional de La Matanza, Adrogue, Argentina
Contributors
cxvii

----- Page 117 (native) -----
Ben Law Department of Social Work and Social Administration, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Larry Lloyd Lawhon Department of Landscape Architecture, Regional and
Community Planning, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA
Shannon Lawless Kanata, ON, Canada
Rod Lawson Chest Clinic, Shefﬁeld Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation
Trust University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, UK
Elisabetta Lazzaro Division of Cultural Management, Universite´ Libre de
Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium
Ce´line
Le
Bourdais Department
of
Sociology,
McGill
University,
Montreal, QC, Canada
Campbell Leaper Department of Psychology, University of California,
Santa Cruz, CA, USA
Fre´de´ric Lebaron Universite´ de Picardie-Jules Verne et CNRS, Amiens,
France
Yuval Lebel The Guttman Center in the IDI, Israel Democracy Institute and
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, The Open University of Israel, Jerusalem,
Israel
Carmen
Leccardi Department
of
Sociology
and
Social
Research,
University of Milan-Bicocca, Milan, Italy
George Leckie Centre for Multilevel Modelling, University of Bristol,
Bristol Institute of Public Affairs (BIPA), Bristol, UK
Antoinette Lee Department of Psychiatry, University of Hong Kong Queen
Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Dong-Jin Lee Department of Marketing, Yonsei University, Seoul, South
Korea
Elliott S. Lee Department of Psychology, University of Victoria, Victoria,
BC, Canada
James Lee Department of Applied Social Sciences, The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Jinwoo Lee The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
Ka Yiu Lee School of Nursing, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
People’s Republic of China
Lok-chun Janet Lee Institute of Human Performance, The University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Paul S. N. Lee School of Journalism and Communication, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Nicole Legate Department of Clinical and Social Sciences in Psychology,
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA
cxviii
Contributors

----- Page 118 (native) -----
Melinda S. Leidy First 5 LA, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Alicia Leonard Survey Division, Mathematica Policy Research, Princeton,
NJ, USA
Anners Lerdal Lovisenberg Diakonale Hospital, Department of Nursing
Science, Institute of Health and Society, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
Ashley Leschyshyn University of North Dakota, Brand Forks, ND, USA
William D. Leslie Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
MB, Canada
Aura Leulescu EUROSTAT, Luxembourg
Ambrose Leung Policy Studies, Mount Royal University, Calgary, AB,
Canada
Cynthia Leung Department of Applied Social Sciences, The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Louis W. Leung School of Journalism & Communication, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Pamela
Pui
Yu Leung Department of
Social Work and
Social
Administration, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s
Republic of China
Sharron Leung School of Nursing, Hong Kong Baptist Hospital, Hong
Kong, People’s Republic of China
Se´bastien Le´vesque De´partement de Sociologie, Universite´ Laval, Que´bec,
QC, Canada
Me´lanie Levasseur Universite´ de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada
Shlomit Levy A. Harman Institute of Contemporary Jewry, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Chris Lewis Institute of Criminal Justice Studies, University of Portsmouth,
Portsmouth, UK
Alastair H. Leyland MRC/CSO Social and Public Health Sciences Unit,
Glasgow, UK
Carmen Barros Lezaeta Instituto de Sociologı´a, Pontiﬁcia Universidad
Cato´lica de Chile, Santiago, Chile
Jiayin (Jaylene) Liang Department of Sociology & Gerontology, Miami
University, Oxford, OH, USA
Pei-Shan Liao Center for Survey Research, RCHSS, Academia Sinica,
Taipei, Taiwan
Panagiotis
Liargovas Department
of
Economics,
University
of
Peloponnese, Tripolis, Greece
Xiaoming Li Pediatric Prevention Research Center, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA
Contributors
cxix

----- Page 119 (native) -----
Ulf Liebe Institute of Sociology, University of Bern, Berne, Switzerland
Heng Hui Lien Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan
Department of General Surgery, Cathay General Hospital School of
Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, Taipei, Taiwan
Jacqueline A. Lifﬁton Department of Kinesiology, University of Windsor,
Windsor, ON, Canada
Teresa Lillis Department of Psychology, University of Kansas, Lawrence,
KS, USA
Susan Limber Institute on Family & Neighborhood Life, Clemson
University, Clemson, SC, USA
Carolyn A. Lin Communication Sciences, University of Connecticut,
Storrs, CT, USA
Danhua Lin Institute of Developmental Psychology, Beijing Normal
University, Beijing, China
Ji-Ping Lin Research Center for Humanities and Social Sciences, Academia
Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
Keh-chung
Lin School
of
Occupational
Therapy,
National
Taiwan
University College of Medicine, Division of Occupational Therapy,
National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan
Kuei-Hsiu Lin Sociology, National Taipei University, New Taipei City,
Taiwan
Qianhan Lin Department of Sociology, Asia Research Institute, National
University of Singapore, Singapore
Wei-Ling Lin Department of Psychology, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China
Andrea Lind Madison, Wisconsin, USA
Niels Lind University of Waterloo, Victoria, BC, Canada
Antonia Linde Department of Law and Political Science, Universitat
Oberta de Catalunya (UOC), Barcelone, Spain
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
Morag Lindsay School of Architecture, Oxford Brookes University,
Oxford, UK
P. Alex Linley Centre of Applied Positive Psychology, Coventry, UK
Laura Lippman Education, Child Trends, Washington, DC, USA
Hilary Lips Department of Psychology, Radford University, Radford,
VA, USA
Silvie Lisˇkova´ Department of Zoology, Charles University of Prague,
Praha, Czech Republic
cxx
Contributors

----- Page 120 (native) -----
Tanja Lischetzke Department of Psychology, University of Koblenz-
Landau, Landau, Germany
Steve Litke Fraser Basin Council, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Todd Litman Victoria Transportation Policy Institute, Victoria, BC, Canada
Brian Little Department of Psychology, Cambridge University,
Cambridge, UK
Howard
Litwin Paul
Baerwald
School
of
Social
Work,
Israel
Gerontological
Data
Center,
The
Hebrew
University
in
Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, Israel
Mengqiao Liu Department of Psychology, Wayne State University, Detroit,
MI, USA
Yan Liu Department of ECPS, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
BC, Canada
Lisa Lix Department of Community Health Sciences, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada
Susana Llorens Work & Organizational Psychology, University Jaume I,
Castello´n, Spain
Helen Lloyd Department of Public Health, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK
Katrina
Lloyd School
of
Education,
Queen’s
University
Belfast,
Belfast, UK
Catherine Mei-han Lo School of Nursing, University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Christopher Lo University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada
Amy C. Lodge Department of Sociology, University of Texas, Austin, TX,
USA
Massimo Loi Senter for IKT I utdanningen - Norwegian center for ICT in
Education, Oslo, Norway
Daniel Lois University of T€ubingen, T€ubingen, Germany
James W. Lomax II Menninger Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
Antonio Jose´ Lo´pez Lo´pez Polı´ticas y Programas en Nin˜ez, Juventud y
Desarrollo Social, Universidad de Manizales-CINDE, Manizales, Colombia
Belen Lopez Department of Biology of Organisms and Systems, University
of Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain
Kristjana Loptson Department of Political Science, Faculty of Arts,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada
Laura Lorente Work & Organizational Psychology, Universitat de
Vale`ncia, Valencia, Spain
Contributors
cxxi

----- Page 121 (native) -----
Tierney Lorenz Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin
and University of Washington School of Medicine, Austin, TX, USA
John Lorinc Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Gail D. Low Adult Development and Psychometrics Lab, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Giancarlo Lucchetti Research Departament of Sa˜o Paulo Medical Spiritist
Association, Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil
Department of Neurology, Federal University of Sa˜o Paulo, Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil
Mario Lucchini Department of Sociology and Social Research, University
of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy
Patricia Lucero Study Group on Population and Territory, Department of
Geography, The University of Mar del Plata, Mar del Plata, Argentina
Cristina Lucier Department of Sociology, Boston College, Chestnut Hill,
MA, USA
Maike Luhmann Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Benedicto
Lukanima Business
School,
Universidad
del
Norte,
Barranquilla, Colombia
Universidad del Norte, Barranquilla, Colombia
Steven Luper Department of Philosophy, Trinity University, San Antonio,
TX, USA
Michael Lyons Department of Psychology, University of South Carolina,
Columbia, SC, USA
Juliette Lyons-Thomas Department of ECPS, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Joanne
Lyubovnikova Aston
Business
School,
Aston
University,
Birmingham, UK
Cecilia M. S. Ma Department of Applied Social Sciences, The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Ramzi Mabsout American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon
Douglas A. MacDonald Department of Psychology, University of Detroit
Mercy, Detroit, MI, USA
Judy MacIntosh Faculty of Nursing, University of New Brunswick,
Fredericton, NB, Canada
Virginia Maclaren University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Fleur Macqueen Smith Saskatchewan Population Health and Evaluation
Research Unit, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada
Bryan Maddox University of East Anglia, Norfolk, UK
cxxii
Contributors

----- Page 122 (native) -----
Filomena Maggino Dipartimento di Statistica, Informatica, Applicazioni
“G. Parenti” (DiSIA), Universita` degli Studi di Firenze, Firenze, Italy
Asa-Sophia Maglio Counselling Psychology Program, Adler School of
Professional Psychology, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Eleonora Maino Department of Psychology, Center for Family Studies and
Research, Catholic University of Milan, Milan, Italy
Wingyun Mak Department of Psychology, CUNY Lehman, Bronx, NY, USA
Monde Makiwane Human and Social Development, Human Sciences
Research Council, Pretoria, South Africa
Rahul Malhotra Health Services and Systems Research, Duke-NUS
Graduate Medical School, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Kaisa
Malinen Family
Research
Centre,
University
of
Jyv€askyl€a,
Jyv€askyl€a, Finland
Robyn K. Mallett Department of Psychology, Loyola University Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA
Agneta Malmgren F€ange Department of Health Sciences, Occupational
Therapy and Gerontology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
Sara Malo Research Institute on Quality of Life (IRQV), University of
Girona (Spain), Girona, Spain
Patrick S. Malone Department of Psychology, University of South
Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
Hendrika
Maltby Department
of
Nursing,
University
of
Vermont,
Burlington, VT, USA
Lauren E. Maltby Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA, USA
Maha Manai Department of Economics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland
Anna Rita Manca European Institute for Gender Equality, Vilnius,
Lithuania
Federica Mancini Institute for the Development of Vocational Training for
Workers, ISFOL, Rome, Italy
Jornt Mandemakers Sociology, University of Groningen, Groningen,
The Netherlands
Lenore Manderson School of Psychology and Psychiatry, Monash
University, Caulﬁeld East, VIC, Australia
Lynne L. Manganaro Public Affairs and Social Research, Texas A&M
International University, Laredo, TX, USA
Roger Mannell Department of Recreation and Leisure Studies, University
of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Contributors
cxxiii

----- Page 123 (native) -----
A. M. Mannion Department of Geography and Environmental Science,
University of Reading, Reading, UK
Patricia Manuel School of Planning, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS,
Canada
Claudia Manzi Department of Psychology, Universita` Cattolica del Sacro
Cuore, Milan, Italy
Giancarlo Manzi Department of Economics, Management and Quantitative
Methods, Universita` degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy
Robert W. Marans Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Oscar
Marcenaro-Gutierrez Departamento
de
Economı´a
Aplicada
(Estadı´stica y Econometrı´a), Universidad de Ma´laga and Fundacio´n Centro
de Estudios Andaluces, Ma´laga, Spain
Ioan Marginean The Institute for Quality of Life Research, Bucharest,
Romanian Academy, Bucharest, Romania
Andrea
Marinozzi Orthopaedics
and
Trauma
Surgery,
Campus
Bio-Medico University, Rome, Italy
Kristen P. Mark Department of Kinesiology & Health Promotion,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA
Nic Marks Centre for Well-being, New Economics Foundation,
London, UK
Elisa Marques Research Centre in Physical Activity, Health and Leisure,
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
Emily A. Marshall Population Studies Center, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA
Gul Aldikacti Marshall Department of Sociology, University of Louisville,
Louisville, KY, USA
Elena Marta Psychology Department, Universita´ Catolica Del Sacro Cuore,
Milan, Italy
Andrew J. Martin Faculty of Education and Social Work, University of
Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Crystal Martin Northern Health Assessment Network, Prince George, BC,
Canada
Faith Martin Clinical Psychology, University of Bath, Bath, UK
Mike W. Martin Chapman Degree, Orange, CA, USA
Nicolo` Martinelli Ankle and Foot Surgery, IRCCS Galeazzi University
Campus Bio-medico, Rome/Milan, Italy
Isabel M. Martinez Work & Organizational Psychology, University
Jaume I, Castello´n, Spain
cxxiv
Contributors

----- Page 124 (native) -----
Sonia Fraı´s Martinez National Autonomous University of Mexico, Regional
Center for Multidisciplinary Research, Cuernavaca, Mexico
Isabel Martins Unit of Studies and Planning, Porto City Council, Porto,
Portugal
Jorge Tiago Martins Information School, The University of Shefﬁeld,
Shefﬁeld, UK
Josune
Martı´n Hospital
Galdakao-Usansolo,
Research
Unit,
Health
Services Research on Chronic Diseases Network (REDISSEC), Galdakao,
Spain
Julian
Martı´nez Food
Engineering,
State
University
of
Campinas,
Campinas, Brazil
Vicente Martı´nez-Tur Organizational Psychology, IDOCAL (Research
Institute of Human Resources Psychology, Organizational Development &
Quality of Working Life), University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain
Tama´s Martos Institute of Mental Health, Semmelweis University,
Budapest, Hungary
Diane Martz University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada
Helena Marujo Human Resources Management, Univ Tec Lisboa, Iscsp,
Lisbon, Portugal
Massimiliano Mascherini Employment and Competitiveness, European
Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions,
EUROFOUND, Dublin, Ireland
Michael C. Mathers Existential Analysis Society of Canada, Vancouver,
BC, Canada
Alessandra
Mattei Department
of
Statistics,
Computer
Science,
Applications “G. Parenti”, University of Florence, Florence, Italy
Molly R. Matthews Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences, West
Virginia University School of Public Health, Morgantown, WV, USA
Liana Mattulich Inner Key Center, Jefferson, CO, USA
Isidro Maya-Jariego Departamento de Psicologı´a Social, Facultad de
Psicologı´a, Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain
Doug May Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, NL, Canada
Axel Mayer Department of Methodology and Evaluation Research, Institute
of Psychology, Friedrich-Schiller-University of Jena, Jena, Germany
Mehrdad Mazaheri Faculty of Education and Psychology, University of
Sistan & Baluchestan, Zahedan, Iran
Valentina Mazzucato Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, Maastricht
University, Maastricht, The Netherlands
Catherine McBride-Chang Psychology Department, Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Contributors
cxxv

----- Page 125 (native) -----
Josh McCabe Department of Sociology, University at Albany, SUNY,
Albany, NY, USA
Wendy McCallum History and Theory, Brandon University, Brandon, MB,
Canada
Christopher McCarty UF Survey Research Center, University of Florida
Bureau of Economic and Business Research, Gainesville, FL, USA
Theresa
McClenaghan Canadian
Environmental
Law
Association,
Toronto, ON, Canada
Cassandra McCroy School of Social Work, University of Northern British
Columbia, Prince George, BC, Canada
James R. McDonell Institute on Family & Neighborhood Life, Clemson
University, Clemson, SC, USA
Ian McDowell Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON,
Canada
Michael J. McFarland Bendheim-Thoman Center for Research on Child
Wellbeing, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA
Frances McGinnity The Economic and Social Research Institute, Dublin,
Ireland
Pauline M. McGuirk Discipline of Geography and Environmental Studies,
The Centre for Urban and Regional Studies, The University of Newcastle,
Callaghan, NSW, Australia
Hugh McIntosh Oakton, VA, USA
Thomas L. McKenzie School of Exercise and Nutritional Sciences, San
Diego State University, San Diego, CA, USA
Amie R. McKibban Department of Psychology, University of Southern
Indiana, Evansville, IN, USA
Craig McKie Chilliwack, BC, Canada
Melanie McMahan Department of Psychological and Social Foundations,
University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
Fred McMahon International Research, The Fraser Institute, Toronto, ON,
Canada
Susan Dvorak McMahon Department of Psychology, DePaul University,
Chicago, IL, USA
Patricia A. McManus Department of Sociology, Indiana University,
Bloomington, Bloomington, IN, USA
Katherine A. McMillan Department of Psychology, University of Regina,
Regina, SK, Canada
Laurel McNall Psychology, The College at Brockport, State University of
New York, Brockport, NY, USA
cxxvi
Contributors

----- Page 126 (native) -----
Christine J. McPherson Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, ON, Canada
Fabrizia Mealli Department of Statistics “G. Parenti”, University of
Florence, Florence, Italy
Marta Meana Honors College, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV, USA
Mahbubur Meenar Community and Regional Planning, Center for
Sustainable Communities, Temple University, Ambler, PA, USA
Dan Meisler Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Alfredo Mela DIST - Interuniversity Department of Regional and Urban
Studies and Planning, Polytechnic of Turin University of Turin, Turin, Italy
Molly Melching Tostan International, Dakar, Senegal
Kala J. Melchiori Department of Psychology, Loyola University Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA
Ronald Melzack Department of Psychology, McGill University, Montreal,
QC, Canada
Letizia Mencarini Department of Economics “S. Cognetti de Martiis”,
Collegio Carlo Alberto, University of Turin, Turin, Italy
Silvia
Mendolia School
of
Economics,
University
of
Wollongong,
Wollongong, NSW, Australia
Verena Menec Department of Community Health Sciences, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada
Rute F. Meneses Human and Social Sciences Department, Fernando Pessoa
University, Porto, Portugal
Tobias Menz Department of Economics, University of Oldenburg BTC
Business Technology Consulting, Oldenburg, Germany
Andrea E. Mercurio Department of Psychology, Boston University,
Boston, MA, USA
Jean-Louis Mercy EUROSTAT, Luxembourg
Joav Merrick National Institute of Child Health and Human Development,
Division for Mental Retardation Ministry of Social Affairs and Social
Services, Jerusalem, Israel
Melanie Merriman Touchstone Consulting, North Bay Village, FL, USA
Aaron Meskin School of Philosophy, Religion and History of Science,
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK
Dave Meslin PigeonHat Productions, Toronto, ON, Canada
Cindy M. Meston The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
Colleen
Metge Community
Health
Sciences,
Faculty
of
Medicine,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada
Contributors
cxxvii

----- Page 127 (native) -----
Thaddeus Metz Philosophy, University of Johannesburg, Auckland Park,
South Africa
Denis Meuret Department of Educational Science, University of Burgundy
Institut Universitaire de France, Dijon, France
Briana Mezuk School of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond, VA, USA
Juliet Michaelson Centre for Well-being, New Economics Foundation,
London, UK
Stella Michaelsen Physical Therapy, Universidade do Estado de Santa
Catarina, Floriano´polis, Brazil
Erin Michalak University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Jerzy Michalek European Commission, Seville, Spain
Alex C. Michalos University of Northern British Columbia, Prince George,
BC, Canada
(residence) Brandon, MB, Canada
William Michelson Department of Sociology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada
Andrew Miles Department of Sociology, Duke University, Durham,
NC, USA
Taciano
L.
Milfont School
of
Psychology,
Victoria
University
of
Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand
Rachael Milicich National Accounts, Statistics New Zealand Statistics
House, Wellington, New Zealand
Chad R. Miller Department of Economic & Workforce Development, The
University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, MS, USA
Deborah Miller Mellen Center, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
Quantitative Health Sciences, Wb4, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland,
OH, USA
David Miller University at Albany, State University of New York, Albany,
NY, USA
Sophie A. Miller School of Public Health and Social Work and the Institute
of Health and Biomedical Innovation, Queensland University of Technology,
Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Matthew S. Mingus School of Public Affairs and Administration, Western
Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI, USA
Michael Minkov International University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria
Krista Lynn Minnotte University of North Dakota, Brand Forks, ND, USA
Michael A. Minor Michael Minor & Associates, Portland, OR, USA
cxxviii
Contributors

----- Page 128 (native) -----
Marco Mira D’Ercole Household Statistics and Progress Measurement,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Paris,
France
Girishwar Misra Department of Psychology, University of Delhi,
Delhi, India
Kristen
Missall Psychological
and
Quantitative
Foundations,
The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA
Chelsea Mitamura Vassar College, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
WI, USA
A. Dana Me´nard School of Psychology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
ON, Canada
Steven E. Mock Department of Recreation and Leisure Studies, University
of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Robert Moir Department of Social Science (Economics), University of
New Brunswick, Saint John, NB, Canada
Lidwine B. Mokkink Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, VU
University Medical Center, EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Jørgen Møller Department of Political Science, Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark
Valerie Møller Institute of Social and Economic Research, Rhodes
University, Grahamstown, South Africa
Carolina
Moliner Organizational
Psychology,
IDOCAL
(Research
Institute of Human Resources Psychology, Organizational Development &
Quality of Working Life), University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain
Arlen Moller Department of Psychology, Illinois Institute of Technology,
Chicago, IL, USA
Anita E. Molzahn Faculty of Nursing, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
AB, Canada
Christiaan Monden University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Cristina
Monforte-Royo Medicine
and
Health
Sciences
School,
Universitat Internacional de Catalunya, Sant Cugat del Valle´s, Barcelona,
Spain
Myriam Mongrain Psychology Department, York University, Toronto,
ON, Canada
Mahmood Monshipouri International Relations, San Francisco State
University, San Francisco, CA, USA
Daniel Mont Leonard Cheshire Disability and Inclusive Development
Centre, Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College
London, London, UK
Contributors
cxxix

----- Page 129 (native) -----
Jeremy Montemarano Clinical Psychology/Department of Psychology,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA
Jose´-Marı´a Montero Department of Statistics of the Faculty of Law and
Social Sciences, University of Castile-La Mancha, Toledo, Spain
Dario Monzani Department of Psychology, University of Milan-Bicocca,
Milan, Italy
Kristin A. Moore Child Trends, Inc, Bethesda, MD, USA
Pablo A. Mora University of Texas, Arlington, TX, USA
Helena
Moreira Faculty
of
Psychology
and
Educational
Sciences,
University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal
Sara Moreno-Pires Faculty of Law, University of Coimbra, Coimbra,
Portugal
Filip Morisse Psychiatric Centre Dr. Guislain, Gent, Belgium
David Morley Department of Public Health, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK
Daniel Morris Institutional Research and Planning, Grant MacEwan
University, Edmonton, AB, Canada
Stephen Morse Centre for Environmental Strategy, University of Surrey,
Surrey, UK
Meinhard Moschner Data Archive for the Social Sciences (DAS), GESIS
Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences, Cologne, Germany
Corinne
A.
Moss-Racusin Yale
University,
Skidmore
College,
Saratoga Springs, NY, USA
Jorge Mota Research Centre in Physical Activity, Health and Leisure,
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
Joan-Maki Motapanyane Women’s Studies, Mount Royal University,
Calgary, AB, Canada
Nina S. Mounts Department of Psychology, Northern Illinois University,
DeKalb, IL, USA
Karsten Mueller Industrial and Organizational Psychology, University of
Osnabr€uck, Osnabr€uck, Germany
Ruud Muffels Faculty of Social and Behavioral Sciences, Tilburg
University, Tilburg, The Netherlands
Nazeem Muhajarine Department of Community Health and Epidemiology,
Saskatchewan Population Health and Evaluation Research Unit, College of
Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada
Diganta Mukherjee Sampling and Ofﬁcial Statistics Unit, Indian Statistical
Institute, Kolkata, India
cxxx
Contributors

----- Page 130 (native) -----
Nisha Mukherjee Bellinger Department of Government, Stephen F. Austin
State University, Nacogdoches, TX, USA
Etienne Mullet Ethics and Work, Institute of Advanced Studies (EPHE),
Plaisance, France
Ziva Muller The Hebrew University in Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Giuseppe Munda Department of Economics and Economic History,
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
Rafael Mun˜oz de Bustillo Llorente Department of Applied Economics,
University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain
Jessica M. Murakami University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, USA
Maria Giuseppina Muratore Italian National Statistical Ofﬁce, Rome, Italy
Brian Murphy Income Statistics Division, Statistics Canada, Ottawa,
ON, Canada
David A. Murphey Child Trends, Inc, Bethesda, MD, USA
Greg Murray Psychological Sciences and Statistics, Swinburne University
of Technology, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
Scott Murray DataAngel Policy Research, Kanata, ON, Canada
Janek Musek Department of Psychology, Faculty of Arts, University of
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Sarah Mustillo Department of Sociology, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN, USA
Andwilile Mwakibete Accounting and Finance, Mzumbe University,
Kihonda kwa Nkomola, Morogoro, Tanzania
Naoki Nakazato Department of Sociology, Kwansei Gakuin University,
Nishinomiya, Japan
Jaime Napier Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven,
CT, USA
Michela Nardo European Commission, Joint Research Center, IPSC-Unit
of Econometrics and Applied Statistics, Ispra, Italy
Lucas R. Nascimento Physical Therapy, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
Julia Naskrent University of Applied Sciences for Economics and
Management, Essen, Germany
Sophia Nathenson Oregon Institute of Technology, Klamath Falls, OR, USA
Jatin Nathwani Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Dolors Navarro Universitat de Girona, Girona, Spain
Contributors
cxxxi

----- Page 131 (native) -----
Ma
Lucı´a
Navarro
Go´mez Departamento
de
Economı´a
Aplicada
(Estadı´stica y Econometrı´a), Universidad de Ma´laga, Ma´laga, Spain
Rodolfo M. Nayga University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, USA
Etienne Nel Department of Geography, University of Otago, Dunedin,
New Zealand
Faculty of Management, School of Tourism and Hospitality, University of
Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South Africa
Michael A. Nelson University of Akron, Akron, OH, USA
Michelle R. Nelson The Charles H. Sandage Department of Advertising,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign College of Media, Urbana,
IL, USA
Stefano Neri Faculty of Political Science, University of Milan, Milan, Italy
Ragnhild Bang Nes Division of Mental Health, Norwegian Institute of
Public Health, Oslo, Norway
Fe´lix Neto University of Oporto, Oporto, Portugal
Luis Miguel Neto Univ Tec Lisboa, Iscsp, Lisbon, Portugal
Britta I. Neugaard James A. Haley Veterans’ Hospital, University of South
Florida College of Public Health, Tampa, FL, USA
Robert Neumann Institute for Sociology/Technische Universit€at Dresden,
Dresden, Germany
Cameron John Newton QUT Business School, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Jocelyn H. Newton Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin –
La Crosse, La Crosse, WI, USA
Siu Man Ng Department of Social Work & Social Administration, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Weiting Ng SIM University, Singapore, Singapore
Amanda B. Nickerson University at Albany, State University of New York,
Albany, NY, USA
Jessica Nicklin University of Hartford, Hartford, CT, USA
Sylvia Niehuis Department of Human Development & Family Studies,
Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX, USA
Pauli Niemela Department of Social Sciences, University of Eastern
Finland, Kuopio, Finland
Christopher P. Niemiec Department of Clinical and Social Sciences in
Psychology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA
Ryan M. Niemiec VIA Institute on Character, Ohio, CT, USA
Ken Niere Department of Physiotherapy, La Trobe University, Melbourne,
VIC, Australia
cxxxii
Contributors

----- Page 132 (native) -----
Masaaki Niino Department of Clinical Research, Hokkaido Medical
Center, Sapporo, Japan
Therese Nilsson Department of Economics, School of Economics and
Management, Lund University, Sweden, and Research Institute of Industrial
Economics (IFN), Sweden, Lund and Stockholm, Sweden
Elizabeth
K.
Nisbet Department
of
Psychology,
Trent
University,
Peterborough, ON, Canada
Marilyn Noble PeopleLink, Fredericton, NB, Canada
Brian Nolan UCD School of Applied Social Science, University College
Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
Heinz-Herbert Noll Social Indicators Research Centre, GESIS- Leibniz
Institute for the Social Sciences, Mannheim, Germany
Sandra Nolte Medical Clinic for Psychosomatics, Charite´ – University
Medicine, Berlin, Germany
Population Health Strategic Research Centre, Deakin University, Melbourne,
VIC, Australia
Vinai Norasakkunkit Department of Psychology, Gonzaga University,
Spokane, WA, USA
Mikael Nordenmark Dept of Health Sciences, Mid Sweden University,
O¨ stersund, Sweden
David Nordstokke Educational Studies in School Psychology, University
of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada
J. Ian Norris Business and Economics, Berea College, Berea, KY, US
Geranda Notten Graduate School of Public and International Affairs,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Sheila Novek Centre on Aging, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB,
Canada
Nuelle Novik University of Regina, Regina, SK, Canada
Nadine
Nowatzki Healthy
Child
Manitoba
Ofﬁce,
Government
of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada
Fridtjof W. Nussbeck Institute of Psychology, University of Bielefeld,
Bielefeld, Germany
Mark Nuttall University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada
Giampaolo Nuvolati Department of Sociology and Social Research,
University of Milan Bicocca, Milano, Italy
Godfrey Nyamrunda Economics Subject Group, University of Hull
Business School, Hull, UK
Marianne Nylund Diaconia University of Applied Sciences, Helsinki,
Finland
Contributors
cxxxiii

----- Page 133 (native) -----
Jessica
J.
O’Bleness Psychological
and
Quantitative
Foundations,
The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA
Catherine O’Brien Education Department, School of Professional Studies,
Cape Breton University, Sydney, NS, Canada
Charlynn A. Odahl Department of Psychology, DePaul University,
Chicago, IL, USA
Ismaila
Odogba Department
of
Geography/Geology,
University
of
Wisconsin-Stevens Point, Stevens Point, WI, USA
Aidan O’Driscoll School of Marketing, Dublin Institute of Technology,
Dublin, Ireland
Dave Odynak Sociology (PRL), University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB,
Canada
Jane Ogden Department of Psychology, University of Surrey, Surrey, UK
Tomson
Ogwang Department
of
Economics,
Brock
University,
St. Catharines, ON, Canada
Marita Ohls Swedish Institute for Social Research, Stockholm University,
Stockholm, Sweden
Tor H. Oiamo Department of Geography, Western University Faculty of
Social Science, London, ON, Canada
Adam Okulicz-Kozaryn Rutgers University, Camden, NJ, USA
Brian O’Leary Corporate Policy Unit, eThekwini Municipality, Durban,
South Africa
John Oliffe School of Nursing, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
BC, Canada
Karin Olson Faculty of Nursing, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
AB, Canada
Oscar Olvera Department of ECPS, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Hatim Omar Pediatrics & Obstetrics/Gynecology, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY, USA
Rosemary Ommer University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada
Melanie O’Neill Department of Psychology, Vancouver Island University,
Nanaimo, BC, Canada
Hiromi Ono U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences,
Washington, DC, USA
Juan R. Ordon˜ana Department of Human Anatomy and Psychobiology,
University of Murcia, and Murcia Institute for Biomedical Research (IMIB),
Murcia, Spain
Kate Orkin International Development, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
cxxxiv
Contributors

----- Page 134 (native) -----
Annalisa Ornaghi Faculty of Sociology, University of Milano-Bicocca,
Milan, Italy
Brendan
K.
O’Rourke School
of
Marketing,
Dublin
Institute
of
Technology, Dublin, Ireland
Caroline Orr Department of Social and Behavioral Health, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA
Gabriela Orsak Department of Psychology, University of Texas, Arlington,
TX, USA
Bienvenido Ortega Departamento de Economı´a Aplicada (Estructura
Econo´mica), Universidad de Ma´laga, Ma´laga, Spain
Lars Osberg Department of Economics, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
NS, Canada
Takashi Oshio Institute of Economic Research, Hitotsubashi University,
Kunitachi, Tokyo, Japan
Truls Østbye Health Services and Systems Research, Duke–NUS Graduate
Medical School, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Duke Global Health Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
Tyler Ostapyk Manitoba Centre For Health Policy, Department of
Community Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada
Erin O’Sullivan Strategic Research Directorate, Aboriginal Affairs and
Northern Development Canada, Gatineau, QC, Canada
Jan Ott Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Jan
Cornelis
Ott Erasmus
University
Rotterdam,
Rotterdam,
The Netherlands
Johan H. L. Oud Behavioral Science Institute, Radboud University
Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Brenda
den
Oudsten Department
of
Medical
Psychology,
Tilburg
University, Tilburg, The Netherlands
Linda Outcalt Centre On Aging, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC,
Canada
Ayc¸a O¨ zen Psychology, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey
Burcu H. Ozuduru Department of City and Regional Planning, Gazi
University, Ankara, Turkey
Darı´o Pa´ez Social Psychology and Methodology of Behavior Sciences,
University of the Basque Country, San Sebastia´n, Spain
Hye-Jin Paek Department of Advertising and Public Relations, Hanyang
University, Ansan, Gyeonggi-do, South Korea
Ricardo Pagan-Rodriguez Faculty of Economics. Applied Economic
Department, University of Malaga (Spain), Ma´laga, Spain
Contributors
cxxxv

----- Page 135 (native) -----
Francesca Giorgia Paleari Department of Social and Human Sciences,
Bergamo University, Bergamo, Italy
Anita Palepu Medicine, St. Paul’s Hospital University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Frank Palermo School of Planning, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS,
Canada
Yuval Palgi Gerontology, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel
Joaquina Palomar Psychology, Universidad Iberoamericana-Ciudad de
Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico
Riikka Paloniemi Environmental Policy Centre, Finnish Environment
Institute (SYKE), Helsinki, Finland
Mahesh Pandey Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Meg Panichelli Portland State University, Portland, OR, USA
Nikolas Papavlassopulos St. Thomas Aquinas College, Sparkill, NY, USA
David
M.
Paperny University
of
Hawaii
School
of
Medicine,
Honolulu, HI, USA
Nicolas Paradis Student Academic Success Service, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, ON, Canada
Yolanda Pardo IMIM (Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute),
Barcelona, Spain
CIBER Epidemiologı´a y Salud Pu´blica (CIBERESP), Spain
Gillian Parekh Critical Disability Studies, York University, Toronto, ON,
Canada
Kenneth I. Pargament Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green,
OH, USA
Chong-Min Park Department of Public Administration, Korea University,
Seoul, South Korea
Eri Park Department of Social Sciences, Roosevelt Academy, Utrecht
University, Middelburg, The Netherlands
Daniel W. Parker Existential Analysis Society of Canada, Vancouver,
BC, Canada
Philip D. Parker Centre for Positive Psychology and Education, University
of Western Sydney, Penrith, NSW, Australia
Margot Parkes University of Northern British Columbia, Prince George,
BC, Canada
George R. Parkerson Jr. Community and Family Medicine, Duke
University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA
cxxxvi
Contributors

----- Page 136 (native) -----
Diana Parry Department of Recreation and Leisure Studies, University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Emma
Partridge Institute
for
Sustainable
Futures,
University
of
Technlogy, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Romana Pasca Health Sciences, University of Northern British Columbia,
Prince George, BC, Canada
Dilip R. Patel Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Western
Michigan University School of Medicine, Kalamazoo, MI, USA
Donald L. Patrick School of Public Health, Department of Health Services,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Laurence Pattacini Landscape, University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, UK
Karen Sandberg Patton Newark, NJ, USA
Lieven J. R. Pauwels Department of Criminal Law and Criminology, Ghent
University Malmo¨ University, Gent, Belgium
William Pavot Social Science, Southwest Minnesota State University,
Marshall, MN, USA
Sylvia H. Paz Department of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Tessa Peasgood School of Health and Related Research, The University of
Shefﬁeld, South Yorkshire, Shefﬁeld, UK
Jose Marı´a Peiro´ Organizational Psychology, IDOCAL (Research Institute
of Human Resources Psychology, Organizational Development & Quality of
Working Life), University of Valencia, IVIE (Valencian Economic Research
Institute), Valencia, Spain
Sara Pelucchi Psychology, Catholic University, Milan, Italy
Bridget Penhale School of Nursing, University of East Anglia,
Norwich, UK
Ian Percy Instituto del Tercer Mundo (ITeM), Montevideo, Uruguay
Esteban Perez Caldentey Economic Commission for Latin America and
the Caribbean (ECLAC), United Nations, Santiago, Chile
Martine Pernod Faculty of Economics and Sociology, University Lille 1
CLERSE, Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
Anthony V. Perruccio Arthritis Program, Orthopaedics; and, Institute of
Health Policy, Management & Evaluation, University Health Network and
Toronto Western Research Institute; and, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada
Pier Paolo Peruccio Department of Architecture and Design, Politecnico di
Torino, Turin, Italy
Anne Birgitta Pessi Helsinki Collegium for Advanced Studies, University
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
Contributors
cxxxvii

----- Page 137 (native) -----
Michele Peters Department of Public Health, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK
Mark Peterson Management & Marketing Department, University of
Wyoming College of Business, Laramie, WY, USA
Anastasia Petrou Department of Economics, University of Peloponnese,
Tripolis, Greece
Andrey Petrov Department of Geography, University of Northern Iowa,
Cedar Falls, IA, USA
Kathryn L. S. Pettit Metropolitan Housing and Communities Policy
Center, The Urban Institute, Washington, DC, USA
Elizabeth Pfoh Health Policy and Management, The Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA
Dionisis Philippas European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Unit of
Econometrics and Applied Statistics, Ispra, Italy
Gary W. Phillips American Institutes for Research (AIR), Washington,
DC, USA
Rhonda
Phillips Community
Resources/Development,
Arizona
State
University, Phoenix, AZ, USA
Charles Picavet Rutgers WPF, Utrecht, UT, The Netherlands
Florian Pichler Department of Industrial Sociology, University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria
Ralph L. Piedmont Pastoral Counseling Department, Loyola University
Maryland, Columbia, MD, USA
Richard Pieper Univerity of Tampere, Tampere, Germany
Giovanni Pieretti Department of Sociology and Business Law, University
of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
Luca Pietrantoni Department of Psychology, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy
Martin Pinquart Psychology, Philipps University, Marburg, Germany
Laszlo Pinter Department of Environmental Sciences and Policy, Central
European University (CEU), Budapest, Hungary
International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD), Winnipeg,
MB, Canada
Elena
Pirani Department
of
Statistics,
Informatics,
Applications
“G. Parenti” - DiSIA, University of Florence, Florence, Italy
Robert Pittman Janus Economics, Atlanta, GA, USA
Anke
Plagnol Department
of
Sociology,
University
of
Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK
cxxxviii
Contributors

----- Page 138 (native) -----
Montserrat Planes Institut de Recerca sobre Qualitat de Vida, Universitat
de Girona, Girona, Spain
Courtney N. Plante Department of Psychology, University of Waterloo,
Waterloo, ON, Canada
Levno Plato School of Philosophy, Religion and History of Science,
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK
Zuzana Podana´ Department of Sociology, Charles University in Prague
Faculty of Arts, Prague, Czech Republic
Deborah Poff Brandon University, Brandon, MB, Canada
Betsy Pohlman The Brod Group, Inc, Mill Valley, CA, USA
Jelena Pokimica Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA
Marko Polic Department of Psychology, Faculty of Arts, University of
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Michael Polonsky School of Management/Marketing, Deakin University,
Burwood, VIC, Australia
Alexander M. Ponizovsky Mental Health Services, Ministry of Health,
Jerusalem, Israel
Birger Poppel Department of Social Science, Ilisimatusarﬁk, University of
Greenland, Nuuk, Greenland
Adriana Araujo Portella Faculty of Architecture and Planning, Federal
University of Pelotas, Brazil
The Bartlett School of Planning at University College London, London, UK
Joint Centre for Urban Design at Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, UK
Dorrit Posel School of Development Studies, University of KwaZulu-Natal,
Durban, South Africa
James Potter College of Architecture, University of Nebraska–Lincoln,
Lincoln, NE, USA
Luke Potwarka Department of Recreation and Leisure Studies, University
of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Nattavudh Powdthavee London School of Economics, London, UK
J. Denise Power Dalla Lana School of Public Health; and, Toronto Western
Research Institute, University of Toronto; and University Health Network,
Toronto, ON, Canada
Mick
Power Clinical
Psychology,
Edinburgh
University,
Tromso
University, Edinburgh, Norway
Helen D. Pratt Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Western
Michigan University School of Medicine, Kalamazoo Center for Medical
Studies, Kalamazoo, MI, USA
Contributors
cxxxix

----- Page 139 (native) -----
Patrick Pr€ag ICS/Department of Sociology, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands
Frank J. Prerost Family Medicine, Midwestern University Chicago
College of Osteopathic Medicine, Downers Grove, IL, USA
Mindy Pressman Department of Psychology, University of Kansas,
Lawrence, KS, USA
Carmel E. Price Department of Sociology, Furman University, Greenville,
SC, USA
Maria-Eugenia
Prieto-Flores National
School
of
Public
Health,
Department of Geography, National University of Distance Education
(UNED), Institute of Health Carlos III, Madrid, Spain
Isaac Prilleltensky School of Education and Human Development,
University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA
Zvjezdana
Prizmic-Larsen Department
of
Psychology,
Washington
University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA
Amanda
D.
Procsal Department
of
Psychology,
Northern
Arizona
University, Flagstaff, AZ, USA
Carmel Proctor Positive Psychology Research Centre, St. Peter Port,
Guernsey, UK
H. Thompson Prout Department of Educational School, and Counseling
Psychology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA
Caroline F. Pukall Department of Psychology, Queen’s University,
Kingston, ON, Canada
Federico Pulselli Department of Physical, Earth and Environmental
Sciences, University of Siena, Siena, Italy
Israel Pupko The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Julianita Purnomo International Health Services, The Albion Centre,
Sydney, NSW, Australia
Aili
Pyhala Institute
of
Environmental
Science
and
Technology,
Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
Nekehia Quashie Department of Sociology, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, UT, USA
Monika
Queisser Organization
for
Economic
Cooperation
and
Development (OECD), Paris, France
Jose´ M Quintana Hospital Galdakao-Usansolo, Research Unit, Health
Services Research on Chronic Diseases Network (REDISSEC), Galdakao,
Spain
Alasdair Rae Town and Regional Planning, University of Shefﬁeld,
Shefﬁeld, UK
cxl
Contributors

----- Page 140 (native) -----
Jason Raibley Philosophy Department, California State University, Long
Beach, CA, USA
Stephen A. Rains Communication, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA
Abbas
Rakhshani Yoga
and
Life
Sciences,
SVYASA
University,
Bangalore, India
Subha Ramanathan Faculty of Kinesiology & Physical Education,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Shibu
Raman Department
of
Architecture
and
Built
Environment,
Univeristy of Nottingham, Ningbo, China
Bali Ram Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, India
Shefali Ram Lawrence S. Bloomberg Faculty of Nursing, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Raul Ramos AQR–IREA, Department of Econometrics, Statistics and
Spanish Economy, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), Bonn, Germany
Carla Rampichini Department of Statistics ‘G. Paernti’, University of
Florence, Florence, Italy
Christoph Randler University of Education Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany
Sonia Ranieri Department of Psychology, Athenaeum Centre for Family
Studies and Research - Catholic University, Milan, Italy
Toril Rannestad Research Centre Health Promotion and Resources HiST/
NTNU, Faculty of Nursing, Sør-Trøndelag University College, Trondheim,
Norway
Anja Rantanen School of Health Sciences, University of Tampere,
Tampere, Finland
Beverley Raphael Disaster Response and Resilience Research Group,
School of Medicine, University of Western Sydney, Rydalmere, NSW,
Australia
Tayyab Rashid Health & Wellness Centre, University of Toronto,
Scarborough, ON, Canada
Rasmus
Ole
Rasmussen NordRegio
Nordic
Centre
for
Spatial
Development, Stockholm, Sweden
Pamela A. Ratner School of Nursing, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Ricardo Rato University of Saint Joseph, Macau, China
Adi Raveh Jerusalem, Israel
Contributors
cxli

----- Page 141 (native) -----
Corinna Rea Division of General Pediatrics, Boston Children’s Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA
Matthew Reaney PLO Consulting Ltd, Surrey, UK
Kenneth M. Reardon Graduate Division in City and Regional Planning,
University of Memphis, Memphis, TN, USA
Jennica Rebelez-Ernst Department of Counseling, Clinical, and School
Psychology, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA
Rob P. Rechard Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM, USA
Vasu Reddy Human and Social Development, Human Sciences Research
Council, Durban, South Africa
Vijay Reddy Education, Science and Skills Development, Human Sciences
Research Council, Cape Town, South Africa
Bryce Reeve Department of Health Policy and Management, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
Camillo Regalia Psychology, Catholic University, Milan, Italy
Hans Reinders VU University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Kelly Reiss Department of Environmental Engineering Sciences, HT Odum
Center for Wetlands University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
Elke D. Reissing University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Anne Rentz Center for Health Outcomes Research, United BioSource
Corporation, Bethesda, MD, USA
Rebecca Renwick Quality of Life Research Unit, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada
Spyridon Repousis Department of Economics, University of Peloponnese,
Tripolis, Greece
Amy Reschly University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA
Lillian Reuman Vassar College, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston
Dennis Revicki Center for Health Outcomes Research, United BioSource
Corporation, Bethesda, MD, USA
Melanie Revilla Political and Social Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra
RECSM, Barcelona, Spain
Victoria Reyes-Garcı´a ICREA and Institute of Environmental Science and
Technology, Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
T. Anne Richards Public Health Institute, Oakland, CA, USA
Robin Richards Independent Research and Development Specialist,
Johannesburg, South Africa
Evin Richardson Department of Human Development and Family Science,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA
cxlii
Contributors

----- Page 142 (native) -----
Daniel Riddle Departments of Physical Therapy and Orthopaedic Surgery,
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA
Carme Riera-Prunera Econometrics, Statistics and Spanish Economy,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
Anne W. Riley John Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, MD, USA
Brandi Rima Bronx Community College, Bronx, USA
Aric Rindﬂeisch University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign,
IL, USA
Francesca Rinesi Italian National Institute of Statistics, Rome, Italy
Norma Del Rio Education and Communication, Universidad Auto´noma
Metropolitana-Xochimilco, Mexico City, Mexico
Marcia Rioux School of Health Policy and Management, Faculty of Health,
York University, Toronto, ON, Canada
Janice Ristock Women’s and Gender Studies, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada
Caroline Rizza European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Ispra, Italy
Telecom ParisTech, Paris, France
Irene Rizzini Social Work, Pontiﬁcal Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro
CIESPI – International Center for Research and Policy on Childhood, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil
Coral Del Rı´o Departamento de Economı´a Aplicada, Universidade de Vigo,
Vigo, Pontevedra, Spain
Benjamin Roberts Democracy, Governance & Service Delivery Research,
Programme, Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC), Intuthuko Junction,
Durban, South Africa
Karen A. Roberto Center for Gerontology, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg,
VA, USA
Lance W. Roberts Department of Sociology, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada
Clinton Robinson Paris, France
Jennie
Robinette Psychology
and
Social
Behavior,
University
of
California, Irvine, CA, USA
John Robinson Department of Sociology, University of Maryland, College
Park, MD, USA
Karen
Jeong
Robinson CASTL-HE,
Curry
School
of
Education,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA
Michael D. Robinson Department of Psychology, North Dakota State
University, Fargo, ND, USA
Contributors
cxliii

----- Page 143 (native) -----
Rebecca S. Robinson Justice and Social Inquiry, Arizona State University,
Tempe, AZ, USA
Brian
Robson Centre
for
Urban
Studies,
Manchester
University,
Manchester, UK
Michele Roccato Department of Psychology, University of Torino, Torino,
Italy
Ariel Rodrı´guez School of Community Resources and Development,
Arizona State University, Phoenix, AZ, USA
Jose´ Antonio Rodrı´guez-Martı´n Department of Applied Economics,
University of Granada, Granada, Spain
Carlos Farinha Rodrigues Economics Department, School of Economics
and Management, Technical University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal
He´ctor Rodriguez Salta National University, Salta, Argentina
Lia Rodriguez De La Vega Quality of Life Group, Lomas de Zamora
National University, Buenos Aires, Argentina
Vicente Rodriguez Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), Centre for
Human and Social Sciences (CCHS), Institute of Economics, Geography and
Demography (IEGD), Madrid, Spain
Carmen Rodriguez-Blazquez National Center of Epidemiology, Institute
of Health Carlos III and CIBERNAD, Madrid, Spain
Anne Roeters Sociology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Michelle Rogerson Applied Criminology Centre, Institute for Research in
Citizenship and Applied Human Sciences, University of Huddersﬁeld,
Huddersﬁeld, UK
Mariano Rojas Economics, Latin American Faculty of Social Sciences,
Mexico City, Mexico
Universidad Popular Auto´noma del Estado de Puebla, Puebla, Mexico
Fermina Rojo-Perez Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), Centre
for Human and Social Sciences (CCHS), Institute of Economics, Geography
and Demography (IEGD), Madrid, Spain
Berit Rokne Department of Global Public Health and Primary Care,
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
Luca Rolle` Department of Psychology, University of Torino, Torino, Italy
Javier Romani AQR-IREA Research Group, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain
Rebecca Romsdahl Earth Systems Science & Policy, University of North
Dakota, Grand Forks, ND, USA
Tommaso Rondinella President’s Technical-Scientiﬁc Secretariat, Italian
National Institute of Statistics – Istat, Rome, Italy
cxliv
Contributors

----- Page 144 (native) -----
Anna Ro¨nk€a School of Health and Social Studies, JAMK University of
Applied Sciences, Jyv€askyl€a, Finland
Leslie Roos Department of Community Health Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Manitoba, Manitoba Centre for Health Policy,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada
Mark W. Roosa School of Social and Family Dynamics, Arizona State
University, AZ, USA
Monica Rosales Population Sciences, City of Hope, Duarte, CA, USA
Aldo Rosano Agency for Public Health, Rome, Italy
Susan Rosegrant University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Rosa Rosnati Department of Psychology, Athenaeum Centre for Family
Studies and Research - Catholic University, Milan, Italy
Anna Rosofsky CUNY Hunter, New York, NY, USA
Jenna Ross Department of Pediatrics, University of KY, Lexington, KY, USA
Nina Rottmann National Research Centre for Cancer Rehabilitation,
Research Unit of General Practice, University of Southern Denmark,
Odense, Denmark
Jan Anne Roukema Tilburg University, Tilburg, The Netherlands
Donna Rowen School of Health and Related Research (ScHARR),
University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, UK
Vicente Royuela AQR-IREA Research Group, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain
Sara Rubinelli Schweizer Paraplegiker-Forschung and University of
Lucerne, Nottwil, Switzerland
Willibald Ruch Department of Psychology, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland
Matthew
Ruderman Counseling,
Clinical,
and
School
Psychology,
University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA
Chiara Ruini Dipartimento di Psicologia, Universita` di Bologna, Bologna,
Italy
Deden Rukmana Department of Political Science and Public Affairs,
Savannah State University, Savannah, GA, USA
Stephen Rule Outsourced Insight cc, Greenside, South Africa
Anna M. Rulska-Kuthy Department of Political Science and International
Affairs, University of North Georgia, Dahlonega, GA, USA
Leah Ruppanner Survey Research and Methodology, University of
Nebraska–Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA
Daniel Russell University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA
Contributors
cxlv

----- Page 145 (native) -----
Graeme Russell SR&G Pty Ltd, Rozelle, NSW, Australia
Silvia Russo Department of Psychology, University of Torino, Torino, Italy
Tone Rustøen Division of Emergencies and Critical Care, Department of
Research and Development, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway
Shayna Rusticus Evaluation Studies Unit, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
M. S. Laure Ruth Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven,
CT, USA
Richard M. Ryan Department of Clinical and Social Sciences in
Psychology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA
Phil Ryan School of Marketing, Dublin Institute of Technology, Dublin,
Ireland
Jesper Ryberg University of Roskilde, Roskilde, Denmark
Sara R. Rzepa Data Collection and Psychometrics, MHS Incorporation,
Toronto, ON, Canada
Jan Saarela A˚ bo Akademi University, Vasa, Finland
Marwan Sabbagh Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ, USA
Michaela Saisana Econometrics and Applied Statistics, Joint Research
Centre, European Commission, Ispra, Italy
Marisa Salanova Work & Organizational Psychology, University Jaume I,
Castello´n, Spain
Laura
Hersh
Salganik Quality
Initiatives,
American
Institutes
for
Research, Washington, DC, USA
Javier Salinas-Jime´nez Universidad Auto´noma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
Maria
del
Mar
Salinas-Jime´nez Universidad
de
Extremadura,
Extremadura, Spain
John H. Salmela Human Kinetics, University of Ottawa, Belo Horizonte,
Brazil
Mario Salomone University of Bergamo, Bergamo, Italy
Andrea Saltelli European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Ispra, Italy
Silvana
Salvini Department
of
Statistic,
Informatics,
Applications
“Giuseppe Parenti”, University of Florence, Florence, Italy
Marcus Samanni University of Gothenburg, Go¨teborg, Sweden
Gordon Sammut Department of Psychology, University of Malta, Msida,
Malta
Cory Sanchez Justice and Social Inquiry, Arizona State University,
Glendale, AZ, USA
cxlvi
Contributors

----- Page 146 (native) -----
Thomas
W.
Sanchez Urban
Affairs
and
Planning,
Virginia
Tech,
Blacksburg, VA, USA
Manuel Sanchis i Marco Applied Economics II, University of Valencia,
Valencia, Spain
Andrew Sanderford Urban Affairs and Planning, College of Architecture
and Urban Studies, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA
James P. Sanders Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA
Debra
(Dallie)
Sandilands Measurement,
Evaluation
and
Research
Methodology, Faculty of Education, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Marta Santacreu Department of Psychobiology and Health, Autonomous
University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain
Maria-Jose Santana Faculty of Medicine, W21C Research and Innovation
Centre, Institute of Public Health, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB,
Canada
Luis Delﬁm Santos Faculty of Economics, University of Porto, Porto,
Portugal
Paulo Roberto Santos Sobral School of Medicine, Federal University of
Ceara´, Brazil
Philipe dos Santos Food Engineering, State University of Campinas,
Campinas, Brazil
Willem
Egbert
Saris Research
and
Expertise
Centre
for
Survey
Methodology, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain
Simone Sarti Department of Social and Political Sciences, University of
Milano, Italy
Shinya Sasaoka Hiroshima Shudo University, Hiroshima, Japan
Emilia Saukko Department of Social Sciences, University of Eastern
Finland, Kuopio, Finland
Jyoti Savla Human Development, Center for Gerontology, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA, USA
Sukanlaya Sawang QUT Business School, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Richard
Sawatzky School
of Nursing, Trinity Western
University,
Langley, BC, Canada
Seang Mei Saw Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health and Yong Loo Lin
School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Kristin D. Sawka-Miller Department of Psychology, Siena College,
Loudonville, NY, USA
Mike Sayler College of Education, University of North Texas, Denton,
TX, USA
Contributors
cxlvii

----- Page 147 (native) -----
Andy
Scerri Virginia
Polytechnic
Institute
and
State
University,
Blacksburg, VA, USA
Annekathrin Schacht CRC Text Structures, University of Goettingen,
Goettingen, Germany
Robert L. Schalock Hastings College, Hastings, NE, USA
Rinie Schenck Department of Social Work, University of the Western Cape,
Cape Town, South Africa
Stefani Scherer Department of Sociology and Social Research, University
of Trento, Trento, Italy
Kara Schick Makaroff Faculty of Nursing, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, AB, Canada
Anne Schiffer Design, Friends of the Earth, England, Wales and Northern
Ireland and Queen’s University Belfast, UK
Ulrich Schimmack Department of Psychology, University of Toronto,
Mississauga, ON, Canada
Ines Schindler Cluster Languages of Emotion, Free University Berlin,
Berlin, Germany
Joop Schippers Universiteit Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Andreas
Schleicher Organisation
of
Economic
Co-operation
and
Development, Paris, France
Klaus Scho¨mann Jacobs Centre for Life-long Learning, Jacobs University
Bremen, Bremen, Germany
Gunther Schmaus CEPS/Instead/Luxembourg, Schengen, Luxembourg
Katharina
Schmidt Department
of
Psychological
Assessment
and
Differential and Personality Psychology, Freie Universit€at Berlin, Berlin,
Germany
Stefanie Schmidt IMIM (Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute),
Barcelona, Spain
CIBER Epidemiologı´a y Salud Pu´blica (CIBERESP), Spain
Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain
Leann Schneider Industrial/Organizational Psychology, University of
Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada
Pia Schober Department of Education Policy, German Institute for
Economic Research, Berlin, Germany
Kimberly A. Schonert-Reichl Department of Educational and Counselling
Psychology, and Special Education, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
David Schonfeld Department of Pediatrics, St. Christopher’s Hospital for
Children, Philadelphia, PA, USA
cxlviii
Contributors

----- Page 148 (native) -----
Florian R. Schroeck Department of Urology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA
Andreas
Schulze
B€aing Department
of
Geography
and
Planning,
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
Michaela Schulze Faculty of Arts Sociology, University of Siegen, Siegen,
Germany
Carolyn E. Schwartz DeltaQuest Foundation, Tufts University Medical
School, Concord, MA, USA
Benyamin
Schwarz Architectural
Studies,
University
of
Missouri,
Columbia, MO, USA
Peter P. Schweitzer Department of Social and Cultural Anthropology,
University of Vienna, Wien, Austria
Peggy Schyns The Netherlands Institute for Social Research, SCP,
The Hague, The Netherlands
Natalie Sch€uz Centre of Research Excellence for Chronic Respiratory
Disease and Lung Ageing, School of Medicine, University of Tasmania,
Hobart, TAS, Australia
Alison Scope School of Health and Related Research, The University of
Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, UK
Duncan G. Scott Queens University Belfast, Belfast, UK
John Scott The Convention on Biological Diversity, Montreal, QC, Canada
Wolf Scott United Nations Research Institute for Social Development
(UNRISD), Geneva, Switzerland
Constantine Sedikides School of Psychology, University of Southampton,
England, UK
Elisabetta Segre ISTAT – Italian National Institute of Statistics Department
of Economics, “Sapienza” University of Rome, Rome, Italy
Chris Segrin Department of Communication, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ, USA
Katsunori Seki Department of Political Science, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX, USA
Sayanti Sen Bangabasi College, Kolkata Calcutta University, Kolkata,
India
Sacha Sene´cal Strategic Research Directorate, Aboriginal Affairs and
Northern Development Canada, Gatineau, QC, Canada
Department of Sociology, The University of Western Ontario, London,
ON, Canada
Amir A. Sepehry Division of Neurology / Neuroscience, The University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Contributors
cxlix

----- Page 149 (native) -----
Joyce Serido The Norton School of Family & Consumer Sciences,
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA
Eleni Sfakianaki Business Administration, Hellenic Open University,
Patra, Greece
Kelly Shaffer Psychology, Univeristy of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Emily Shaffer-Hudkins Department of Pediatrics, University of South
Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
Asrul Akmal Shaﬁe Discipline of Social & Administrative Pharmacy,
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia (USM),
Minden, Malaysia
Hongxia Shan Faculty of Education, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Ruchita Shah Department of Psychiatry, Post-Graduate Institute of Medical
Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India
Kate Shannon Divison of AIDS, Department of Medicine, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Erin K. Sharpe Department of Recreation and Leisure Studies, Brock
University, St. Catharines, ON, Canada
Benjamin R. Shear Department of ECPS, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Daniel T. L. Shek Department of Applied Social Sciences, The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Roy J. Shephard Faculty of Kinesiology and
Physical
Education,
University of Toronto, Brackendale, BC, Canada
Meg Sherval Discipline of Geography and Environmental Studies, The
Centre for Urban and Regional Studies, The University of Newcastle,
Callaghan, NSW, Australia
Paula Sherwood University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Qiuling Shi MD Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas, Houston,
TX, USA
Doh C. Shin Center for Democracy, University of California-Irvine, Irvine,
CA, USA
Amit Shrira Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel
Xiaoling Shu Sociology, University of California Davis, Davis, CA, USA
Samuel Shye The Van Leer Jerusalem Institute and The Hebrew University
of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Paul Siakaluk Department of Psychology, University of Northern British
Columbia, Prince George, BC, Canada
cl
Contributors

----- Page 150 (native) -----
Pavle
Sicherl SICENTER
(Socio-economic
Indicators
Center)
and
University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Frank Siebler Department of Psychology, University of Tromsø, Tromsø,
Norway
Rainer K. Silbereisen Center for Applied Developmental Science (CADS),
University of Jena, Jena, Germany
Nava R. Silton Psychology, Marymount Manhattan College, New York,
NY, USA
Isabel Silva Human and Social Sciences Department, Fernando Pessoa
University, Porto, Portugal
Neuza Silva Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, University of
Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal
Hilary Silver Department of Sociology, Brown University, Providence,
RI, USA
Deanne Catharine Simms Psychology, University of New Brunswick,
Fredericton, NB, Canada
Na´dia Simoes Economics Department, ISCTE – Instituto Universita´rio de
Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal
Leslie Gordon Simons School of Criminology and Criminal Justice,
Arizona State University, Phoenix, AZ, USA
Gary Sinclair School of Marketing, Dublin Institute of Technology, Dublin,
Ireland
Kamlesh Singh Department of Humanities & Social Sciences, Indian
Institute of Technology, New Delhi, India
Barbara Sini Psychology Department, University of Turin, Turin, Italy
Eszter Siposne Nandori Institute of World and Regional Economics,
University of Miskolc, Miskolc, Hungary
M. Joseph Sirgy Department of Marketing, Virginia Polytechnic Institute &
State University, Blacksburg, VA, USA
Cindy H. P. Sit Department of Sports Science and Physical Education,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of
China
Institute of Human Performance, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
People’s Republic of China
Svend-Erik Skaaning Department of Political Science, Aarhus University,
Aarhus, Denmark
Petros Skapinakis Department of Psychiatry, University of Ioannina
School of Medicine, Ioannina, Greece
Elizabeth A. Skinner Health Policy and Management, The Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA
Contributors
cli

----- Page 151 (native) -----
Emily Skinner School for Resource and Environmental Studies, Dalhousie
University, Halifax, NS, Canada
Richard L. Skolasky Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Spine Outcomes
Research Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA
Jeff A. Sloan Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, NY, USA
Bryan Smale Faculty of Applied Health Sciences, University of Waterloo,
Waterloo, ON, Canada
Adam B. Smith York Health Economics Consortium, University of York,
York, UK
Cheryl A. Smith Central Jersey Family Health Consortium, North
Brunswick, NJ, USA
Conal Smith OECD, Paris, France
W. James Smith Department of Economics, University of Colorado
Denver, Denver, CO, USA
Jennifer L. Smith Department of Psychology, Loyola University Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA
Kelly B. Smith Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Peter B. Smith School of Psychology, University of Sussex, East Sussex,
UK
Jeroen Smits Nijmegen Center for Economics, Institute for Management
Research, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Janet Smylie Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada
Centre for Research on Inner City Health in the Keenan Research Centre of
the Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, Saint Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, ON,
Canada
Rodlescia
S.
Sneed Department
of
Psychology,
Carnegie
Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Claire Snyder Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
Thomas Søbirk Petersen Philosophy and Science Studies, University of
Roskilde, Roskilde, Denmark
Frans Søltoft Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Birkerød, Denmark
Alessandro Solipaca Italian National Institute of Statistics, Rome, Italy
Jordan Soliz Department of Communication, University of Nebraska–
Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA
clii
Contributors

----- Page 152 (native) -----
Werner Sommer Department of Psychology, Humboldt-University at
Berlin, Berlin, Germany
Sharon Song Clinical Practice Guidelines Unit, Department of Research
and Scientiﬁc Affairs, American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons,
Rosemont, IL, USA
Internal Medicine/Psychology Section, Presence Resurrection Medical
Center, Chicago, IL, USA
Judith
P.
M.
Soons Education
Council
Netherlands,
The
Hague,
The Netherlands
Silvia So¨rensen Department of Psychiatry, University of Rochester School
of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA
Jennifer
Sorochan Department
of
Psychology,
Vancouver
Island
University, Nanaimo, BC, Canada
Igor Sotgiu Department of Human and Social Sciences, University of
Bergamo, Italy, Bergamo, Italy
Alfonso Sousa-Poza Department of Household and Consumer Economics
and Gender Economics, University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany
Felicity South Psychological Sciences, University of Worcester, Worcester,
UK
Chris Southcott Department of Sociology, Lakehead University, ON,
Canada
Zsolt Speder Demographic Research Institute, Budapest, Hungary
Laura Speer The Annie E. Casey Foundation, Baltimore, MD, USA
Annette Spellerberg University Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany
Filippo Spiezia Orthopaedics and Trauma Surgery, Campus Bio-Medico
University, Rome, Italy
Nicholas Spina Department of Politics and European Studies, American
University in Bulgaria, Blagoevgrad, Bulgaria
Mirjam A. G. Sprangers Department of Medical Psychology, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Susan Sprecher Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Illinois State
University, Normal, IL, USA
Robert A. Sproule Department of Economics, Bishop’s University,
Sherbrooke, Canada
Wilis
Srisayekti Faculty
of
Psychology,
Padjadjaran
University,
Jatinangor-Sumedang, Indonesia
Kelli I. Stajduhar School of Nursing and Centre On Aging, University of
Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada
Contributors
cliii

----- Page 153 (native) -----
Brian Starzomski School of Environmental Studies, University of Victoria,
Victoria, BC, Canada
Patrizia Steca Department of Psychology, University of Milan-Bicocca,
Milan, Italy
Ann Steedly Planning Communities, LLC, Raleigh, NC, USA
Jennifer L. Steel University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Andre´s Steffanowski Otto-Selz-Institute of the University of Mannheim,
Mannheim, Germany
Mary Steffel Marketing Department, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL, USA
Georges Steffgen Research Unit: INSIDE, University of Luxembourg,
Walferdange, Luxembourg
Nadia Steiber Department Socioeconomics, Institute for Sociology and
Social Research, Vienna University of Economics, Vienna, Austria
Frederick Steiner School of Architeture, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX, USA
Jennifer L. Steiner Department of Psychology, Indiana University Purdue
University Indianapolis, Indianapolis, IN, USA
Donald M. Steinwachs Health Policy and Management, The Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA
Andrea M. Stelnicki Educational Psychology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, AB, Canada
Svetlana Stepchenkova Department of Tourism, Recreation and Sport
Management, College of Health and Human Performance, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
Rebecca Stephens University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
Kyle R. Stephenson Department of Psychology, University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX, USA
Gillian Stevens Department of Sociology, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
AB, Canada
Kenneth Stewart Department of Economics, University of Victoria,
Victoria, BC, Canada
Rolf Steyer Department of Methodology and Evaluation Research, Institute
of Psychology, Friedrich-Schiller-University of Jena, Jena, Germany
Nelia Steyn Centre for the Study of Social and Environmental Determinants
of Nutrition (CSSE), Human Sciences Research Council, Cape Town,
South Africa
Skye Stifel University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA
cliv
Contributors

----- Page 154 (native) -----
Daniel Stokols School of Social Ecology and UCI Health Sciences,
University of California-Irvine Planning, Policy, and Design; Psychology
and Social Behavior; Public Health, Irvine, CA, USA
Michael Stones Department of Psychology, Lakehead University, Thunder
Bay, ON, Canada
Erik David Storholm Applied Psychology, New York University, New
York, NY, USA
Robert L. Stoughton Fitz Center for Leadership in Community, University
of Dayton, Dayton, OH, USA
Tammo Straatmann Industrial and Organizational Psychology, University
of Osnabr€uck, Osnabr€uck, Germany
Steffanie Strathdee University of California, San Diego, CA, USA
Randi Streisand Department of Psychiatry & Pediatrics, Children’s
National Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA
Jare´ Struwig Human Sciences Research Council, Pretoria, South Africa
Tammy Stubley School of Social Work, University of Northern British
Columbia, Prince George, BC, Canada
Alice F. Stuhlmacher Psychology, DePaul University, Chicago, IL, USA
Alois Stutzer Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Basel,
Basel, Switzerland
Aleksandar Sˇtulhofer Sexology Unit, Department of Sociology, Faculty of
Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia
Ines Sucic Institute of social sciences Ivo Pilar, Zagreb, Croatia
Yi Nam Suen Institute of Human Performance, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Shakira Suglia Epidemiology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
Jussi Suikkanen Philosophy Department, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK
Shannon M. Suldo University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
William Sullivan Department of Landscape Architecture, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL, USA
Sudarno Sumarto SMERU Research Institute, Jakarta, Indonesia
Rachel C. F. Sun Faculty of Education, The University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
HeeKyung Sung School of Community Resources & Development,
Arizona State University, Phoenix, AZ, USA
Jordi Surin˜ach AQR-IREA Research Group, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain
Contributors
clv

----- Page 155 (native) -----
Daniel Suryadarma Arndt-Corden Department of Economics, Australian
National University, Acton, ACT, Australia
Asep Suryahadi SMERU Research Institute, Jakarta, Indonesia
Christian Suter Institut de Sociologie, Universite´ de Neuchaˆtel, Neuchaˆtel,
Switzerland
Sven Svebak Department of Neuroscience, NTNU - Trondheim Norwegian
University of Science and Technology Faculty of Medicine, Trondheim,
Norway
Robert Svensson Malmo¨ University, Malmo¨, Sweden
Viren Swami Department of Psychology, University of Westminster,
London, UK
Eric Swank Morehead State University, Morehead, KY, USA
Suzanne Swanton School of Planning, University of Waterloo, Waterloo,
ON, Canada
Sharlene Swartz Human and Social Development/Sociology, Human
Sciences Research Council/University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South
Africa
Semira Tagliabue Department of Psyhcology, Atheneum Center for Family
Studies and Research Catholic University, Brescia, Italy
Bee Choo Tai Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University
of Singapore, Singapore
Emily Talen School of Geographic Sciences and Urban Planning, Arizona
State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
Craig Talmage Community Resources and Development, Arizona State
University, Tempe, AZ, USA
Paolo Tamborrini Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy
Siok Kuan Tambyah Department of Marketing, NUS Business School,
National University of Singapore, Singapore
Hala Tamim York University, Toronto, ON, Canada
Hiromi
Tanaka School
of
Information
and
Communication,
Meiji
University, Tokyo, Japan
Ern Ser Tan Department of Sociology, National University of Singapore,
Singapore
Ngiap-Chuan
Tan SingHealth
Polyclinics
(Pasir
Ris),
Singapore,
Singapore
Soo Jiuan Tan Department of Marketing, NUS Business School, National
University of Singapore, Singapore
Hiromi Taniguchi Department of Sociology, University of Louisville,
Louisville, KY, USA
clvi
Contributors

----- Page 156 (native) -----
Stefano Tarantola Statistical Indicators for Policy Assessment, Joint
Research Centre of the European Commission, Ispra, Italy
Benjawan Tawatsupa National Centre for Epidemiology and Population
Health, ANU College of Medicine, Biology & Environment, The Australian
National University, Canberra, Australia
Maria Tcherni University of New Haven, CT, USA
Judith Teichman Political Science, University of Toronto Munk School,
Toronto, ON, Canada
Karl Halvor Teigen Department of Psychology, University of Oslo Faculty
of Social Sciences, Oslo, Norway
Luci
Fuscaldi
Teixeira-Salmela Department
of
Physical
Therapy,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
Caroline E. Temcheff Universite´ de Sherbrooke, Que´bec, QC, Canada
Mikiko Terashima Environmental Science & Community Health and
Epidemiology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada
Berend Terluin Department of General Practice and Elderly Care
Medicine, EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, VU University
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Caroline B. Terwee Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, VU
University Medical Center, EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Kathryn Terzano Westﬁeld State University, Westﬁeld, MA, USA
Clemens Tesch-Ro¨emer German Centre of Gerontology, Berlin, Germany
Laura Tesler Waldman Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA
Peter Theuns Methods in Psychology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussel,
Belgium
Neil Thin School of Social and Political Science, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, UK
Cecilie Thøgersen-Ntoumani School of Sport and Exercise Sciences,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
Ren Thomas Department of Geography, Planning, and International
Development
Studies,
University
of
Amsterdam,
Amsterdam,
The Netherlands
Mieke Beth Thomeer Department of Sociology, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX, USA
James
Thompson Department
of
Special
Education,
Illinois
State
University, Normal, IL, USA
William Thorn OECD Directorate for Education, Paris, France
Sally Thorne UBC School of Nursing, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Contributors
clvii

----- Page 157 (native) -----
Bruce A. Thyer College of Social Work, Florida State University,
Tallahassee, FL, USA
Valerie Tiberius Department of Philosophy, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA
Keith G. Tidball Department of Natural Resources, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY, USA
Habib Tiliouine Psychology and Educational Sciences, Laboratory of
Educational Processes & Social Context, University of Oran, Oran, Algeria
Robin Tillmann FORS Swiss Centre of Expertise in the Social Sciences,
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
Carla Tinti Psychology Department, University of Turin, Turin, Italy
Litman Todd Victoria Transportation Policy Institute, Victoria, BC, Canada
Nathan R. Todd Department of Psychology, DePaul University, Chicago,
IL, USA
Davood Toﬁghi School of Psychology, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA, USA
Mara Tognetti Sociology and Social Research, University of Milano-
Bicocca, Observatory and Methods for Health, Milan, Italy
Ray Tomalty School of Urban Planning, McGill University Smart Cities
Research Services, Montreal, QC, Canada
Martin J. Tomasik Department of Psychology, Applied Psychology:
Life-Management, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Joaquı´n Toma´s-Sa´bado Nursing School, Escola d’Infermeria Gimbernat,
Sant Cugat del Valle´s, Barcelona, Spain
Michael B. Toney Department of Sociology, Social Work & Anthropology,
Utah State University, Logan, UT, USA
Graciela Tonon Universidad Nacional de Lomas de Zamora, Camino de
Cintura, Argentina
Universidad de Palermo, Argentina Universidad Nacional de La Matanza,
San Justo, Argentina
Umran Topcu Bahcesehir University, Faculty of Architecture and Design,
I˙stanbul, Turkey
Claire Topping Whittington Health, London, UK
Judith Torney-Purta University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
Livianna Tossutti Department of Political Science, Brock University,
St. Catharines, ON, Canada
Casey Totenhagen The Norton School of Family & Consumer Sciences,
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA
Teresa Townsend Planning Communities, LLC, Raleigh, NC, USA
clviii
Contributors

----- Page 158 (native) -----
Jean Baptiste Trabut Epatologue – Hopital Cochin, Paris, France
Paula Tran Inzeo School of Human Ecology, University of Wisconsin-
Madison, Madison, WI, USA
Marco Trapani University of Florence, Florence, Italy
Bernardo Pena Trapero University of Alcala´, Alcala´, Spain
Travis Trapp International Relations, San Francisco State University,
Concord, CA, USA
Judith Treas School of Social Sciences, University of California, Irvine,
CA, USA
Stanislav Treger Department of Psychology, DePaul University, Chicago,
IL, USA
Nico Trocme´ Centre for Research on Children and Families, McGill
University, Montreal, QC, Canada
Ming-Chang Tsai Department of Sociology, National Taipei University,
New Taipei City, Taiwan
Sandra
Tsang
Kit
Man Department
of
Social
Work
and
Social
Administration, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s
Republic of China
Sasha Tsenkova Faculty of Environment, University of Calgary, Calgary,
AB, Canada
Stavroula
Tsirogianni Methodology
Institute,
London
School
of
Economics, London, UK
Geoffrey K. F. Tso City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s
Republic of China
Michele Tugade Department of Psychology, Vassar College, New York,
NY, USA
Diane Turner-Bowker Datacorp, Smithﬁeld, RI, USA
Gavin Turrell School of Public Health and Social Work and the Institute of
Health and Biomedical Innovation, Queensland University of Technology,
Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Professor of Public Health and National Health and Medical Research
Council Senior Research Fellow, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Leslie Tutty University of Calgary, Faculty of Social Work, Calgary, AB,
Canada
Cara J. Tweed Integrated Science, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Roger G. Tweed Department of Psychology, Kwantlen Polytechnic
University, Surrey, BC, Canada
Yukiko Uchida Kokoro Research Center, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
Contributors
clix

----- Page 159 (native) -----
Ekaterina Uglanova Jacobs University, Bremen, Germany
Jennifer Uhrig Social Policy, Health and Economics Research, Health
Communication, RTI International, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA
Debra Umberson Department of Sociology, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX, USA
Megan R. Underhill Sociology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati,
OH, USA
Ileana Ungureanu Department of Marriage and Family Counseling, Adler
School of Professional Psychology, Chicago, IL, USA
Dominic Upton Psychology, University of Worcester Institute of Health and
Society, Worcester, UK
Penney Upton Psychological Sciences, The University of Worcester,
Worcester, UK
Jane Ursel Department of Sociology, University of Manitoba, MB, Canada
Raquel af Ursin Survey Division, Mathematica Policy Research, Princeton,
NJ, USA
Kristin Urstad The Faculty of Social Science, University of Stavanger,
Stavanger, Norway
Inger Utne Nursing, Oslo and Akershus University College of Applied
Science, Oslo, Norway
Marja Vaarama National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), Helsinki,
Finland
Annukka Vainio Department of Social Research, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland
Berit Taraldsen Valeberg Nursing, Oslo and Akershus University College
of Applied Sciences, Oslo, Norway
William
Valliere Rubenstein
School
of
Environment
and
Natural
Resources, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA
Robert F. Valois Health Promotion, Education & Behavior, Arnold School
of Public Health University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
Frederik Van Acker Faculty of Psychology, Open Universiteit, Heerlen,
The Netherlands
M. S. Van B. Praag Faculty of Economics and Business, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Marjolein van Broese Groenou Department of Sociology, Faculty of
Social Sciences VU University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Geurt
van
de
Kerk Sustainable
Society
Foundation,
Afferden,
The Netherlands
clx
Contributors

----- Page 160 (native) -----
Peter van de Ven Statistics Directorate, OECD, Paris, France
Roderick
van
den
Bergh University
Medical
Centre,
Utrecht,
The Netherlands
Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Kees van den Bos Social Psychology, Utrecht University, Utrecht,
The Netherlands
Mariska van der Horst Department of Sociology | ICS, Utrecht University,
Utrecht, The Netherlands
Tanja van der Lippe Department of Sociology, Utrecht University,
Utrecht, The Netherlands
Sylvia van der Pal Child Health, TNO, Leiden, The Netherlands
Jojanneke van der Toorn Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands
Jeroen van der Waal Department of Sociology, Erasmus University
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Babette van der Zwaard EMGO+ Department of General Practice, VU
Medisch Centrum, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Marcel Van Egmond Department of Communication Science, University
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Jos van Loon Department of Special Education, University of Ghent, Gent,
Belgium
Arduin Foundation, Middelburg, The Netherlands
Wim van Oorschot Department of Sociology, Leuven University, Leuven,
Belgium
Wijbrandt H. Van Schuur Department of Sociology/ICS, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
Arthur Van Soest Tilburg University and Netspar, Tilburg, The Netherlands
Melissa Van Wert Factor-Inwentash Faculty of Social Work, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Martijn van Zomeren Social Psychology, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands
Wouter Vanderplasschen Orthopedagogics, Ghent University, University
College Ghent, Gent, Belgium
Stijn
Vandevelde Faculty
of
Education,
Health
and
Social
Work,
Department of Special Education, University College Ghent, Ghent
University, Gent, Belgium
Richard J. Vann Management & Marketing Department, University of
Wyoming College of Business, Laramie, WY, USA
Contributors
clxi

----- Page 161 (native) -----
Evangelos Vantzos Department of Psychiatry, University of Patras Medical
School, Patras, Greece
Cristina Vaque´ Crusellas Department of Community Health and Food,
Faculty of Health and Well being, University of Vic, Barcelona, Spain
James W. Varni Department of Landscape Architecture and Urban
Planning, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA
Celeste Amorim Varum Department of Economics, Management and Ind.
Engineering, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal
Matt
Vassar Ofﬁce
of
Educational
Development,
Oklahoma
State
University Center for Health Sciences, Tulsa, OK, USA
Leonardo Vazquez The National Consortium for Creative Placemaking,
Montclair, NJ, USA
Ruut Veenhoven Erasmus Happiness Economics Research Organisation,
Erasmus University Rotterdam, Potchefstroom, The Netherlands
Optentia Research Group, North–West University, Potchefstroom, South
Africa
Jose Garcia Vega Department of Economics, The University of Monterrey,
Garza Garcia, Mexico
Veronica Velasco OReD (Regional Observatory for Drug Dependence),
Milan, Italy
Dianne Vella-Brodrick School of Psychology and Psychiatry, Monash
University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
Søren Ventegodt Quality of Life Research Center, København, Denmark
Aldo Vera-Calzaretta Escuela de Salud Pu´blica, Universidad de Chile,
Santiago, Chile
Fellow Program ITREOH, Mount Sinai University, New York, NY, USA
Paolo Verme Economics, The World Bank and University of Torino,
Turin, Italy
Jeroen K. Vermunt Department of Methodology and Statistics, Tilburg
University, Tilburg, The Netherlands
Howard Vernon Research, Canadian Memorial Chiropractic College,
Toronto, ON, Canada
Gijsbert Erik Verrips Life Style, TNO, Leiden, The Netherlands
Roland Verwiebe Department of Sociology, University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria
Amparo Victorio Psychology, Universidad Iberoamericana-Ciudad de
Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico
Ignacio Ramos Vidal Departamento de Psicologı´a Social, Universidad de
Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain
clxii
Contributors

----- Page 162 (native) -----
Alessio Vieno Department of Developmental and Social Psychology,
University of Padova, Padua, Italy
Karla Valverde Viesca Center of Political Sciences Studies, UNAM,
Facultad de Ciencias Polı´ticas y Sociales, Mexico, Mexico
Vivian L. Vignoles School of Psychology, University of Sussex, Sussex,
UK
Daniele
Vignoli DiSIA
-
Dipartimento
di
Statistica,
Informatica,
Applicazioni, University of Florence, Florence, Italy
Gemma Vilagut IMIM (Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute),
Barcelona, Spain
Alexandra M. Vilela School of Media Arts & Design, James Madison
University, Harrisonburg, VA, USA
Cynthia M. H. Villalba Institute of International Education, Stockholm
University (Sweden) IACM/FORTH, Stockholm, Sweden
Institute of International Education, Educational Research and Evaluation
Group (Greece), Heraklion, Greece
Ernesto Villalba CEDEFOP, Finikas, Thessaloniki, Greece
Ferran Vin˜as Psychology, Universitat de Girona, Girona, Spain
Leela Viswanathan School of Urban and Regional Planning, Queen’s
University, Kingston, ON, Canada
Joar Vittersø Department of Psychology, University of Tromsø, Tromsø,
Norway
Alberto Voci Department of Philosophy, Sociology, Education, and
Applied Psychology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy
Manuel Voelkle Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin,
Germany
Joachim Vogel University of Umea˚, Umea, Sweden
Ioannis Vogiatzakis Open University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus
Nina Vøllestad Department of Health Sciences, Institute of Health and
Society University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
Scott Vollum Department of Sociology-Anthropology, University of
Minnesota-Duluth, Duluth, MN, USA
Matthias von Davier Center for Global Assessment, Educational Testing
Service, Princeton, NJ, USA
Armin von Gunten University Hospital Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
Marieke Voorpostel FORS (Swiss Centre of Expertise in the Social
Sciences), Lausanne, Switzerland
Jessica Vorstermans Critical Disability Studies, York University, Toronto,
ON, Canada
Contributors
clxiii

----- Page 163 (native) -----
P€aivi Vuokila-Oikkonen Diaconia University of Applied Sciences, Oulu,
Finland
Udaya R. Wagle´ School of Public Affairs and Administration, Western
Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI, USA
Gert G. Wagner German Institute for Economic Research (DIW Berlin),
Berlin, Germany
Shannon L. Wagner School of Health Sciences, University of Northern
British Columbia, Prince George, BC, Canada
Astrid Wahl Faculty of Medicine, Oslo University, Oslo, Norway
Michael F. Walker Justice and Social Inquiry, Arizona State University,
Tempe, AZ, USA
Ruth Walker Southgate Institute for Health, Society and Equity, Flinders
University, Adelaide, SA, Australia
Claire
Wallace Department
of
Sociology,
University
of
Aberdeen,
Aberdeen, UK
Imogen Wall Social and Progress Reporting Section, Australian Bureau of
Statistics, Australia
Deatra Walsh Political Science, York University, Toronto, ON, Canada
Jeffrey A. Walsh Criminal Justice Sciences, Illinois State University,
Normal, IL, USA
Stephen Walters School of Health and Related Research, The University of
Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, UK
Tracy Walters Department of Psychology, Northern Illinois University,
DeKalb, IL, USA
David Waltner-Toews Department of Population Medicine, University of
Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada
Po-san Wan Hong Kong Institute of Asia-Paciﬁc Studies, Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Adrian H. Y. Wan Centre on Behavioral Health, The University of
Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong
Shun Wang
Korea Development Institute (KDI), School of Public Policy
and Management, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Weijun Wang Institute on Family & Neighborhood Life, Clemson
University, Clemson, SC, USA
Xiao-Li Wang Department of Child, Adolescent and Women’s Health,
Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, People’s Republic of
China
Chong-Wen Wang Centre on Behavioral Health, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
clxiv
Contributors

----- Page 164 (native) -----
Jung-Der Wang Department of Public Health, National Cheng Kung
University College of Medicine, Tainan, Taiwan
Pa-Chun Wang Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan
Department of General Surgery, Cathay General Hospital School of
Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, Taipei, Taiwan
Qunwei Wang Dongwu Business School, Soochow University, Nanjing
University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Suzhou, China
Rebekah Wanic University of California, San Diego, CA, USA
Christopher Wannamaker University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
John E. Ware Jr. University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
MA, USA
Robert Ware University of Calgary, University of British Columbia,
Galiano, BC, Canada
Narelle Warren School of Psychology and Psychiatry, Monash University,
Caulﬁeld East, VIC, Australia
Sietske Waslander TiasNimbas Business School, Tilburg, The Netherlands
Robert W. Wassmer Department of Public Policy and Administration,
California State University, Sacramento, CA, USA
Alan S. Waterman Department of Psychology, The College of New Jersey,
Ewing, NJ, USA
Wendy Watkins Data Centre, Carleton University Library, Ottawa, ON,
Canada
Kathleen B. Watson Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA
Torquil
Watt Department
of
Medical
Endocrinology,
Copenhagen
University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark
Samantha
Wauchope Sector
for
External
Relations
and
Public
Information,
United
Nations
Educational,
Scientiﬁc
and
Cultural
Organization, Paris, France
Matthew Waugh Department of Educational and Counselling Psychology
and Special Education, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada
Brian Webb School of Environment and Development, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK
Dave Webb University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia
Samuel R. Weber Department of Psychiatry, Wexner Medical Center,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA
Christy Weer Department of Management and Marketing, Salisbury
University, Salisbury, MD, USA
Contributors
clxv

----- Page 165 (native) -----
Michael L. Wehmeyer Special Education, University of Kansas, Lawrence,
KS, USA
John T. Wei Department of Urology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA
Stefan Weick Gesis - Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences, Mannheim,
Germany
Netta
Weinstein Department
of
Psychology,
University
of
Essex,
Colchester, UK
Patricia L. Weir Department of Kinesiology, University of Windsor,
Windsor, ON, Canada
Myrna Weissman Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, College
of Physician’s and Surgeons, New York, NY, USA
Cyprian Wejnert DHHS/CDC/OID/NCHHSTP/DHPSE/BCSB, Atlanta,
GA, USA
Ian
Wellard Department
of
Sport
Science,
Tourism
and
Leisure,
Canterbury Christ Church University, Canterbury, UK
Linda Welling Economics, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada
Shirli Werner Paul Baerwald School of Social Work and Social Welfare,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Michael West Aston Business School, Aston University, Birmingham, UK
Mark Western Institute for Social Science Research, University of
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
Charles F. Westoff Ofﬁce of Population Research, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ, USA
Eddy Weyts Academic Psychiatric Centre, UPC Sint Kamillus, Bierbeek,
Belgium
Anne
Wheeler Carolina
Institute
for
Developmental
Disabilities,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
Stephen Wheeler Human Ecology, University of California at Davis,
Davis, CA, USA
Christopher T. Whelan School of Social Policy, Queen’s University of
Belfast, Belfast, UK
Kathryn White United Nations Association in Canada, Ottawa, ON,
Canada
Rebecca M. B. White Sanford School of Social and Family Dynamics,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
Sarah C. White Social and Policy Sciences, University of Bath, Bath, UK
Andrea Whitsett Morrison Institute for Public Policy, Arizona State
University, Phoenix, AZ, USA
clxvi
Contributors

----- Page 166 (native) -----
Eric D. Widmer Department of Sociology, University of Geneva, Geneva,
Switzerland
Mark Widmer Recreation Management, Brigham Young University,
Provo, UT, USA
Lisa
Wiebesiek Human
and
Social
Development,
Human
Sciences
Research Council, Durban, South Africa
Elaine Wiersma Department of Health Sciences, Lakehead University,
Thunder Bay, ON, Canada
Ulrich Wiesmann Institute for Medical Psychology, Greifswald University
Medicine, Greifswald, Germany
Daniel Wight MRC Social and Public Health Sciences Unit, University of
Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
Kenneth Aarskaug Wiik Research Department, Statistics Norway,
Oslo, Norway
Diane Wild eCOA, Oxford Outcomes Seacourt Tower, Oxford, UK
Gordon Wilkie Nova Scotia Community College, School of Trades and
Technology, Dartmouth, NS, Canada
Angela A. A. Willeto Department of Sociology and Social Work, Northern
Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ, USA
Gavin William Physiotherapy Department, Epworth Hospital, Richmond,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia
Oliver S. Williams Department of Sociology, University of Leicester,
Leicester, UK
Parrish B. Williams The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
J. Douglas Willms Canadian
Research
Institute for
Social
Policy,
University of New Brunswick, Fredericton, NB, Canada
Brian Willoughby Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA
Eduardo Wills-Herrera School of Management, Universidad de Los
Andes, Bogota, DC, Colombia
Jeffrey Wilson School for Resource and Environmental Studies and College
of Sustainability, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada
Matthew T. Wilson Rehabilitation Psychology, University of Wisconsin-
Madison, Madison, WI, USA
Rainer Winkelmann Department of Economics, University of Zurich,
Zuerich, Switzerland
Eva Wiren Joint Research Centre, European Commission, Ispra, Italy
Michelle M. Wirth Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame,
Notre Dame, IN, USA
Contributors
clxvii

----- Page 167 (native) -----
Marie´ P. Wissing School of Psychosocial Behavioural Sciences, Africa
Unit
for
Trans-disciplinary
Research,
North-West
University,
Potchefstroom, South Africa
Werner W. Wittmann Otto-Selz-Institute of the University of Mannheim,
Mannheim, Germany
Timothy
Wojan Economic
Research
Service,
US
Department
of
Agriculture, Washington, DC, USA
Pascal Wolff EUROSTAT, Luxembourg
Anthony Wong Hong Kong Council of Social Service, Wanchai, Hong
Kong, People’s Republic of China
Cecilia Wong Centre for Urban Policy Studies, The University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK
Paul
T.
P.
Wong Department
of
Psychology,
Trent
University,
Peterborough, ON, Canada
Stephen H. Wong Department of Sports Science & Physical Education, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Alex M. Wood Behavioural Science Centre, Stirling Management School,
University of Stirling, Manchester, UK
Mark Wooden Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social
Research, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
Laura Wray-Lake Clinical and Social Sciences in Psychology, University
of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA
Gemma Wright Oxford Institute of Social Policy, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK
Helen Wright School of Psychology, Flinders University, Adelaide, SA,
Australia
Lester
Wright
Jr. Clinical
Psychology/Department
of
Psychology,
Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI, USA
Penny Wright Psychosocial Oncology and Clinical Practice Research
Group, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine University of Leeds,
St James’s University Hospital, Leeds, UK
Tarah Wright Environmental Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
NS, Canada
Amery D. Wu The Department of Educational and Counselling Psychology,
and Special Education, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
BC, Canada
Albert W. Wu Health Policy and Management, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA
clxviii
Contributors

----- Page 168 (native) -----
Chia-Huei Wu UWA Business School, University of Western Australia,
Crawley, Perth, WA, Australia
Ching-yi Wu Department of Occupational Therapy & Graduate Institute of
Behavioral Sciences, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan
Chinyu Wu Allied Health Sciences, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
Thomas Wuerzer Department of Community and Regional Planning, Boise
State University, Boise, ID, USA
Susanne Wurm German Centre of Gerontology, Berlin, Germany
Jing Jian Xiao Human Development and Family Studies, University of
Rhode Island, Kingston, RI, USA
Zhanjun Xing School of Political Science and Public Administration,
Shandong University, Jinan, China
Kuan Xu Economics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada
Xiaoyan Xu Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, National
University of Singapore, Singapore
Jorge Yamamoto Psychology Department, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Catolica
del Peru, Lima, Peru
Department of Social & Policy Sciences, University of Bath, Bath, UK
Ching-Chow Yang Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering,
Chung Yuan Christian University, Zhong-Li, Taiwan
Jhih-Jyun Yang Department of Psychology, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China
Zheng Yang North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA
Eyal Yaniv Graduate School of Business Administration, Bar Ilan
University, Ramat Gan, Israel
Grace Yao Department of Psychology, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan, Republic of China
Sophia Yeung Center of Community Alliance for Research & Education –
CCare, Division of Population Sciences City of Hope National Medical
Center, Duarte, CA, USA
Wei-Jun Jean Yeung Department of Sociology and Asia Research Institute,
National University of Singapore, University of Michigan, Singapore
Vasoontara Yiengprugsawan National Centre for Epidemiology and
Population Health, ANU College of Medicine, Biology & Environment,
The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
Jeremy Yorgason School of Family Life, Brigham Young University,
Provo, UT, USA
Karim Youssef University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada
Contributors
clxix

----- Page 169 (native) -----
Lu Yu Department of Applied Social Sciences, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
Grace B. Yu Linton Global College, Hannam University, Daejeon, South
Korea
Morag A. Yule Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Deanna Zachary Applied Survey Research, Watsonville, CA, USA
Anat Zaidman-Zait Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel
Catalin Zamﬁr Romanian Academy, Institute for Quality of Life Research,
Bucharest, Romania
Bruna Zani Department of Psychology, Alma Mater Studiorum –
University of Bologna (Italy), Bologna, Italy
Nana Zarnekow Department of Agricultural Economics, University of
Kiel, Kiel, Germany
Diana
Zavala-Rojas Research
and
Expertise
Centre
for
Survey
Methodology, Department of Political and Social Sciences, Universitat
Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain
Bozena Zdaniuk Department of ECPS, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Marty Zelenietz Anthropology, Saint Mary’s University, Halifax, NS,
Canada
John M. Zelenski Department of Psychology, Carleton University, Ottawa,
ON, Canada
Donglan Zha College of Economics and Management, Nanjing University
of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
Jintao Zhang State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and
Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China
Ling Zhang College of Economics and Management, Nanjing University of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
Rui Zhang Department of Psychology, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
AB, Canada
Xuelin Zhang Income Statistics Division, Statistics Canada, Ottawa, ON,
Canada
Yang Zhang Urban Affairs and Planning Program, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA, USA
Yandong
Zhao Chinese
Academy
of Science and Technology for
Development, Institute of Science, Technology and Society, Beijing, China
Buhong Zheng Department of Economics, University of Colorado Denver,
Denver, CO, USA
clxx
Contributors

----- Page 170 (native) -----
Shiping Zheng Global Studies, Bentley University, Waltham, MA, USA
Eric S. Zhou Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA
Peng Zhou College of Economics and Management, Nanjing University of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
Ying Zhou Surrey Business School, University of Surrey, Surrey, UK
Yifei Zhu University of California Davis, Davis, CA, USA
Yue Zhuo Sociology and Anthropology Department, St. John’s University,
Queens, NY, USA
Stephen Ziliak Department of Economics, Roosevelt University College of
Arts and Sciences, Chicago, IL, USA
Camilla Zimmermann Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University
Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada
Donald W. Zimmerman Carleton University, Surrey, BC, Canada
Sonja Zmerli Faculty of Social Sciences, Institute for Social and Political
Analysis, Goethe-University Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany
Francisco Zorondo-Rodrı´guez Institute of Environmental Science and
Technology, Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
Daniyal Zuberi Department of Sociology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Keith Zullig Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences, West Virginia
University School of Public Health, Morgantown, WV, USA
Bruno D. Zumbo Department of ECPS & Department of Statistics,
Institute
of
Applied
Mathematics,
University
of
British
Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Matt Zwolinski Philosophy, University of San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA
Contributors
clxxi