

----- Page 1 (native) -----
ED 371 047
AUTHOR
TITLE
INSTITUTION
SPONS AGENCY
REPORT NO
PUB DATE
CONTRACT
NOTE
AVAILABLE FROM
PUB TYPE
EDRS PRICE
DESCRIPTORS
DOCUMENT RESUME
UD 029 185
Newmann, Fred M., Ed.
Student Engagement and Achievement in American
Secondary Schools.
Center on Organization and Restructuring of Schools,
Madison, WI.; National Center on Effective Secondary
Schools, Madison, WI.
Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED),
Washington, DC.; Wisconsin Center for Education
Research, Madison.; Wisconsin Univ., Madison. School
of Education.
ISBN-0-8077-3183-8
92
G-0086900007; R117Q00005-91
243p.
Teachers College Press, 1234 Amsterdam Avenue, New
York, NY 10027 (paperback: ISBN-0-8077-3182-X,
$17.95; hardcover: ISBN-0-8077-3183-8, $38).
Books (010)
Reports
Research/Technical (143)
MF01/PC10 Plus Postage.
*Academic Achievement; Extracurricular Activities;
*Family Influence; High Risk Students; High Schools;
*High School Students; *Junior High School Students;
Literature Reviews; Middle Schools; Peer
Relationship; *Research Projects; Secondary
Education; Social Class; Student Motivation; *Student
Problems; Thinking Skills
IDENTIFIERS
National Center on Effective Secondary Schools;
*Student Engagement
ABSTRACT
Findings from five main projects in the National
Center on Effective Secondary Schools, which operate.i from December
1, 1985 to February 28, 1991, are presented. Projects investigated
different aspects of engagement and achievement problems through
literature reviews, analyses of existing data sets, and new studies
of students and staff in 32 middle and 62 high schools throughout the
United States. Material from the projects is integrated into the
following chapters: (1) "The Significance and Sources of Student
Engagement" (F. M. Newmann, G. G. Wehlage, and S. D. Lamborn);
(2)
"Taking Students Seriously" (A. Gamoran and M. Nystrand); (3)
"Higher-Ordey Thinking and Prospects for Classroom Thoughtfulness"
(F. M. Newmann);
(4) "Building New Programs for Students at Risk" (G.
G. Wehlage and G. A. Smith);
(5) "Cultivating Teacher Engagement:
Breaking the Iron Law of Social Class" (K. S. Louis and B. Smith);
(6) "Putting School in Perspective: The Influence of Family,
Peers,
Extracurricular Participation, and Part-Time Work
on Academic
Engagement" (S. D. Lamborn, B. B. Brown, N. S. Mounts, and L.
Steinberg); and (7) "Conclusion" (F. M. Newmann). (SLD)
*********************w*************************************************
Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that
can be made
from the original document.
***********************************************************************

----- Page 2 (native) -----
IN\
Student Engagement
and
Achievement
in
American
Secondary Schools
Fred M. Newmann
Editor
U.S. OEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Office of Educanonal Research end Imorovernenl
EFUCAPONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION
CENTER (ERIC)
O This document has been reproduced
as
recerved from the I:Arson or PlgiffilallOn
origInahnta it
CI Minor changes have been made to improve
reproduction duality
Points of view Or oprrnOn3 stated mn this docu-
men! do n01 necessarily represent official
OERI posthon or poficy
TrACHERS
COLLEGE
wpREss
Teachers College, Columbia University
New York and London
BEST COPY AVAILABLE

----- Page 3 (native) -----
This book was prepared at the National Center on Effective Secondary Schools
and the Center on Organization and Restructuring of Schools, which were
supported in part by grants from the Office of Educational Research and Jm-
provement (Grant No. G-0086900007 and R117Q00005-91), by the Wisconsin
Center for Education Research, and the School of Education, University of
Wisconsin-Madison. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommenda-
tions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the supporting agencies.
Published by Teachers College Pre,ss, 1234 Amsterdam Avenue
New York, NY 10027
Copyright C) 1992 by Teachers College, Columbia University
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanicg',
including photocopy, or any information storage and retrieval system,
without permission from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Student engagement and acLievement in American secondary schools /
Fred M. Newmann, editor.
p.
cm.
"Findings from five main projects in the National Center on
Effective Secondary Schools, which operated from December 1, 1985 to
February 28, 1991"
Acknowledgments.
Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index.
ISBN 0-8077-3183-8 (alk. paper). - ISBN 0-8077-3182-X (alk. paper:
pbk.)
1. Academic achievement - United States.
2. High school students -
United States.
3. Classroom environment - United States.
I. Newmann, Fred M.
LB1062.6.578
1992
373.18'0973
dc20
:)2-15727
ISBN 0-8077-3183-8
ISBN 0-8077-3182-X (pbk.)
Printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America
99
98
97
96
95
94
93
92
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

----- Page 4 (native) -----
Contents
Acknowledgments
Introduction
Fred M. Newmann
vii
1
Chapter 1:
The Significance and Sources of
Student Engagement
11
Fred M. Newmann, Gary G. Wehlage, and Susie D. Lamborn
Chapter 2:
Taking Students Seriously
40
Adam Gamoran and Martin Hystrand
Chapter 3:
Higher-Order Thinking and Prospects for
Classroom Thoughtfulness
62
Fred M. Newmann
Chapter 4:
Building New Programs for Students at Risk
92
Gary G. Wehlage and Gregory A. Smith
Chapter 5:
Cultivating Teacher Engagement:
Breaking the Iron Law of Social Class
119
Karen Seas.iore Louis and BetsAnn Smith
Chapter 6:
Putting School in Perspective: The InflUence
of Family, Peers, Extracurricular Participation,
and Part-Time Work on Academic Engagement
153
Susie D. Lamborn, B. Bradford Brown, Nina S. Mounts,
and Laurence Steinberg
Chapter 7:
Conclusion
182
Fred M. Newmann
Index
219
About the Contributors
229

----- Page 5 (native) -----
Acknowledgments
This book presents research findings from five main projects in the Na-
tional Center on Effective Secondary Schools, which operated from De-
cember 1, 1985 to February 28, 1991. A shorter summary of findings is
available in the Final Report, which includes a listing of all personnel
and about 150 publications that they produced.' The work of the Center
depended on financial and substantive contributions frOm dozens of or-
ganizations and thousands of individuals. We cannot mention all by
name. Funding was provided by the Office of Education Research and
Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, the Wisconsin Center for
Education Research, and the School of Education, University of Wiscon-
sin-Madison. Members of the National Advisory Panel and the High
School Advisory Network offered yearly counsel on our plans and reactions
to tentative findings. Researchers and practitioners nationwide provided
useful reviews of manuscripts. A variety of educational organizations
helped to disseminate information from the Center, particularly the feder-
ally sponsored Research Centers and Educational Laboratories, the Amer-
ican Federation of Teachers, the National Education Association, the Na-
tional Association of Secondary School Principals, and the Association for
Supervision and Curriculum Development. The authors owe an enormous
debt to staff at the University of Wisconsin, especially the student assis-
tants and secretaries who shouldered the burdens of intense wc ,K behind
the scenes. Diane Randall provided exceptionally efficient and friendly
administrative coordination for the Center, and she skillfully prepared the
manuscript. Finally, we recognize the cooperation of the ultimate sources
of the knowledge generated
the students, teachers, and school adminis-
trators in secondary schools from coast to coast.
NOTE
1. National Center on Effective Secondary Schools, Final Report on OERI
Grant No. G-0086900007, March 20, 1991, available from WCER Document
Service, Room 242, 1025 W. Johnson St., Madison, WI 53706. Make check or
purchase order to 'Center Document Service." Cost is $12.75, which include-
shipping, handling, and first class mailing.
vii

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Introduction
Fred M. Newmann
Since the early 1980s, America's high schools have been besieged with
studies, critiques, and proposals for reform. Critics have exposed academi-
cally weak curricula, neglect of problem solving and higher-order think-
ing, inequitable effects of curriculum tracking, professionally demeaning
working conditions for teachers, and, in many schools, drop-out rates that
exceed 50 percent for poor minority students. Reports of national test
scores and international comparisons continually announce low levels of
high school student achievement.
Beginning in the 1970s research on "effective schools" (Brookover,
Beady, Flood, Schweitzer, & Wisenbaker, 1979; Edmonds, 1979) tried to
identify the variables through which some elementary schools enabled
poor minority students to achieve at levels comparable to middle-class
white students on standardized reading and math tests. Strong leadership
by the principal, a school-wide instructional focus on basic skills with
continuous monitoring of student achievement, and high expectations by
teachers were some of the key factors.
Following a body of research that emphasized the dominant influence
of social background on student achievement (Coleman, Campbell, Hob-
son, McPartland, Modd, Weinfeld, & York, 1966; Jencks, Smith, Acland,
Bane, Cohen, Gintis, Heyns, & Michaelson, 1972), effective schools re-
search offered hope that schools could make a difference. The slogan was
quickly appropriated to educational research and practice that extended
well beyond the original issue of how elementary schools serving poor
minority students might enhance standardized test scores to middle-class
levels. In 1985 the federal government funded two 5-year centers to con-
duct research on effective schools
one dealing with elementary schools
(at Johns Hopkins University), and the other dealing with secondary
schools (University of Wisconsin-Madison). Both centers studied middle
1

----- Page 7 (native) -----
2
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
schools. This book presents major findings from the National Center on
Effective Secondary Schools (henceforth the Center), which concentrated
primarily on high schools, with two of the five main projects studying
middle schools.'
The Center began with a mission broader than boosting the achieve-
ment of low-income minority students on standardized tests. Our mission
extended the effective schools framework in four ways.' First, we were
concerned with students who did not succeed in school, especially low-
income students of color, who are disproportionately represented in this
group. Ultimately, however, we were interested in increased success for
all students.
Second, we believed that success in school should not be judged pri-
marily by the tests conventionally used in large-scale assessments. Such
tests measure only limited forms of human accomplishment, they fail to
test much of what schools try to teach, and, when norm-referenced and
standardized, they make it impossible for half the students to succeed.
Other indicators of school success are important, such as reduced drop-out
rates, increased enrollment in advanced coursework or in extracurricular
activities, and projects that reflect more authentic forms of intellectual
performance.
Further, we doubted that secondary schools could be improved sim-
ply by identifying a list of variables related to student achievement and
persuading schools to work on each item in the list. Instead, we felt ihat
educational interventions would be powerful only to the extent that they
were grounded in coherent theory that explained how and why certain
approaches to instruction, curriculum, and school organization were more
likely than others to produce favorable student outcomes.
Finally, research literature on American secondary schools, along
with our conversations with teachers, suggested to us that the effective
schools literature, and indeed most of the rhetoric about school improve-
ment, had neglected the most salient issue for both teachers and students
each hour of the school day.
ENGAGEMENT
The most immediate and persisting issue for students and teachers is
not low achievement, but student disengagement. The most obviously
disengaged students disrupt classes, skip them, or fail to complete assign-
ments. More typically, disengaged students behave well in school. They
attend class and complete the work, but with little indication uf excite-
ment, commitment, or pride in mastery of the curriculum. In contrast,

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Introduction
3
engaged students make a psychological investment in learning. They try
hard to learn what school offers. They take pride not simply in earning
the formal indicators of success (grades), but in understanding the mate-
rial and incorporating or internalizing it in their lives.'
For teachers, the challenge is how to get students to do academic
work and to take it seriously enough to learn; for students, the challenge
is how to cope with teachers' demands so as to avoid boredom, to maintain
self-respect, and, at the same time, to succeed in school. As we explain
further in several chapters, meaningful learning cannot be delivered to
high school students like pizza to be consumed or videos to be observed.
Lasting learning develops largely through the labor of the student, who
must be ent;ced to participate in a continuous cycle of studying, produc-
ing, correcting mistakes, and starting over again. Students cannot be ex-
pected to achieve unless they concentrate, work, and invest themselves in
the mastery of school tasks. This is the sense in which student engagement
is critical to educational success; to enhance achievement, one must first
learn how to engage students.
The point seems almost too obvious to mention, but too many of us
(educators and parents) have learned the hard way that it cannot be taken
for granted. Student disengagement posed less of a problem in earlier
times when secondary schools served more select populations of students,
when families offered more cohesive, sustained support for students' in-
vestment in schoolwork, and when youth had fewer opportunities for
activities that now compete with schoolwork. Today, however, schools'
ability to engage students is constantly tested by increased cultural diver-
sity in the student body, by large proportions of siudents who need special
forms of care that school staff traditionally have not been expected to
offer, and by a host of powerful distractions that compete foi students'
time and emotional investment. (For many students these "distractors"
involve substantial responsibilities for family care.)
Public concerns for education expressed in the mass media; in the
debates of policy makers; in programs and mandates of districts, states,
and professional organizations; and in the views of corporate leaders often
focus on the "bottom line" student achievement. What students actually
know, what they can do, and the attitudes or other outcomes of schooling
should, of course, receive substantial attention. But attempts to establish
consensus on achievement outcomes for secondary school students on ei-
ther a national or local level will continue to pose major issues in the
United States. Concern with end results has often deflected attention from
fundamental conditions of teaching and learning. Ultimately, we must
craft policy, practice, and research to enhance student achievement, but
until we learn more about the fundamental problem of how to engage

----- Page 9 (native) -----
4
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
students in schoolwork, there is no reason to expect improvements in
achievement, however these outcomes may be defined.
To study how to enhance student engagement, the Center encouraged
diverse perspectives and developed five projects to investigate the prob-
lem. Students at risk present the most visible symptoms of disengage-
ment
numerous programs have tried to address them, and so one of tl,2
projects studied experiences and effects of alternative programs and pon-
cies to assist at-risk students. Concerned that the secondary school curricu-
lum usually offers few opportunities for critical thinking or problem solv-
ing, and hypothesizing that challenging students to use their minds would
enhance engagement, another project studied how to increase higher-
order thinking in social studies. A third project developed a model of
authentic instructional discourse that included criteria for the kind of
writing, reading, and talking most likely to promote engagement and
achievement. It examined the extent to which grouping and tracking poli-
cies affect student opportunities for authentic discourse. Recognizing that
teachers have the most di:ect opportunities to affect student engagement,
a project on teacher quality of worklife studied how organizational fea-
tures of the school contribute to teachers' engagement and success in teach-
ing. A final project studied high school mainly from the students' perspec-
tive to learn how engagement and achievement might be influenced by
student experiences in four noninstructional settings
namely, the family,
peer group, extracurricular activity, and part-time work.
The projects investigated different aspects of the engagement and
achievement problems
through literature reviews, analyses of existing
data sets, and new studies of students and staff in 32 middle and 62 high
schools throughout the United States. Because research on the nature and
measurement of student engagement has only just begun, and because of
continuing controversy over what forms of achievement ought to be as-
sessed and what forms can be assessed within reasonable costs, it was not
possible or even advisable for all projects to use a common set of indicators
of student engagement and achievement.
ACHIEVEMENT
Before presenting results from each project, we wish to explain why
the Center did not use a common set of tests or other indicators of student
achievement across all projects. The simple reason is that a good set of
indicators is not available. In spite of recent interest in national goals for
student achievement, there exists no set of indicators for student achieve-
ment in American secondary schools that is considered valid by researchers

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Introduction
5
and the public at large and that also can be used to compare the progress,
tr,..m high school entry to exit, of students from different schools and with
different educational needs.
Many indicators have been used to measure the accomplishments of
students and schools: attendance (drop-out rates), credits earned, grades,
and performance on several types of tests standardized achievement
tests; college admission tests; competency tests constructed by schools,
districts, states, and the national assessment; and teacher-made tests for
specific courses. Unfortunately, each of these indicators is deficient on one
or more of the following grounds:
1. Failure to indicate what the student actually knows or can do
2. Neglect of important educational goals such as creativity, interper-
sonal sensitivity, psychological development, civic responsibility,
or critical thinking
3. Perpetuation of cultural biases that unfairly restrict educational
opportunity
4. Providing information that has little relationship to success beyond
school
5. Failure to assess the specific curriculum taught within an individ-
ual high school
Indicators of achievement that avoid these faults cannot be con-
structed by specialists in testing and measurement alone. Such a project
requires reexamination of the very goals of schooling, which, in a democ-
racy, demands broad participation of educators and the public at large.
The challenge is particularly perplexing in a society that now encounters
two underlying and opposing social forces. On the one hand, we face
the homogenizing aspects of modernization
accelerating centralization,
nationalization, and globalization of experience. The...., combined with a
commitment to equity, suggest the need to evaluate educational achieve-
ment through common nationr or even international standards. On the
other hand, in the United States we face the diversifying forces of in-
creased cultural pluralism and economic polarization. These, combined
with a long-standing commitment to preserve the autonomy of local com-
munities to determine school goals, support the prospect of diverse, rather
than common, educational standards across schools. As a nation, we are
only beginning to address the question of what standards for secondary
school achievement should be applied in common and what standards
might be unique to different groups of students.
The press for national goals and tests should bring to the surface
long-standing dilemmas, rarely discussed in public, about the proper aims

----- Page 11 (native) -----
6
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
of education. Dominant voices of corporate leaders and policy makers
tend to emphasize utilitarian, economic outcomes for both individuals
and the nation. But these are unlikely to silence historically persistent
cries that education also serve the ends of civic welfare and personal fulfill-
ment. Once the debate is ignited, we will see that the conflicts are more
complex than arriving at relative priorities among vocational, civic, or
personal goals. If faced honestly and openly, a host of other issues, both
within and across these realms, will make it increasingly difficult to forge
national consensus on the meaning of school achievement and how to
measure it.
To give a sense of the contested territory, we list here only some of
the issues.
1. To what extent should education focus on the transmission and
reproduction of authoritative knowledge versus student construc-
tion, or production of students' own unds..rstandings?
2. How much emphasis should be given to development of abstract
verbal and logical competence, in contrast to other forms of intelli-
gence such as spatial, musical, bodily-kinesthetic, or personal?
3. What should be the balance between socializing students to accept
and to "succeed" within existing social institutions versus develop-
ing the critical capacity, commitment, and competence to change
those institutions?
4. In what ways should conceptions of education be anchored in
visions of individual welfare and development as opposed to vi-
sions of communal or co1lectiv.3 welfare and development?
5. To what extent should formal education help students to under-
stand their historical and cultural roots; how are these to be identi-
fied and taught to a culturally diverse student population?
6. Is knowledge itself to be regarded largely as a body of conclusive
truth discovered by impartial experts, or more as a set of provi-
sional claims continually influenced by social-cultural values and
designed to serve particular interests?
The contrasts posed by these issues are not intended to suggest that
they be resolved by choosing one side or the other. What makes them
controversial is that each side of the dilemma contains enough "truth" or
"validity" to prevent its outright dismissal. Constructive resolution of the
issues in schools, communities, and states can be expected to involve seri-
ous disagreement, strenuous intellectual work, sensitive efforts in commu-
nication, and political savvy.

----- Page 12 (native) -----
Introduction
7
It remains to be seen whether new standards for educational achieve-
ment become crafted through careful consideration of these issues. It is
possible that the substance of issues will remain largely ignored by most of
the participants in the education enterprise. Dominant regulatory groups
that assume that these issues have already been resolved through existing
tests and other indicators (e.g., grades, drop-out rates, or college atten-
dance rates) may continue to prevail. The issues can also be avoided
through the political strategy of allowing separate teachers, schools, dis-
tricts, or states to "do their own thing." On the other hand, if all teachers
and schools face high-stakes consequences for student performance on
standard, highly specific tests and tasks, we can expect an explosion of
interest in rethinking what we mean by student achievement.
Even using data from currently available tests, rer.earch is inconclu-
sive on the size of achievement gains from high school entry to exit. Unfor-
tunately, there is almost no information on gains in student achievement
attributable to American secondary schools. The most systematically gath-
ered information from a national sample recorded student performance
only at the end of 10th an
12th Grade." The tests included vocabulary,
reading, writing, mathematics, science, and civics
all in multiple-choice
format. The average magnitude of these two-year gains was only one to
two items on tests ranging from 20 to 40 items.
In two years of school, students presumably spend about 2,000 hours,
or the equivalent of fifty 40-hour weeks, on schoolwork.' Considering the
amount of time that students spend in educational activity, we might
conclude from these results that (1) high schools have no important impact
on achievement; (2) they must have a far greater impact than what is
measured by the tests; or (3) the impact is unclear unless we know more
about the items on which progress is made. Learning four new words, for
example, may be educationally insignificant, but perhaps learning how to
solve just one algebraic equation reflects a major accomplishment.
Lacking a valid system of achievement indicators, realizing that cur-
rent tests often reveal only marginal or inconclusive gains attributable to
high school education, and believing that student engagement should be
attacked directly as the most salient issue, we woided Center-wide em-
phasis on a common set of tests or other indicators of student success.
Instead, projects in the Center were encouraged to develop a variety
of indicators and to learn from existing assessments used in schools.
This strategy did not permit the projects within the Center to formally
test a comprehensive theory of how specific school practices and poli-
cies improve student achievement through enhancing engagement. Each
project has, however, produced findings that contribute to both the de-

----- Page 13 (native) -----
4
8
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
velopment of theory and the improvement c
practice on the central
problem.
OVERVIEW OF THE CHAPTERS
We begin by explaining student engagement. Chapter 1 presents a
definition of engagement in academic work, discusses its significance to
learning, and outlines the major sources or causes of engagement that
schools can deliberately try to promote. The theory of engagement is ilhis-
trated by examples from students' experiences. We then enter some class-
rooms to examine in Chapter 2 how high-quality conversation can engage
students by taking their ideas seriously, and building upon them, rather
than expecting students always to reproduce correct answers tnat have
been prespecified by the teacher. The teaching of literature in 9th Grade
revealed only rare examples of high-quality discourse, but high-quality
conversation about literature did improve student understanding. Next
we consider the hypothesis that student boredom is often due to an absence
of intellectual challenge in the classroom. To explore this, Chapter 3 pro-
poses a conception of higher-order thinking and a scheme for analyzing
classroom thoughtfulness. In this study of social studies teaching, students
reported more engagement in classes that challenged them to use their
minds. The study explains how some high school departments succeeded
far more than others, but all faced a number of barriers in developing
thoughtful classrooms.
Chapters 4, 5, and 6 look well beyond the classroom for influences on
student engagement and academic achievement. Chapter 4 focuses on the
problem of engaging at-risk students, those with histories of low achieve-
ment who also confront other difficulties that inhibit their engagement in
conventional schooling. The chapter studies this problem through two
strategies. First, it draws conclusions about the keys to success from a
number of novel, alternative school programs created to respond to needs
of at-risk students in different locations. Then it examines a unique effort
sponsored by a national foundation to restructure several entire school
districts to respond to all students at risk in all the districts' schools. Iso-
lated small alternative programs have found ways to engage at-risk stu-
dents, 13,it major issues in educational restructuring must be faced before
these successes can be implemented systemically.
One major issue is how to develop schools that build teacher commit-
ment to the engagement and achievement of all students. Chapter 5 deals
with this issue by clarifying the conditions in schools and districts that
promote and sustain teacher engagement, especially with low-income stu-

----- Page 14 (native) -----
Introduction
9
dents, whom many teachers find so difficult to teach. This study of four
innovative high schools with large proportions of low-income students
found high levels of teacher engagement. By examining leadership, school
culture, specific structural changes, and community context, the study
explains how these schools have apparently broken the "iron law of social
class" to attain high levels of teacher engagement.
To this point, the book looks to student experiences in school as major
influences on student engagement and achievement. Chapter 6 reminds
us that schooling occupies only a small portion of adolescents' lives.
Through a study of students in nine high schools, it examines the influence
of family, peers, participation in extracurricular activities, and part-time
employment. Some of these influences are substantial, and the chapter
discusses what might be done by school authorities, parents, employers,
students, and others
to minimize negative effects.
Finally, we offer an interpretive summary of the findings (Chapter 7)
and their implications for engaging adolescents in academic work in both
conventional and "restructured" schools, To accomplish major improve-
ments on a systemic basis will require far more than teachers' understand-
ing of what currently seems to "work," or the introduction of new tests,
new curricula, or new organizational structures for schools and districts.
Significant advances in student engagement and achievement will depend
on communities and the nation as a whole confronting a number of con-
troversial issues dealing with educational aims for children, the content of
teacher education and professional development, redistribution of power
and authority in the conduct of schooling, and public willingness to invest
not only in innovative schooling, but in the building of more basic social
support for children.
NOTES
1. See National Center on Effective Secondary Schools (1991) for a more
complete listing of Center activities and publications.
2. See Bliss, Firestone, and Richards (1991) for a more comprehensive discus-
sion of effective schools research and practice.
3. Studies that document student disengagement include Cusick (1973), Eck-
ert (1989), Fine (1991), Goodlad (1984), McNeil (1986), Powell, Farrar, and
Cohen (1985), Sedlak, Wheeler, Pullin, and Cusick (1986), Weis (1990), and
Weis, Farrar, and Petrie (1989).
4. This is the High School and Beyond (HSB) project of the National Center
on Education Statistics (NCES), which tested sophomores and seniors from 1,000
high schools in 1980 with succeeding two-year follow-ups. By 1992, a more recent
project of NCES, the National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS:88)

----- Page 15 (native) -----
10
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
will provide data on student gains over four years in high school. Better longitudi-
nal data may also become available later in the 1990s from the National Assess-
ment of Educational Progress.
5. Assuming 180 days (36 weeks) of school per year, five hours of classes per
day, and three hours per week of homework.
REFERENCES
Bliss, J. R., Firestone, W. A., & Richards, C. E. (Eds.). (1991). Rethinking effec-
tive schools: Research and practice. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Brookover, W. B., Beady, C., Flood, P., Schweitzer, J., & Wisenbaker, J. (1979).
School social systems and student achievement: Schools can make a differ-
ence. New York: Praeger.
Coleman, J. S., Campbell, E. Q., Hobson, C. J., McPartland, J., Modd, A. M.,
Weinfeld, F., & York, R. L. (1966). Equality of educational opportunity.
Washington, DC: Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office.
Cusick, P. A. (1973). Inside high school: The student's world. New York: Holt,
Rinehart & Winston.
Eckert, P. (1989). Jocks and burnouts: Social categories and identity in the high
school. New York: Teachers College Press.
Edmonds, R. R. (1979). Effective schools for the urban poor. Educational Leader-
ship, 37, 15-27.
Fine, M. (1991). Framing dropouts: Notes on the politics of an urban public high
school. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Good lad, J. I. (1984). A place called school: Prospects for the future. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Jencks, C., Smith, M., Acland, H., Bane, M. J., Cohen, D., Gintis, H., Heyns,
B., & Michaelson, S. (1972). Inequality: A reassessment of the effect of family
and schooling in America. New York: Basic Books.
McNeil, L. M. (1986). Contradictions of control: School structure and school
knowledge. New York: Routledge.
National Center on Effective Secondary Schools. (1991). Final report. [WCER
Document Service, Room 242, 1025 West Johnson St., Madison, WI 53706.
$12.75 postpaid.] Madison, WI: Author.
Powell, A. G., Farrar, E., & Cohen, D. K. (1985). The shopping mall high
school: Winners and losers in the educational marketplace. Boston: Hough-
ton Mifflin,
Sedlak, M. W., Wheeler, C. W., Pullin, D. C., & Cusick, P. A. (1986). Selling
students short: Classroom bargains and academic reform in the American
high school. New York: Teachers College Press.
Weis, L. (1990). Worki
class without work: High school students in a decentral-
izing economy. New York: Routledge.
Weis, L., Farrar, E., & Petrie, H. G. (1989). Dropouts from school: Issues, dilem-
mas, and solutions. Albany: State University of New York Press.

----- Page 16 (native) -----
CHAPTER 1
The Significance and Sources
of Student Engagement
Fred M. Newmann, Gary G. Wehlage,
and Susie D. Lamborn
A sense of engagement is conveyed by three high school students who told
us about some positive kinds of involvement in school.
I like the fact that I know that I'm challenging myself in
school.
.
.
. I like to work hard and that's the thing I value the
most. There are always students and teachers that are there to
challenge me. I like to be involved in sports and I like to have
good times with my friends, pretty much like all teenagers my
age, but I value those things, really getting involved and getting
to know all kinds of people.
I'm really happy with what they're teaching me because it's like
I really have to use my head. I'm really enthused with what
they're teaching me. I think it's really good.
More than anything I would just advise them to be themselves. I
don't think they should try to show anybody up or act cool. Just
be yourself and people will respect you more for that than if you
try to be cool and stuff. Just be yourself, strive for the best, don't
quit or anything, be open to everyone, all the teachers, all your
peers, student:. I'd encourage them to get involved because I
think you really get the most out of life then; it helps your stud-
ies, too.
Engagement stands for active involvement, commitment, and con-
centrated attention, in contrast to superficial participation, apathy, or
lack of interest. In work, play, and social interaction, we may experience
11
',)

----- Page 17 (native) -----
12
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
varying levels of engagement as we talk, listen, observe, read, reflect, and
use our bodies. The causes of human engagement and its results are com-
plex and can be best understood in reference to specific activities and
social contexts. We begin, therefore, by defining the concept as it applies
to student engagement in academic work. Next we argue for its impor-
tance in building an agenda for educational reform. Finally, we suggest
important sources of engagement in academic work that schools can delib-
erately try to promote.'
WHAT IS ENGAGEMENT IN ACADEMIC WORK?
Academic work consists of the tasks, usually specified by teachers,
that students are asked to undertake in order to master the knowledge,
skills, and crafts that serve as the instructional objectives of schooling.
The work can occur as part of classroom instruction, homework, or exams,
and it may include different types of reading, writing, computing, partici-
pating in discussions, and individual and group projects. The boundaries
for academic work should not be limited to tasks commonly pursued in
the teaching of traditional school subjects of the liberal arts (e.g., math-
ematics, sciences, humanities, languages). A more adequate conception
would recognize as academic work attempts to master any field of exper-
tise that is based on a tradition of accumulated public knowledge and
that, through activities of practitioners and/or researchers, continually
strives to create advanced levels of understanding or performance in the
field. In this sense the mastery of subjects as diverse as electronics, child
care, modern dance, or cosmetology can involve academic work.
We define student engagement in academic work as the student's
psychological investment in and effort directed toward learning, under-
standing, or mastering the knowledge, skills., or crafts that academic work
is intended to promote. This definition requires elaboration and clarifica-
tion on several points.
Engagement involves psychological investment in learning, compre-
hending, or mastering knowledge, skills, and crafts, not simply a commit-
ment to complete assigned tasks or to acquire symbols of high performance
such as grades or social approval. Students may complete academic work
and perform well without being engaged in the mastery of a topic, skill,
or craft. In fact, a significant body of research indicates that students
invest much of their energy in performing rituals, procedures, and rou-
tines without developing substantive understanding (see Eckert, 1939; Mc-
Neil, 1986; Powell, Farrar, & Cohen, 1985; Sedlak, Wheeler, Pullin, &
Cusick, 1986; & Weis, 1990).
Psychological investment and effort to master are not readily observ-

----- Page 18 (native) -----
The Significance and Sources of Student Engagement
13
able characteristics. Rather, engagement ic a construct used to describe an
inner quality of concentration and effort to learn. The student's invest-
ment in any given type of mastery should be viewed on a continuum
from less to more, not as a dichotomous state of being either engaged or
unengaged. Levels of engagement must be estimated or inferred from
indirect indicators such as the a.iiount of participation in academic work
(attenda ,ce, portion of tasks completed, amount of time spent on aca-
demic v )rk), the intensity of student concentration, the enthusiasm and
interest expressed, and the degree of care shown in completing the work.
".1l of these, however, can be misleading indicators of engage-
-.:, for at
times they may represent a student's willingness to comply with school
routines, rather than an actual investment in mastering, comprehending,
or learning knowledge, skills, and crafts.
Tasks that students complete in order to succeed in school often in-
volve meaningless rituals, mechanistic rep_ oduction of knowledge, and
trivial forms of learn us: that offer little opportunity for students to use
their minds well or t ) develop in-depth understanding and critical, cre-
ative mastery. Idealiy, we would like all forms of schoolwork to be more
meaningful. Ho...rever, our technienl definition of engagement does not
prescribe any particular arenas of knowledge to be understood, skills to be
learn 3d, or dispositions to be cultivated. It therefore leaves the fundamen-
tal question of educational aims unanswered. Deciding what kinds of
knowledge studonts should be engaged in is another matter, one charged
with controversy.
Engagement implies more than motivation. Academic motivation
usually refers to a general desire or disposition to succeed in academic
work and in the more specific tasks of school. Conceivably students can be
motivated to perform well in a general sense without being engaged in the
specific tasks of school. Engagement in specific tasks may either precede
or presume general motivation to succeed. By focusing on the extent to
which students demonstrate active interest, effort, and concentration in
the specific work that teachers design, engagement calls special attention
to the social contexts that help activate un lerlying motivation, and also to
conditions that may generate new motivation.'
WHY IS STUDENT ENGAGE MENT IMPORIANT
TO LEARNING IN SCHOOL?
The importance of student engagement becomes clearer if we con-
sider the relationship of teacher to student in contrast to professional
client relationships in other professions such as law, engineering, finance,
management, and, in some cases, medicine. In other professions the client
t.

----- Page 19 (native) -----
14
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
often recognizes a problem and voluntarily seeks the help of a professional.
The professional is trusted to have important knowledge that will have
clear benefits for the client, usually within a reasonably short period of
time. The teaching of children, however, is more coercive. Children are
told by society that they have a problem (ignorance) that must be solved
regardless of whether they feel a need for education. They are subjected
to a program of labor that the teacher prescribes. The benefits of this labor
are rarely self-evident to the student, partly because they are projected far
into the future. These circumstances seem to diminish student trust in the
professional, which is necessary if the student is to invest the considerable
effort required for learning. Client effort is also required in other profes-
sions, especially, for example, mental health fields, but teaching stands
o-,:t as the profession whose success depends on exceptionally long-term
committed participation of its clients.3
professionals focus on the unique needs of individuals, helping
one person at a time, but teaching school usually requires the professional
to serve the needs of groups, that is, to treat large numbers of clients (20
35 per class) simultaneously. Since individual students vary in the kinds of
interaction and activities they find most engaging, teaching large groups
magnifies the difficulty of eliciting student effort from everyone. As one
student explained, "You want to talk a lot in class and sometimes your
friends influence you .
. . you find yourself holding a conversation while
the teacher's up front trying to teach and that's a big problem, too."
Of course, students may give only token effort and still succeed in
school. That is, they can tune out, complete some of the work with only
minimal concentration, and even cheat. But if most of their learning is
approached in this manner, it will yield only superficial understanding
and short-term retention, unlikely to be applied or transferred beyond a
few school tests. Meaningful cognitive demands of formal education can-
not be mastered through passive listening and reading, nor through being
entertained; they require an engaged student.
Students usually agree that learning requires work, but, as illustrated
by the folk wing four students, some explain this from a more positive
perspective than others.'
I like to 1
hard and I guess I'll just pound it into myself if I
don't understand. If I don't understand something, I make sure
that I work at it until I do understand, and I keep it up and I
never give up. I'm not a quitter at all.
I'd say like get serious about your work, right away.
.
.
. You
know, like do your homework every night and things like that.

----- Page 20 (native) -----
The Significance and Sources of Student Engagement
15
And don't skip and stuff like that. I'd say also go out for a fall
sport either way. 'Cause that's how you meet like a lot of people.
I like learning a lot of this stuff but I've been slack in a lot of
classes. It happened in science courses before biology and
chemistry. I'd shift between 13S and D's sometimes. Like the sec-
ond or first day, a bad report card and I'll compensate for it this
weekend but it's like it gets worse when I dc that, like a snowball
rolling, it gets bigger and bigger. I'm in a deep hole all of the
time.
When you go home there's always something you can be doing
with your friends besides homework so you just do enough to get
a decent grade but you don't try to get your best grade, you do
just enough to finish.
The social roles and developmental dynamics of adolescence pose
roadblocks to engagement in academic work, as other concerns and activi-
ties occupy students' attention and energy. Interpersonal issues with par-
ents and peers usually take on added significance, as do sexual relations.
As we will see in Chapter 6, adolescents' expanded opportunities for social
participation with peers and in the adult work force can interfere with
er4gement in academic work. In effect, teachers must compete for stu-
dents' attention with parents, siblings, boyfriends, girlfriends, bosses,
coaches, salespeople, media figures, and a host of others who touch adoles-
cents' lives. One study found that adolescents spent only about 25 percent
of their waking hours in classes or doing homework. The balance of their
day was spent at home (41 percent of waking hours) or elsewhere (27
percent) in diverse activities unconnected to school learning: eating, run-
ning errands and doing chores, socializing with friends, pursuing hobbies
or extracurricular activities, working at a part-time job, watching TV or
relaxing, talking with family members, and so on.b
The marginal role of academic learning in students' lives was further
illustrated when we asked students what they liked most about their time
in school. T1-
most common answers highlighted social life, not what
they were studying or learning.
"Well, I don't know what I like best about school. Well, most of
my friends are here. This is where I generally meet them. I don't
have any friends in my neighborhood. So this is where I come to
see if they want to goof around after school."
"Just that I'm around my friends. And just that friends are
around."
4.

----- Page 21 (native) -----
16
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
"Well, the people maybe. Be with your friends."
"I hardly ever did my work in any [of my classes]. I failed like
pretty much all of them. Mostly F's. I planned on quitting but I
decided not to. I just came to see people."
When we asked what they liked least about school, the responses were
more diverse and included too much homework, poor teachers, rest -ictive
rules, unappetizing lunches, and disruptive or snotty peers.
Up to this point we have ,?.xplained how student engagement is neces-
sary to the learning of school subjects, but that engagement in academic
work is often difficult to stimulate in high school. We have not yet dem-
onstrated a strong quantitative connection between engagement and
achievement. Using scales of engagement based on student surveys, we
found only modest statistical
associations between engagement and
achievement. But these preliminary findings have not diminished our be-
lief in the importance of student engagement to achievement.
First, as indicated in the Introduction, the measurement of achieve-
ment itself is problematic, which prevented the standardization of valid
achievement measures across the many studies within the Center.' Second,
student engagemenl- has only recently been proposed as a variable deserv-
ing theoretical and empirical study. To measure it quantitatively, we
experimented with different survey items, but it will take more resetrch
to develop valid survey indicators of student engagement.' Third, the lack
of correlation between engagement and achievement could well be due to
the fact that many low-achieving students are highly engaged because
they find schoolwork difficult, and, conversely, many high-achieving stu-
dents can succeed with low levels of engagement because their prior high
achievement makes school success relatively easy. Finally, teacher testi-
mony and our own observational evidence continue to suggest that for
any given level of prior achievement or ability, the more engaged the
student in the work expected by the school, the higher the level of achieve-
ment on indicators consistent with that work.
The problem of disengaged students can be viewed as an instance of
the more general challenge of reducing alienation in modern culture.'
Relations with other individuals, with objects, with the physical environ-
ment, with social institutions, with one's own labor, and even with the
supernatural or divine can be construed on a scale or continuum. At one
extreme, relations can be characterized by detachment, isolation, frag-
mentation, disconnectedness, estrangement, or powerlessness. These be-
speak alienation. At the other extreme, relations represent more of a
quality of attachment, inclusion, integration, unity, connectedness, or
empowerment. Alienation literature does not identify a single term to
1.

----- Page 22 (native) -----
The Significance and Sources of Student Engagement
17
characterize its opposite, but if one term were chosen, engagement seems
to capture many of these missing qualities in relations to people, work, or
the physical environment In this sense, the promotion of student engage-
ment should bring benefits to quality of life that are more fundamental
than increases in school achie-iement.
FACTORS THAT AFFECT ENGAGEMENT
What might schools do to promote engagement? To answer this, we
first sought to clarify the factors that affect (or cause) engagement. A
significant body of research has shown that students from different social
and cultural backgrounds look at schooling in vastly different ways (see
Eckert, 1989; Farrell, 1990; Weis, 1990). For example, students who iden-
tify with the conventional expectations of working hard at abstract verbal
arid mathematical tasks for credentials that bring future rewards are more
likely to invest themselves in acidemic work than students who have little
hope in the future rewards promised by the system, or students more
interested in manual and physical competence. From this perspective,
the social-cultural orientations that students bring to school are the most
important factors affecting student engagement.
Students' beliefs, values, and orientations toward schooling are criti-
cal, and educators must take them seriously. Consideration of the social-
cultural determinants of student engagement can, however, lead to con-
flicting interpretations of the role of schooling. One interpretation puts so
much emphasis on the powerful influences of race, class, gender, family,
and social experience outside of school that school practitioners are seen as
having almost no effective means for enhancing student engagement in
school. The other realizes that schooling may have minimal impact on
students' present lives beyond school, but contends, nevertheless, that
changing students' experiences within school can enhance engagement.
The Center grounded its research more in the latter perspective.
To be most useful to practitioners, we restricted this analysis to factors
affecting engagement about which schools could conceivably do some-
thing. Research on how schools might enhance student engagement in
academic work is lacking, but scholarship in psychology, sociology, and
studies of schooling suggest the importance of several factors. As indicated
in Figure 1.1, we construe engagement in academic work to result largely
from three broad factors: students' underlying need for competence, the
extent to which students experience membership in the school, and the
authenticity of the work they are asked to complete. This model does not
attempt to offer a comprehensive guide to all the important things a school

----- Page 23 (native) -----
18
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
Figure 1.1
Factors That Influence Student Engagement in Academic Work
STUDENT ENGAGEMENT
IN ACADEMIC WORK
SCHOOL
MEMBERSHIP
Clarity of Purpose
Fairness
Personal Support
Success
Caring
AUTHENTIC
WORK
Extrinsic Rewards
Intrinsic Interests
Sense of Ownership
Connection to
"Real World"
Fun
NEED FOR COMPETENCE
should do. We fot-us here only on critical aspects that have been neglected
in both the research literature and reform efforts. The broad challenge for
the school is how to generate membership and authentic work that chan-
nels the need for competence into academic success. The first step
to
understand the importance of these foundations of engagement.
Need for Competence
Being challenged really influenced me to strive for the best. So
now I take courses that I think are challenging.
.
.
If I just keep
the right attitude I think I can work around obstacles. I mean,
there's always going to be problems, just got to go with them.
I want to be an architect. I want to be really successful. I did
really well in my architectural class. I don't think I got lower

----- Page 24 (native) -----
The Significance and Sources of Student Engagement
19
than a B. And see I just love drawing, I just love it. When I sit
on the phone and I just sit there and I just draw.
Most people, especially children, have a powerful need to develop
and to express competence. Achieving cognitive understanding and
mastery
getting it right
are personally rewarding, especially as they
enable people to have some impact on the world. When efforts to act
competently are met with success, this generates continued investment,
and the cycle continues. The need for competence has been recognized as
one of the most powerful bases for human action and motivation. Re-
searchers have considered it comparable in significance to sexual energy
or to such fundamental needs as autonomy and social affiliation.' Mastery
of schoolwork offers numerous opportunities for the development of com-
petence, but competence can also be expressed through countless other
forms, such as interpersonal skills, physical development, entrepreneurial
projects, or excellence in arts, crafts, and hobbies, that schools rarely
develop. The question is, "What kinds of work must schools design so that
students' underlying need for competence will be channeled into academic
mastery?"' As indicated in Figure 1.1, this depends on the extent to which
students experience membership and authentic work in school.
School Membership
If students are to invest themselves in the forms of mastery required
by schools, they must perceive the general enterprise of schooling as legiti-
mate, deserving of their committed effort, and honoring them as respect-
ed members. Large numbers of students are so alienated from schools
that almost any activities that fall under school sponsorship are suspect
(Wehlage, Rutter, Smith, Lesko, & Fernandez, 1989; Wheelock, 1986).
For many students, schooling signifies institutional hypocrisy and aimless-
ness, rather than consistency and clarity of purpose; arbitrariness and
inequity, rather than fairness; ridicule and humiliation, rather than per-
sonal support and respect; and worst of all, failure, rather than success.
For others, the disaffection can seem less personally damaging school is
seen as a theatre of meaningless ritual, unrelated to students' serious con
cerns. Before considering the problem of designing specific forms of aca-
demic work that engage students, we should first stand back and ask,
"What institutional conditions are necessary to get students to buy into
the general enterprise of trying to succeed in school?" The key is school
membership.
Building on the work of Merton (1953), Connell (1990) describes
engagement as involving commitment to both the institution's per-

----- Page 25 (native) -----
20
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
ceived goals and the means it prescribes for members to pursue the goals.
Wehlage et al. (1989) present another perspective of student bonding to
schools that builds upon the work of Tinto (1987) and others. Bonding, or
a sense of membership, develops when students establish affective, cogni-
tive, and behavioral connections to the institution. To synthesize a diverse
body of work on students' organizational commitment, we suggest that
schools are most likely to cultivate a sense of membership in students if
they demonstrate clarity of purpose, equity, and personal support, provide
frequent occasions for all students to experience educational success, and
integrate all of these features into a climate of caring.
Students touched on some of these qualities.
I think I feel confident that you're in a good atmosphere. As far
as school is concerned, you feel like you know everybody and
you're comfortable. And that way you can concentrate on your
schoolwork .
.
. because then you get to know the people
around you a little bit better. And it feels like a family situation.
Well, the coaches that I have, they emphasize at the beginning
of meetings and stuff like that if you need any help, they can
help you or find people to help you, like my swimming coach. I
was having some trouble with algebra and stuff like that and he
was an algebra teacher and he helped me out during practices
and everything and for like a week or so I practiced half the time
and then I'd do my schoolwork and he'd help me out with any
questions I had. We have a lot of teachers who are pretty active
outside of just teaching. You may not have them for a class but
you can be really good friends with them because you know
them through a club or something like that they are a leader of.
In other classes, teachers didn't like me so I didn't do their home-
work. The teachers would just give you a hard time all the time.
Just sort of make you stick out. Give other people privileges and
not yourself. And she'd get on me right away if I tried to talk to
anybody. But other people she'd just tell to be quiet.
Clarity of Purpose
Identification with school can be cultivated partly through symbolic
activity (school name, colors, songs) and through participation in a com-
mon agenda of activities (taking courses, eating lunch, attending athletic
events). But the sense of membership needed for investment in mastery of

----- Page 26 (native) -----
The Significance and Sources of Student Engagement
21
academic work will be weak unless students' organizational affiliation is
grounded in clear educational purposes. The "shopping mall high school"
(Powell
al., 1985), for example, by attempting to serve all interests and
tastes, and by even refusing to insist that any be pursued with vigor, offers
no reason for adolescents to become engaged in academic mastery. It is
hard to feel a strong sense of membership in organizations with ambiguous
purposes. The success of "effective schools" has been attributed in part to
clarity of school purpose (Purkey ex Smith, 1983). One explanation of this
success is that clarity of purpose builds a sense of membership that en-
hances engagement in work.
Clarity of purpose can be undermined both by hypocrisy (claiming to
stand for goals that in fact are not pursued in practice) and by aimlessness,
which results from failure to push for any goals in particular or from
adopting (and pursuing) multiple goals that may conflict with one an-
other. Comprehensive high schools with diverse student populations and
with multiple demands from the community have a difficult time estab-
lishing purposes that are clear enough to enhance students' sense of mem-
bership. Sometimes this is accomplished more effectively through magnet
schools or special programs within the school.
Fairness
A sense of fair treatment is critical to organizational bonding. In
schools, fairness is often undermined both by violations of due process in
disciplinary matters and by inequity in allocation of opportunities and
rewards. Basic elements of due process include due notice of rules, consis-
tent and uniform enforcement, a chance to defend oneself if accused,
avenues of appeal, and reasonable punishments. Equitable allocation of
opportunities entails nondiscrimination in access to courses and good
teachers, to counseling and social services, and to participation in extra-
curricular activities. Blatant discrim;nation based on race, gender, or reli-
gion may seem rare, but in many schools, students of low social-economic
status with poor records of achievement or deportment are subject to
subtle, yet pervasive, inequity. Studies have shown that teachers com-
municate less interest in and lower expectations for these students, and
that they receive lower-quality instruction and more disapproval from
staff (see Gamoran & Berends, 1987; Goodlad, 1984; Oakes, 1990). Sim-
ilarly, students of minority cultural backgrounds may feel excluded
from membership when the curriculum and extracurricular activities fail
to take account of their unique experiences." In contrast, when schools
strive for fairness through inclusion, equity, and due process, a heightened

----- Page 27 (native) -----
22
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
sense of school membership should advance student engagement in the
work.
Personal Support
Learning involves risk-taking; that is, trying to learn new material
v, hen chances for success are uncertain, making mistakes, and trying
again. Unless one can trust teachers and peers to offer support for the
hard work of making and correcting mistakes, the learning process can be
too punishing to try. Especially in a competitive society, the social disre-
spect that often accompanies failure can suppress engagement in academic
work and divert the need for competence to alternative, psychologically
more comfortable activities. In short, if students are to build confidence
and willingness to invest themselves, their participation in academic tasks
must be accompanied by personal support from teachers and peers.' Sup-
port is most needed as security to fail in the short run so that success in
the long run becomes more likely. In addition to support from teachers,
cooperative learning among peers also offers forms of personal support to
counteract alienating aspects of competitive learning. Personal support
contributes directly to students' engagement in academic work; it also
contributes indirectly, for it enhances student bonding to staff and to
the organization, which, in turn, fortifies the students' investment in the
organization's goals arid means.
Success
Our theory posits a basic need to develop competence as the founda-
tion of student engagement in academic work. If the school is to nurture a
sense of membership, its most important task is to ensure that students
experience success in the development of competence. It is self-destructive
to affiliate with an organization that offers experiences of repeated failure,
but when the organization is seen as a site of opportunities for meaningful
success, this invites membership. Sense of success will not be achieved by
grade inflation or reducing the rigor of academic demands; students know
the difference between meaningful achievement and merely completing
busy work to earn points. Instead, the task for educators is to design
schoolwork that presents significant challenges, that meets criteria for
authenticity (discussed below), and that offers the kind of personal support
just described, and to provide institutional recognition for the successes of
all students (not simply the most distinguished). The enhanced sense of
membership that comes from successful demonstration of competence will

----- Page 28 (native) -----
The Significance and Sources of Student Engagement
23
pay off through further engagement in the academic work sponsored by
the school.
Caring
There is more to life than academic achievement. Academic success
must not, therefore, be the sole criterion for school membership. Students'
moral worth and dignity must be affirmed through other avenues as well,
such as nonacademic contact between staff and students
in athletics,
music, outings, and personal advising. In short, to build membership, the
separate features we identify (purpose, fairness, support, success) must
be integrated within a more general climate of caring. Such a climate
communicates that all students are worthy, important members of the
school, that the school is serious about helping all to build new forms of
competence, and that activities in pursuit of this mission will be dis-
charged with fairness, personal support, and ample opportunity for suc-
cess. Students are cared for as persons who represent multiple aspects of
humanity, not simply as units to be processed through the official agenda
of the school.'
Many students go through high school with a strong sense of member-
ship they are committed to the goals of schooling, and they experience
sufficient support and success to master the school demands. But increas-
ingly large percentages of students have experienced only alienation in
schools. For these students, high schools will have to work hard to generate
the commitment to clear purposes, fairness, personal support, success ex-
periences, and climate of care that otherwise may have been taken for
granted. Sense of membership can be further enhanced by making the
schoolwork itself more authentic.
Authentic Work
Assuming that conditions to nurture bonding and sense of member-
ship can be established, how can academic work itself be designed so as
to maximize student engagement? We use the term authentic work to
characterize tasks that are considered meaningful, valuable, significant,
and worthy of one's effort, in contrast to those considered nonsensical,
useless, contrived, trivial, and therefore unworthy of effort. As explained
below, work that entails extrinsic rewards, meets intrinsic interests, offers
students a sense of ownership, is connected to the "real world" (i.e., the
world beyond school), and involves some fun is more authentic and more
likely to engage students.14

----- Page 29 (native) -----
24
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
When students expressed enthusiasm for schoolwork, some of these
qualities emerged.
I like getting as much out of class as I can. .
.
. It's a good pro-
gram here. I mean we're learning. I like to learn. My brother
said it helps for college.
.
.
. I like chemistry the best. Chemistry
is more interesting and it's like more applying yourself instead of
having to memorize all of these theories and formulas.
I like to learn, but it's the teacher that really motivates someone
to learn. I don't like a teacher to get in front of me and just talk.
I like them to have a personality when they teach. Kind of try to
make the subject fun, like show what it means in the real world
instead of just in theory.
I wish I could redo my freshman year. I was hyper, immature,
didn't really think school was important. Skipped a lot of classes.
I got injured between my freshman and sophomore year over the
summer in a soccer game. I was amused by how the trainer
wrapped my ankle and what he said was wrong with it. I de-
cided I wanted a career in sports medicine. So I want to get
good grades until the end of school to get into a medical pro-
gram.
.
.
. I just cracked down, kept my eyes in the book, paid
attention as best I could in class.
Extrinsic Rewards
Committed effort should increase if mastery of school tasks is accom-
panied by rewards such as high grades, admission to higher education,
attractive jobs, increased income, and social approval and status. What
may appear to be powerful extrinsic rewards for some students, however,
may have no effect on or may actually decrease the engagement of others.
Only when students value the rewards, perceive that academic achieve-
ment will lead to them, and believe that their own hard work will result
in academic achievement, would we expect student engagement to in-
crease,' Another problem is that some powerful extrinsic rewards, such
as jobs and income, tend to be distributed for long-term, cumulative ef-
fort, rather than for engagement in short-term, daily tasks that lead to
academic learning. This makes it difficult for teachers to offer impressive
extrinsic rewards. Nevertheless, many instructional tasks can be designed
to yield social approval, official credentials (grades), public displays of
impressive accomplishment, and special privileges.

----- Page 30 (native) -----
The Significance and Sources of Student Engagement
25
Intrinsic Interest
Regardless of the level of extrinsic rewards, students may invest in
or withdraw from learning depending on how interesting they find the
material. Interest refers to the fact that some topics and activities are
considered more stimulating, fascinating, or enjoyable to work on than
others.'6 What will be interesting probably depends not simply on the
subjects or topics, but largely on the way the topics are approached by the
teacher, the student's prior experience with similar material, and other
factors, discussed below.
Student interest will probably be enhanced when tasks permit expres-
sion of diverse forms of talent. Schooling concentrates primarily on ab-
stract verbal and mathematical competence, to the neglect of aesthetic,
interpersonal, intrapersonal, kinesthetic, and spatial competencies (Gard-
ner, 1983). Students may be interested in developing competence in sev-
eral of these dimensions. Limiting school tasks to a narrow range dimin-
ishes the opportunity to respond to students' intrinsic interests and to build
their competence upon their prior knowledge.
Adult learners speak of the value and significance of academic study
for reasons other than interest and extrinsic benefit. It may be considered
worthwhile to understand the logic of mathematics, the process of scien-
tific inquiry, or the foundations of culture, even when these subjects may
appear less interesting or lead to less impressive extrinsic rewards than
other subjects. The belief that mastery of certain topics, skills, or crafts is
intrinsically valuable or worthwhile can also enhance engagement.
Sense of Owner.ship
Engagement with and internalization of knowledge depend to a large
degree on the opportunities students have to "own" the work. Rather
than toiling always under predetermined routines to master skills and
knowledge dictated arbitrarily by school authorities, students need some
influence over the conception, execution, and evaluation of the work it-
self.' At a minimum this entails flexibility in the pace and procedures of
learning; opportunity for students to ask questions and to study topics they
consider important; and students' constructing and producing knowledge
in their own language, rather than merely reproducing the language of
others. There ale, of course, important limits on the extent to which
students can control the learning of academic subjects. Certain facts, defi-
nitions, concepts, algorithms, and processes of verification must be assimi-
lated according to predetermined standards of the fields of knowledge to

----- Page 31 (native) -----
26
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
be taught. But even for this kind of learning, students' sense of ownership
can be enhanced if learning tasks offer some autonomy in the way students
study and apply the material.
Connection to the "Real World"
Students often explain their disengagement by calling schoolwork ir-
relevant; that is, unrelated to issues, competencies, or concerns of the real
world. Why devote effort to the mastery of knowledge that seems neces-
sary to success only in school, but in no other aspects of life? The authentic-
ity of schoolwork depends largely on its connections to work beyond in-
structional settings. We notice at least four qualities of adult work in the
real world that are often missing in schoolwork: value beyond instruction,
clear feedback, collaboration, and flexible use of time.'
Value Beyond Instruction
One of most critical criteria for authentic work is that it has its value
and meaning beyond the instructional context. To the extent that the
messages students speak and write, the products they make, the perfor-
mances they complete (music, dance, sports) make an impact on others
and on students themselves, beyond certifying students' level of compe-
tence or compliance, these activities gain in authenticity. Writing to per-
suade a friend or to publicize one's views in a letter to the editor is more
authentic than writing only to show a teacher that one is capable of
organizing a coherent paragraph. Studying the habits of animals or fish
when one is also responsible for their care is more authentic than learning
about their behavior from texts. Remodeling a house, repairing a car,
developing a computer program, and tutoring all involve application of
knowledge in ways that can have value or use in the world beyond the
instruction of the student who completes the work.
Clear, Prompt Feedback
In the real world, feedback on the quality of one's work is often more
clear and immediate than in school, Some activities, such as music, sports,
or mechanical repair, provide almost instant and clear evidence of success
or failure. It is not necessary to wait for a teacher's response to learn
whether one got a hit in baseball, whether the sweater one knitted fits,
or whether one remembered his or her lines in the play. In contrast,
after completing abstract academic tasks, the feedback students receive
is often much delayed and difficult to comprehend (What did I do wrong
,

----- Page 32 (native) -----
4/
The Significance and Sources of Student Engagement
27
in this homework assignment, and why was it wrong?). To the extent
that feedback is mystified and delayed, we would expect engagement to
suffer.
Collaboration
Achievements outside school often depend on the opportunity to ask
questions of, to receive feedback from, and to count on the help of others,
including peers and authorities. In contrast, typical activities in school
require the student to work alone, often without access to books and other
information-rich resources. Working together and access to published in-
formation are often prohibited, because they are seen as a form of cheat-
ing. It is important, of course, for students to learn to work on their own,
rather than becoming overly dependent on others. But if opportunities to
cooperate and to consult authoritative sources are consistently denied, this
violates a critical process that adults, both expert and novice, consistently
rely c n for success.
Flexible Use of Time
Meaningful achievements outside school often cannot be produced
within rigidly specified time periods. Adults working to solve complicated
problems, to compose effective discourse, or to design products rarely arc.:
forced to work within the rigid lime constraints imposed on students, such
as the 50-minute class or the two-hour examination period. Standard, prede-
termined time schedules that flow from bureaucratic procedures for
managing masses of students in diverse course offerings, rather than
from the time requirements of disciplined inquiry, can reduce the authen-
ticity of students' work. Achievements in noninstructional tasks such as jour-
nalistic writing, interior design, or mae'cal care do, of course, involve ckad
lines and time limits, but here the schedules tend to be determined more by
the nature of the work than by the requirements of institutional manage-
ment.
Fun
In emphasizing qualities that help to generate serious effort and con-
centration on academic tasks, we must not overlook the importance of
fun, play, and humor. Learning can be hard work, but to sustain engage-
me..it, the tasks should also provide opportunities for lighthearted interac-
tion, for play-like and imaginative activity. Fun reduces the distress of
intense ;.ressure to succeed and the boredom of unchallenging, by': per-
;111.

----- Page 33 (native) -----
28
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
haps necessary, routines. When it is unfeasible to arrange in advance for
fun in specific academic tasks, it can be planned for other times during a
lesson or the school day, and this should enhance student sense of bonding
or membership in the school as a whole.
To summarize, we have indicated a number of guidelines for the
design of academic work that should maximize student engagement. Ide-
ally, plans for student assignments, projects, and classroom discourse
should provide extrinsic rewards, cultivate intrinsic interests, permit a
sense of student ownership, reflect aspects of work beyond school, and
involve some fun. 19 At this point in the development of a theory of student
engagement, we realize that several issues need ftrther study. One is
whether some of these guidelines are mor3 fundamental than others,
whether some are much harder to achieve than others, whether schools
oughi- to place higher priority on werking on some over others. Another is
whether the guidelines might entail difficult contradictions; for example,
structuring learning around extrinsic rewards could conflict with enhanc-
ing engagement based on intrinsic interest. We have not examined these
problems in sufficient detail to make recommendations. Now that we have
developed an argument for each ot the criteria, it remains to be seen
how they might be most productively implemented when instruction is
designed more explicitly to promote student engagement.
MARVIN
To illustrate the importance of membership and authentic work, con-
sider Marvin, a 13-year old African-American for whom low school
achievement has become a normal pattern. Although a good student in
elementary s:_hool (he even made the honor roil hi 3rd Grade), Marvin
appears to have lost interest in academic achievement. Now in 7th Grade,
his semester report card recorded F's in language arts and science and D's
in reading and math. Marvin is typical of a large number of siudents we
observed in his school as well as in other urban schools that serve mostly
economically disadvantaged students, both white and black.
Marvin's teachers complain that he won't do assigned work and that
he often has to be disciplined for talking out or disrupting the class in
some way. He quickly reached the maximum number of absences that,
according to district decree, requires automatic failure, regardless of ac-
tual academic performance. Marvin has his own complaints abou,
hool
and teachers. He says that school is boring and that his teacher:.
n
teach. "They don't make classes interesting. They just preach."

----- Page 34 (native) -----
The Significance and Sources of Student Engagement
29
Marvin's Day at School
From 8:00 a.m. until 3:00 p.m. Marvin has eight class periods with
only 30 minutes for lunch. He eats in a basement cafeteria with no chance
to leave the building. This is the only time, except for brief passing periods
between classes, when he can talk freely to his friends. Except for this
time, almost all of Marvin's school day is spent sitting at a desk in a room
full of adolescents constrained by rules intended to inhibit their natural
inclination to move and speak. Although Marvin admits he puts out little
effcrt to learn what his teachers offer, he still believes learning is impor-
tant. He is not very explicit about how to improve school, but he notes
that "there should be more learning and less fussing."
Marvin's day starts with language arts. Ms. Voss is a middle-aged
African-American woman with a mixed reputation among the students.
On this day, as always, she positions herself squarely in front of the class
to take roll the moment the bell rings beginning the first period. Failing to
get the attention she usually commands, today she announces, "When I'm
in front, you close your mouths." Students quickly quiet down. Ms. Voss
immediately moves into the planned lesson: "Today's lesson is about capi-
talization. Take out your papers."
Students spend the next 20 minutes inserting mostly single words cr:
symbols on a worksheet to answer questions, correct capitalization mis-
takes, and place commas correctly in sentences. When the worksheets are
completed, Ms. Voss requests volunteers to read their answers. In what is
the liveliest part of the class, many students raise their hands, eagerly
seeking to be chosen. Marvin, however, is not among them. As the work is
reviewed, Marvin makes a few corrections on his paper. At one point Ms.
Voss interrupts the recitation and addresses a small girl with her feet
curled under her, "Elizabeth, watch how you're sitting. Ladies don't sit
like that." This provokes a whisper from Marvin to a friend, "Hey, there
goes Sister Voss." Ms. Voss eyes him and says, "Marvin, what are you
talking about? You be quiet nowl" A number of students turn toward
Marvin with subtle gestures of approval.
Ms. Voss quickly restores order, and the class continues reciting from
their worksheets. But a few minutes later Michael, apparently late to
class, enters the room carrying a stainless steel bowl and a sponge. He
ambles over to a cupboard behind Ms. Voss's desk to put the items away.
Ms. Voss tells him that they do not belong in her room. He turns and
slowly walks to the door while Ms. Voss tries to resume the lesson. But the
students' attention is on Michael rather than their teacher. Becoming
angry, Ms. Voss barks at him, "Michael, you leave this room right now

----- Page 35 (native) -----
30
Student Engaoement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
and don't come back. I don't want to be disturbed by you anymore." After
Michael leaves, she locks the door. A few minutes later someone knocks on
the door. Ms. Voss initially ignores it, but finally opens it and admits a
small boy who quickly goes to his seat. A minute later Michael knocks.
Ms. Voss pulls him into the rcom by his shirt sleeve and seats him next to
her. She then says to no one in particular, "This is why we can't teach.
Interruptions! That's my main beef."
Later in the day, Marvin attends social studies class. By this time, the
desks in the room have been pushed into irregular rows with some grouped
facing each other. Paper and books are scattered on the floor. After taking
roll, Ms. Stewart, a young white woman recently out of college, attempts
to call the class to order with shouts of "Class, listen up." Altl-ough most
of the students are seated, they continue to talk among themselves. Marvin
and his friend Jimmy are among those who ignore Ms. Stewart's pleas for
quiet. "Class, we have a quiz today on southern Europe. Take out a piece
of paper."
Many students continue in subdued conversation. Ms. Stewart begins
reading the questions aloud, but then interrupts herself with the admoni-
tion, "Students, you should listen to the questions. Let me repeat, for
questions 1 through 4, name four of the seven southern European coun-
ries." After giving students a minute or so, she goes on. "Question 5:
Spain and Italy are both peninsulas. Give me a definition of a peninsula.
Remember, if you listen you'll hear a lot of ciues." After five more ques-
tions, the students are told to exchange papers to correct during recitation.
The questions are reviewed one by one with students volunteering an-
swers, often incorrect, and marking the papers.
Thirty minutes into the class the correct answers to 10 questions have
been pulled from the students, and the papers have been marked, col-
lected, and placed on the teacher's desk. Ms. Stewart then tells the class to
open their books to page 335. For the next assignment, students are to
draw the outline of southern Europe and then indicate the origin of major
products of this region on their map. Students may work in pairs if they
choose, and Marvin and Jimmy move their seats together, slowly begin-
ning to draw their outlines.
Several minutes into this activity, two white boys who have been
generally quiet up to this point begin arguing. They both rise from their
seats. The smaller of the two draws himself to full height, throws his
shoulders back, puffs out his chest, and moves forward making frontal
contact with his larger opponent. At first, Ms. Stewart does not seem to
notice this confrontation, but when the smaller boy takes an awkward
swing at the other boy, she swiftly intervenes. Ms. Stewart takes the
smaller boy into the hall and then quickly returns to the room. She asks,
cr.

----- Page 36 (native) -----
The Significance and Sources of Student Engagement
31
"Does anyone need any help?" By now most students are either talking
excitedly or are out of their seats, some even dancing in the aisles. One
boy says, "Ms. Stewart, this class is acting pitifully." The bell sounds
shortly after this, and the students rush into the hall.
The last period of the day for Marvin is science, taught by Mr. John-
son, the only male teacher Marvin encounters, Mr. Johnson creates an
impressive physical presence because of his apparent devotion to body-
building activities. He is known for hiz, no-nonsense approach to discipline,
and students take their seats immediately on entering the room and engage
in quiet conversations. Five minutes after the bell has rung Mr. Johnson
rises from behind his desk, where he has been checking some papers, and
calls roll. He then directs students to continue working on the assignment
they started yesterday
a two-page worksheet on astronomy. The work-
sheet asks students to define terms such as refractor and reflective tele-
scopes, celestial sphere, constellation, and pulsar. Mr. Johnson reminds
the class that all answers to these questions can be found in their textbook.
After this short introduction, he returns to his desk where he takes out
some reading material.
A number of students, including Marvin and Jimmy, are working
together, quietly looking up answers in the text. At one point they are
uncertain about an answer, and Marvin raises his hand.
After a while, Mr. Johnson walks over to them. Marvin says, "We
can't find pulsar." The teacher looks at their worksheets and asks rhetori-
cally, "What have you guys been doing the last 15 minutes?" "We've been
working," Marvin protests. "Well, you haven't been doing much." "Tell
us, what's a pulsar?" Mr. Johnson turns away and says, "Look it up in
your book. It's in the chapter." Jimmy says, "Well, we can't find it." "It's
there. just look harder. And stop messing around so much." As he walks
away, Marvin mutters to Jimmy, "He never teaches us anything. All he
ever does is tell us to look it up in the book."
Hearing the muttering, Mr. Johnson spins around, takes several giant
strides, grabs Marvin by the shoulder forcefully, and says, "Hey, Marvin,
have you got a problem?" "No! Nol" is Marvin's quick and reassuring
reply. Jimmy and Marvin continue quietly with the worksheet for the
remainder of the period and complete about half of it.
Exploring the Causes of Marvin's Disengagement
In what ways do Marvin's experiences reinforce a sense of member-
ship and the opportunity to invest in authentic work? First consider the
qualities that promote membership: clarity of school purpose, fairness,
personal support, success, and caring.

----- Page 37 (native) -----
32
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
It is doubtful that Marvin sees a clear purpose in mastering the work-
sheet-style routines and fragmented exercises to which he is subjected in
his academic subjects.
Fairness is another problem. Anthony, one of Marvin's classmates,
was being picked on continually by another boy. One day Anthony was
forced to fight in self-defense. The two boys were apprehended by school
officials, and the punishment for Anthony and his tormentor was the
same
four days of suspension from school and three days of school deten-
tion. One of Anthony's teachers agreed that it was not fair, but saw no
way out of the situation: "If you punish everybody you don't have to
decide who's innocent and who's guilty. You just throw everybody into
detention. That simplifies the problem for the staff."
What about personal support, academic success, and caring? During
the 1989-90 school year, more than half Marvin's classmates in Grades 7
through 12 failed one or more courses, and about one sixth of the students
were retained. Mr. Johnson's refusal to help Marvin and Jimmy and Ms.
Stewart's willingness to allow two boys to ignore her quiz are indicative of
teach2rs' indifference to some students. In a survey taken during the 1988-
89 school year, 78 percent of the students at Marvin's school indicated
that teachers expected them to know material after hearing it only one
time. Despite this difficulty, 59 percent of the same group of students said
that they rarely or never spoke with teachers about Aass problems.
Mr. Johnson and others establish a social distance between themselves
and students, which makes it impossible for students to develop bords of
friendship and trust. In fact, 67 percent of Marvin's peers rarely or never
speak to their teachers about outside-school activities.
Student engagement is inhibited not only by threats to membership,
but also by the absence of authentic work. The work that Marvin was
asked to complete failed most of the criteria for authenticity. Marvin
perceived little or no extrinsic value associated with completing the work
successfully. Marvin's getting A's rather than D's woulu not lead to a
better job or higher wage. Filling out worksheets with one-word answers,
most of which could be found LP., skimming a text, was of no intrinsic
interest; it did not build on students' multiple "intelligences," capture their
imaginations, or challenge them to think. The work, dictated entirely by
teachers, offered no sense of ownership. Even if the work was completed
according to teachers' expectations, it had no value beyond school, nor
did it involve certain other important characteristics that can establish
connections to the real world (e.g., collaboration and flexible use of time).
Finally, the work was devoid of humor or playfulness.
As indicated earlier, we chose a perspective on student engagement
that emphasizes schools' responsibility to respond constructively to the

----- Page 38 (native) -----
-41
The Significance and Sources of Student Engagement
33
students they serve. This is not to neglect either the nonschool factors that
affect student engagement or the personal responsibility students must
take for their own success or failure. Many adults, having endured and
succeeded in schools not too different from Marvin's, see the solution to
disengagement more in terms of changing students and their families. The
problem should be understood from both angles, but there is a long tradi-
tion in American education of blaming students for their own failure and
marginalization. This perspective has led both educators and policymakers
to ignore the contributions of the school itself to the failure of so many
young people. It also has led educators and policymakers to ignore the
positive role school can play in creating an educational environment that
builds student membership and offers students authentic work that pro-
duces high levels of engagement and achievement.
SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS
Dominant concerns in the educational reform movement have ne-
glected one of the problems most critical to the improvement of high
schools: how to engage students in academic work. Engagement is defined
as the student's psychological investment in and effort to master the knowl-
edge, skills, and crafts that academic work is intended to produce. The
importance of engagement and the difficulty of stimulating it were clari-
fied by discussing the relationship of professional to client in teaching
versus other professions, socialpsychological characteristics in adoles-
cents' roles, and the more general problem of alienation in modern cul-
ture. Based on the assumption that all humans share a fundamental need
to develop competence, educators can enhance student engagement in
academic work by attention to two general factors: building a sense of
student membership in the school at large, and designing academic tasks
to maximize the authenticity of schoolwork.
The concepts of membership, authentic work, and criteria for each
complement other research related to school improvement. For example,
research on effective schools and on the bargains that teachers make with
students suggests that teachers often need to raise levels of expectation and
challenge. Our theory of engagement helps to explain why high expecta-
tions (no easy bargains) can improve learning. For example, high expecta-
tions and challenge can enhance membership by demonstrating clear
goals, support, equity, and caring. If directed toward authentic work,
high expectations are likely to enhance intrinsic interest and sense of own-
ership. All of this should promote engagement.
Our model proposes qualities for student experiences that can guide

----- Page 39 (native) -----
34
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
the conduct of instruction as well as other aspects of students' lives in
school. Achieving membership and authentie work is, of course, easier
said than done, because student experiences in school and the meaning
that students attribute to them are aftected by a host of facter::, some of
which cannot be easily controlled by individual practitione,s or even an
entire school staff. A comprehensive explanation of the nature of member-
ship and work in a school, as well as programs for improvement, need to
consider the impact of at least the following factors:
1
Students' personal and social backgrounds
2. The district and community context, whose norms and policies
affect many aspects of life in school
3. School culture, reflected in beliefs and values of staff and students
4. School organization (size, structure, division of labor)
5. Curriculum
6. Teachers' background and competence
7. Teacher-student interaction, in and out of class.
These and other factors can both enhance and diminish membership
and authentic work. Well-intended teachers, unaware of how students'
social backgrounds affect their approach to schooling, may misinterpret
their behavior. Organizational routines and curriculum mandates can
reduce possibilities for authentic academic work. When the culture of
schooling preoccupies itself with the maintenance of order, or competitive
individualism, it deprives many students of a sense of membership. In
short, schools' ability to enhance membership and authentic work for
students depends on a complex ecology.
The Center's studies shed light on a number of these factors. Chapters
2 and 3 examine the nature of teacher-student interaction and how this may
be affected by school organization and culture. Chapter 4 highlights the role
of curriculum, school culture, and district-community context. Chapter 5
emphasizes leadership, school culture, organization, and district context.
Chapter 6 focuses on noninstructional aspects of students' lives,
NOTES
1. An earlier version of some material in this chapter appears in Newmann
(1991a).
2. Syntheses of research on motivating students to learn (Brophy, 1987; Sti-
pek, 1986) distinguish between motivation to perform and motivation to learn.
Discussions of the latter include factors that we see as critical to engagement.
3, See Bidwell (1970) for useful analyses of client-serving institutions. The

----- Page 40 (native) -----
The Significance and Sources of Student Engagement
35
need for serious effort on the part of the student has been demonstrated both by
practitioners' claims and by analytic and empirical research (Cohen, 1988; Cusick,
1973; Powell, Farrar, & Cohen, 1985; Sedlak, Wheeler, Pullin, & Cusick, 1986).
Carroll's (1963) widely cited model of school learning, for example, includes the
variable of student perseverance, which is consistent with our engagement con-
cept. Empirical studies have shown that variables such as student effort and
involvement have effects on student achievemei t independent of student ability
(Grabe, 1982; Grabe & Latta, 1981; Laffey, 1982).
4. Marshall (1988) observes that using the metaphor of work to describe
learning can have unfortunate implications for how teachers relate to students
and how students regard the process of learning. This is because the properties of
adult work settings often involve lack of worker autonomy, labor for the profit
of others rather than self-improvement, and other conditions that may inhibit
meaningful learning. Our use of the term academic work is meant not to suggest
that schools should replicate dominant conditions of adult labor, but instead to
emphasize the point that meaningful learning requires serious effort by the
learner, and further that the design of the work tasks themselves must aim toward
enhancing engagement in mastery, rather than simply securing compliance in task
completion. We would agree with Marshall that the characteristics of academic
work that engages students would differ from characteristics in the typical work
and recreational settings she discusses.
5. In this study Csikszentmihalyi and Larson (1984) had a sample of teenag-
ers carry electronic beepers and record their location, activity, and companions at
random times when they were "beeped." Farrell's (1990) detailed portrait of the
lives of high school students at risk also illustrates the power of influences beyond
the classroom to detract from school engagement.
6. Studies within the Center measured achievement through a variety of
tests and also students' grade-point averages.
7. Examples of engagement survey items included: "How often in this class
do you
.
. . Try as hard as you can? .
. Think what you are supposed to learn is
interesting and worthwhile?
.
. . Find yourself concentrating so hard that time
passes quickly? .
. ." Responses on a five-point scale varied from "never" to "al-
most every day."
8. Newmann's (1981) study of the implications of philosophical, psychologi-
cal, and sociological literature on alienation for high school reform offers a more
detailed analysis of this topic.
9. See the original research on "effectance" by White (1959), the synthesis
on competence by Smith (1968), DeCharms's (1984) discussion of agency, and
Connell's (1990) analysis of motivation.
10. Dweck (1986) explained how students' social cognitions about their com-
petence affect motivation to learn. Stipek (1986) described how particular class-
room activities can affect these cognitions positively and negatively, and thereby
affect engagement. Stipek's review of motivation research also supports our con-
clusions below related to intrinsic interests and student sense of ownership over
work.
11. Students from minority cultures or low-status groups face special threats

----- Page 41 (native) -----
36
Student Engagement and A chievement in American Secondary Schools
to self-esteem from the dominant culture. Culturally responsive pedagogy is neces-
sary to transform student alienation into membership (Erickson, 1987).
12. See Steinberg (1990) for a concise summary of some research showing
how support and caring from teachers can enhance student engagement.
13. Moos's (1986) summary of literature on workplace conditions indicates
that social acceptance and cohesion produce higher worker morale and less stress.
Bryk and Driscoll (1988) present evidence on the advantages of communal features
in high schools.
14. Newmann (1991b) conceptualized authentic academic achievement as
the production (rather than reproduction) of knowledge, through disciplined in-
quiry, that has aesthetic, utilitarian, or personal value beyond demonstrating the
comr
.ice of the learner. The criteria for authentic work developed in this chap-
ter ar .=sistent with those criteria for authentic achievement, but the criteria
here
re more elaborate, because they address the broader issue of the kind of
work most likely to engage students.
15. Bishop (1989), for example, claims that job placement and salary levels
offer few extrinsic rewards for academic engagement, because they are not tied to
students' achievement levels in high school. He also argues that an economic
system that provides only a competitive reward structure (a zero sum game where
winners emerge only by creating losers) offers no incentive for students in the
bottom half to become academically engaged. Ogbu (1974) also showed how
students' perceptions of future economic opportunity affect engagement in school.
16. See Deci (1975) and Maehr (1984) for syntheses of research on intrinsic
motivation.
17. The need for a sense of control over one's work has been established in
the literature on alienation (Blauner, 1964; Braverman, 1974), motivation (Con-
nell, 1990; DeCharms, 1984; Deci 8c Ryan, 1985) and self-management in the
workplace (Hackman, 1986).
18. Resnick's (1987) analysis of learning in school versus more practical prob-
lem solving out of school reflects concerns similar to those that we address.
19. The factors are consistent with conditions that define a flow experience
according to Csikszentmihalyi and Larson (1984). In these experiences a person
concentrates on mastering a specific challenge that has usually been voluntarily
chosen. The challenge demands extending one's skills to new levels of complexity,
but not so far as to generate extreme anxiety. To meet the challenge, one must
abide by certain "rules" of interaction or discipline, and the process entails con-
crete feedback on the degree of success.
REFERENCES
Bidwell. C. (1970). Students and schools: Some observations on client trust in
client-serving organizations. In W. R. Rosengren & M. Lefton (Eds.), Organ-
izations and clients (pp. 37-69). Columbus, OH: Merrill.
Bishop, J. H. (1989). Why the apathy in American high schools? Educational
Researcher, 18(1), 6- 10.

----- Page 42 (native) -----
The Significance and Sources of Student Engagement
37
Blauner, R. (1964). Alienation and freedom: The factory worker and his industry.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Braverman, H. (1974). Labor and monopoly capital. New York: Monthly Review
Press.
Brophy, J. (1987). Synthesis of research on strategies for motivating students to
learn. Educational Leadership, 45(2), 40-48.
Bryk, A. S., & Driscoll, M. E. (1988). The high school as community: Contextual
influences and consequences for students and teachers. Madison, WI: Na-
tional Center on Effective Secondary Schools, University of Wisconsin-Mad-
ison.
Carroll, J. B. (1963). A model of school learning. Teachers College Record, 64,
723-733.
Cohen, D. K. (1988). Teaching practice: Plus ca change .
. (No. 88-3). East
Lansing, MI: National Center for Research on Teacher Education, Michigan
State University.
Connell, J. P. (1990). Context, self and action: A motivational analysis of self-
system processes across the life-span. In D. Cicchetti (Ed.), The self in tran-
sition: Infancy to childhood (pp. 61-97). Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Larson, R. (1984). Being adolescent: Conflict and
growth in the teenage years. New York: Basic Books.
Cusick, P. A. (1973). Inside high school: The students' world. New York: Holt,
Rinehart & Winston.
DeCharms, R. (1984). Motivation enhancement in educational settings. In R. E.
Ames & C. Ames (Eci',.), Research on motivation in education: Vol. 1. Stu-
dent motivation (pp. 275-310). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Deci, E. L. (1975). Intrinsic motivation. New York: Plenum.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and self-determination
in human behavior. New York: Plenum.
Dweck, C. S. (1986). Motivational processes affecting learning. American Psy-
chologist, 41(10), 1040-1048.
Eckert, P. (1989). Jocks and burnouts: Social categories and identity in the high
school. New York: Teachers College Press.
Erickson, F. A. (1987). Transformation and school success: The politics and cul-
ture of educational achievement. Anthropology and Education Quarterly,
18(3), 335-356.
Farrell, E. (1990). Hanging in and dropping out: Voices of at-risk high school
students. New York: Teachers College Press.
Gamoran, A., & Berends, M. (1987). The effects of stratification in secondary
schools: Synthesis of survey and ethnographic research. Review of Educa-
tional Research, 56(2), 195-211.
Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences. New
York: Basic Books.
Goodlad, J. I. (1984). A place called school: Prospects for the future. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Grabe, M. (1982). Effort strategies in a mastery instructional system: The quanti-
REST COPY P,VA1LA8LE

----- Page 43 (native) -----
38
Student Engagement and Achievement in Arnerkin Secondary Schools
fication of effort and the impact of effort on achievement. Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 7,327-333.
Grabe, M., & Latta, R. M. (1981). Cumulative achievement in a mast, ry instruc-
tional system: The impact of differences in resultant achievement motivation
and persistence. American Educational Research Journal, 18(1), 7-13.
Hackman, J. R. (1986). The psychology of self-management in organizations. In
M. S. Pallak & R. 0. Perloff (Eds.), Psychology and work: Productivity,
change, and employment (pp. 89-137). Washington, DC: American Psycho-
logical Association.
Laffey, J. M. (1982). The assessment of involvement with school work among
urban high school students. Journal of Educational Psychology, 74(1), 62-
71.
Maehr, M. L. (1984). Meaning and motivation: Toward a theory of personal
investment. In R. E. Ames & C. Ames (Eds.), Research on motivation in
education: Vol. 1. Student motivation (pp. 115-144). Orlando, FL: Aca-
demic Press.
Marshall, H. H. (1988). Work or learning: Implications of classroom metaphors.
Educational Researcher, 17(9), 9-16.
McNeil, L. M. (1986). Contradictions of control: School structure and school
knowledge. New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Merton, R. (1953). Social theory and social structure. London: Free Press of Glen-
dale.
Moos, R. H. (1986). Work as a human context. In M. S. Pallak & R. 0. Perloff
(Eds.), Psychology and work: Productivity, change, and empluyment (pp.
9-52). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Newmann, F. M. (1981). Reducing alienation in high schools: Implications of
theory. Harvard Educational Review, 51(4), 546-564.
Newmann, F. M. (1991a). Student engagement in academic work: Expanding the
perspective on secondary school effectiveness. In J. R. Bliss, W. A. Firestone,
& C. E. Richards (Eds.), Rethinking effective schools: Research and practice
(pp. 58-76). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Newmann, F. M. (1991b). Linking restructuring to authentic student achieve-
ment. Phi Delta Kappan, 72,458-463.
Oakes, J. (J990). Mu/tip/ying inequalities: The effects of race, social class, and
tracking on opportunities to learn mathematics and science. Santa Monica,
CA: Rand Corporation.
Ogbu, J. U. (1974). The next generation: An ethnography of an urban neighbor-
hood. New York: Academic Press.
Powell, A. G., Farrar, E., & Cohen, D. K. (1985). The shopping malt high
school: Winners and losers in the educational marketplace. Boston: Hough-
ton Mifflin.
Purkey, S. C., & Smith, M. S. (1983). Effective schools: A review. The Elemen-
tary School Journal, 83(4), 427-452.
Resnick, L. B. (1987). Learning in school and out. Educational Researcher, 16(9),
13-20.

----- Page 44 (native) -----
The Significance and Sources of Student Engagement
39
Sedlak, M. W., Wheeler, C. W., Pullin, D. C., oc Cusick, P. A. (1986). Selling
students short: Classroom bargains and academic reform in the American
high school. New York: Teachers College Press.
Smith, M. B. (1968). Competence and socialization. In J. A. Clausen (Ed.), So-
cialization and society (pp. 270-320). Boston: Little Brown.
Steinberg, A. (1990). Why kids give up on schoolAnd what teachers can do
about it. Harvard Education Letter, 6(5), 1-4.
Stipek, D. (1986). Children's motivation to learn. In T. M. Tomlinson 8E H. J.
Walberg (Eds.), Academic work and educational excellence. Berkeley, CA:
McCutchan.
Tinto, V. (1987). Leaving college: Rethinking the causes and cures of student
attrition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wehlage, G. G., Rutter, R. A., Smith, G. A., Lesko, N. L., & Fernandez, R. R.
(1989). Reducing the risk: Schools as communities of support. Philadelphia:
Falmer Press.
Weis, L. (1990). Working class without work: High school students in a de-indus-
trializing economy. New York: Rout ledge Sr Kegan Paul.
Wheelock, A. (1986). The way out: Student exclusion practices in Boston middle
schools. Boston: Massachusetts Advocacy Center.
White, R. W. (1959). Motivation reconsidered: The concept of competence. Psy-
chological Review, 66, 297-333.

----- Page 45 (native) -----
CHAPTER 2
Taking Students Seriously
Adam Gamoran and Martin Nystrand
Our colleagues have presented a conception of student engagement. We
now face the problem of how to enhance it through instruction in a partic-
ular subject. Is there a set of specific pedagogical moves or student activi-
ties that are more likely to enhance membership and authentic work? To
answer this question, one might synthesize research evidence on proposed
interventions such as Madeline Hunter's mastery teaching, cooperative
learning, the project method, the use of case studies, writing to learn,
peer tutoring, and curriculum in specific subjects. Unfortunately, a review
of this sort would probably give few clues on how to build membership
and aufisentic work. First, empirical studies of such interventions have
not usually given explicit attention to membership and authentic work.
Second, logical analysis is most likely to conclude that the potential of any
activity to promote membership or engagement will depend more on how
it is implemented than on its inherent structure and function.
Instead of searching for the most effective generic techniques, we
studied something more fundamental, something that most teaching activ-
ities have in common: conversation or discourse between teachers and
students. Regardless of the activity in which students participate, dis-
course itself can offer a critical indicator of the extent to which school
offers membership and authentic work. What kinds of discourse are most
likely to communicate a sense of inclusion? What kinds of discourse are
most likely to generate a sense of ownership and resemble the kinds of
conversations that people value in the real world?
In studying the teaching of literature, we paid special attention to
the kinds of questions that teachers ask students. In fact, we recorded and
classified more than 20,000 questions, and developed a way of describing
the pattern of questions in order to assess whether teachers were taking
students seriously. When students' ideas are taken seriously, this tells the
students that they are important members of a learning community, and
40

----- Page 46 (native) -----
Taking Students Sf lously
41
the work of responding to teachers' questions is more authentic because
the students can actually influence the course of the conversation. In this
sense, questions that take students seriously promote engagement. In thi.3
chapter, we illustrate this way of looking at discourse in the teaching oi
literature in 9th Grade. We examine whether high-quality discourse oc-
curs more frequently in some class situations than others (large versus
small classes, high-ability versus low-ability groups', whether high-quality
discourse seems to enhance students' engagement, and whether it seems to
enhance their understanding of literature.
THE QUALITY OF INS 7RUCTIONAL DISCOURSE
Susan is like other 9th Grade girls we have met.' She gets along well
enough in school, but doesn't find much excitement in her classes. In
English class, for example, she does her homework most of the time, which
she says takes her less than an hour each week. She finds some of the
readings interesting, and reports that she generally has one or two things
to say during class discussions. Susan says she often works as hard as she
can, but rarely concentrates so hard that time passes quickly. We get the
impression that she works as hard as she needs tt..
Let's spend 50 minutes with Susan during one English class.
The period begins with the familiar ritual of attendance-taking. That
accomplished, Mrs. Randolph, the teacher, reminds students that their
silent reading period has begun. Mrs. Randolph is earnest, not especially
dynamic but conscientious and well-organized. She projects a feeling of
competence, but not much excitement or passion. Susan, who has been
chatting with the girl in the next row, casually takes out The Call of the
Wild, hei assigned reading, eventually finds her place in the book, and
begins reading. For the next 12 minutes, Susan sits quietly and reads, as if
she were alone in a library.
Next, Susan dutifully takes her turn pointing out the grammatical
errors planted for the students to find in sentences Mrs. Randolph has
written on the blackboard. This activity takes 10 minutes, and half the
period is over. The second half is occupied with students answering Mrs.
Randolph's questions on The Call of the Wild. First, students write, on
blank sheets, their answers to two questions that Mrs. Randolph reads
aloud: "Why did Jaok London give his novel the title The Call of the
Wild?" and "What is London's message to his readers?" Mrs. Randolph
collects these papers. Second, the students break into small groups to write
answers to study questions. These questions check whether students have
followed the narrative of the story; for example, "Briefly describe Buck's

----- Page 47 (native) -----
42
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
life at Judge Miller's" and "What important lesson did Buck learn from
the man in the red sweater?" Finally, Mrs. Randolph reads the study
questions aloud and calls on students to respond. Susan raises her hand a
few times. The one time she is called on she responds correctly: "Explain
why it took the team six days to travel 30 miles," reads Mrs. Randolph;
"Because spring was coming and the ice was thin, so the team kept falling
through," replies Susan.
Is this kind of instruction engaging? Although Susan does enough
work to get by, she finds little reason to put more than minimal effort
into it. Susan's class sessions, and her responses, accord with what many
observers have said about instruction in American high schools: Teachers
do most of the talking and almost all of the planning; controversies and
complications are avoided; the tenor of instruction is devoid of passion.
Teachers and students have made a "treaty" ("stalemate" might be a better
word); Students go along with most demands, as long as they don't have
to work too hard.2
What kind of instruction would be more engaging? How can the
unspoken agreement of teachers and students not to expect much from
one another be replaced by mutual engagement in learning? According to
our theory of student engagement, instructional discourse that promotes
membership and authentic work could make an essential contribution. In
this chapter, we describe high-quality instructional discourse and explain
how it makes students active partners in the instructional process, instead
of passive respondents.
Like other forms of human interaction, instruction is governed by
norms that guide the exchange of information. It would be hard to under-
stand one another without certain conversational conventions: When to
start from the beginning, and when to skip the details; when to explain
ourselves, and when to make assumptions; and so on. Typically, though,
talk between teachers and students bends these norms in odd ways. In
ordinary discourse, someone asks a question because he or she wants to
know the answer. Teachers, by contrast, already know the answers to
most of their questions. They ask not to learn the answers, but to find
out whether the students know the answers. Most teacher questions are
essentially "test questions," which is not to say they are part of actual
tests, but that their purpose is to test students' knowledge rather than to
solicit new information.
What is being exchanged in such teacher-student interaction? There
is little give-and-take in the substance of the discourse, compared with
ordinary conversation. Susan, her classmates, and their teacher were not
trading opinions and information back and forth, nor was the teacher
seriously interested in what the students were thinking. Instead, exchange

----- Page 48 (native) -----
Taking Students Seriously
43
in classroom discourse typically has only a procedural basis: Teachers ask,
and students answer. The content of a student's answer is not judged on
its intrinsic merit, but on its conformity to a prespecified idea. In classes
like Susan's, students are engaged in the procedures of discourse, but not
in its substance. They pay attention and follow directions, but are not
intellectually committed to issues of instructional content. And why
should they be? They have little stake in it, for they are given little oppor-
tunity to contribute anything new to the conversation.
High-Quality Instructional Discourse
Not all classroom discourse is like this. Sometimes, instead of test
questions, teachers pose "authentic questions," which call for new infor-
mation instead of nrespecified knowledge. In place of the list of pre-
ordained questions that dominates recitation, some teachers depart from
the script to follow up on student responses, so that what students say
influences the flow of discourse. This sort of follow-up, when teachers
build on what students have said in framing subsequent questions, is called
"uptake."3 Sometimes the discourse flows so well that it is not even guided
primarily by teacher questions, but moves among students and between
students and the teacher like a real conversation. We call this "discussion,"
to distinguish it from ordinary questionanswer recitation.
The following excerpt from another 9th Grade English class provides
an example of a classroom conversation in which students are substan-
tively as well as procedurally engaged.
The teacher asks a recitation question on a provocative topic:
"Can you recall things from Huck Finn that seemed racist to
you?' Students respond with a few examples. Then the teacher
poses an authentic question, one for which the answer is not pre-
specified.
Teacher: How did that make you guys feel? I mean, what was your gut
reaction to all that? .
.
.
Student:
.
. . everyone claims it's so historical, you can find that any-
where .
. . "nigger," you know, you just hear that .
. . and people al-
ways think .
. . it's so historical.
Teacher: Like, oh, we wouldn't do that anymore.
Student: Yeah, like oh, we're not primitive, you know, and it's not, I mean,
everybody does that, all the time. Well, not everybody, but people,
people do that. .
. . People can't get in[to] apartment buildings be-
cause they're black.

----- Page 49 (native) -----
44
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
Teacher: Um-hm.
Student: They can't go to certain stores because they're black, or they're
arrested because they're black .
. . you know, it's just, I mean, every-
body is always saying how historical it is, and it's right here, and it's
right now .
.
.
Teacher: I like that comment, because do you remember .
. . when I gave
you that whole list of things that Twain is making fun of in the story?
Well all of those things still exist, all right? Gullibility, religious con-
vention, urn, all kinds of things. Did this book stop being an accurate
mirror of society? At any point? [Students shake their heads nega-
tively.] I don't think so. .
. . And we can look into this book as if we
were looking into a mirror and saying, oh, OK, these are the things
that are wrong with me.
This teacher has a point to make, but she does not simply state her
views and move on. Nor does she restrict her questions to ones that call for
summarizing the narrative of the story. Instead, she asks questions that
move students to construct their own ideas about the topic. Moreover, she
incorporates knowledge constructed by the students as part of instruc-
tional content. "What was your gut reaction to all that?" she asks, making
the students' analysis of racism the subject of her next question. This
question is an example of uptak., and, as noted above, of authenticity as
well. In the last part of the excerpt, the teacher and students move beyond
question-answer to a discussion, a freer sharing of ideas. Again, the teach-
er builds on students' contributions to make her point. By taking students'
ideas as serious and meaningful, this teacher engages students in the sub-
stantive content of literature.
Authentic questions, uptake, and discussion are characteristic of
high-quality classroom discourse. Such discourse is inherently engaging
for students because it offers them a real stake in its content. They play a
role in determining its substance and direction. Their ideas are treated
as primary information, indispensable to comprehending the meaning of
literature itself. High-quality discourse takes students seriously.
Taking students seriously does not mean one must always agree with
students or legitimize their opinions. Here is an excerpt from the same
teacher in a different class, in which she exhibits respect for a student's
view but argues against it.
Student: Well, we're talking about how white people are racist to black
people, but blacks do that to us too.
Teacher: Um-hm, sure.
Student: I mean, just last night, we were on the bus, and we weren't even
doing anything, all I was like looking out the window, and, and these,

----- Page 50 (native) -----
Taking Students Seriously
45
these five black guys sitting right next to me
.
. . and then they start
saying like they were going to start a fight. And we didn't even do
anything
.
. .
Teacher: Helen, I go along with you
.
. . the thing is though, think about
growing up, any of you
.
. . different from other people. .
. . And, if
you got people all of your life telling you that you're .
. . nasty, and
you're a drug dealer, and you can never amount to anything
you
can't go to college, you can't do this and you can't do that. How do
think you're going to start to act? [Students murmur.] You're going to
act just like how people tell you to act, okay, that's called the self-
fulfilling prophesy. And so, you're right, Helen, I know things like
that happen, but .
. . that doesn't come from anybody's skin color.
That comes from hatred. That's what hatred causes, and it's
.
. . a
disease in our society.
What engages the student is the teacher's willingness to accept her point
as meaningful, though incomplete. Unlike most descriptions of high school
classes, these lessons are not "emotionally flat," and they do not avoid
controversial or complicated issues. Instead, they promote engagement by
incorporating students' contributions into the academic content.
Another feature of high-quality discourse is coherence among the var-
ious themes and activities of instruction. When reading, writing, and
discussion activities have overl apping content and themes, instruction
takes on a coherence that mar
fies its capacity to enrich students' under-
standing. Observer accounts of contemporary high schools suggest that
this type of coherence is relatively rare and that fragmentation rather than
coherence is the norm (McNeil, 1986; Page, 1987),
A STUDY OF INSTRUCTIONAL DISCOURSE
IN 9TH GRADE ENGLISH
To learn more about instructional discourse and its relation to engage-
ment and learning, we studied 54 9th Grade English classes located in nine
high schools in the midwestern United States. The schools were chosen to
vary in community context. Seven were public schools, including three in
small-town and rural areas, one in a wealthy suburb and one in an upper
middle-class urban neighborhood, and two in a working-class urban com-
munity. The other two were Catholic high schools with middle-class stu-
dents. In the smallest schools, all 9th Grade English classes participated.
In the others, representative samples of five to nine classes agreed to take
part. Virtually all students in the participating classes (totaling about
1,100) were included in the study.
,
.1

----- Page 51 (native) -----
46
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
The description of Susan's class was drawn from one of the classes in
one of the small-town schools, but the picture would not be much different
in most classes in the other schools. The excerpts of high-quality discourse
come from one of the Catholic schools. As will be evident, this type of
discussion was far less common than the recitation in Susan's class.
We visited each of the 54 classes on four occasions. Observers re-
corded, both on audio-tapes and by typin; into lap-top computers, all the
questions asked during the class period. The questions were coded along
dimensions that included authenticity and uptake. In addition, we noted
the amount of time spent in activities such as seatwork, lecture, question-
answer recitation, discussion, and small-group time. Students filled out
tests and questionnaires in the fall and spring, and teachers also completed
questionnaires in the spring.
The Overall Quality of Discourse
In our study, the average class period was 50 minutes long, just like
Susan's class. As Table 2.1 shows, about one third of the time was spent in
question-answer recitation, the single most common activity. In this, too,
the description of Susan's class is an apt characterization of the typical
class. More free-flowing discussion, such as in the excerpts on racism,
was exceedingly rare, averaging less titan 15 seconds per day. Aside from
recitation, class periods tended to be evenly divided among procedural
matters, seatwork, lecture, and other activities.
Our results are consistent with the fragmentation that others have
described. Students infrequently write about their readings or discuss
what they have written: on average, these activities occur less than twice
weekly. They have more opportunities to discuss their readings (average
of 3.4 times per week). Overall, instructional activities are not tightly
integrated with one another.
The findings for classroom discourse are slightly more encouraging than
those for the structure and coherence of activities: Just over one quarter of
teacher questions were authentic, and about the same proportion used up-
take Still, the large majority of questions called for conventional recitation
and made little use of student contributions. Most teacher questions did not
take students' ideas seriously, but consisted instead of what appeared to be
preplanned lists of questions with prespecified answers.
Differences Among Classes in the Quality of Discourse
Not all classes conformed to this profile of the typical class. For exam-
ple, although 33 of the 54 classes had no discussion time at all, in four
classes we observed more than a minute of discussion per day. Can instruc-

----- Page 52 (native) -----
Table 2.1
Typical Classroom Discourse in 54 9th Grade English Classes
Activities
Mean
Standard
deviation
(observed minutes per day)
Procedures
8.3
3.0
Seatwork
8.3
6.7
Lecture('
8.4
5.8
Question-answer recitation
17.6
6.6
Discussion
0.2
0.5
Small-group work
2.3
4.4
Otherb
5.1
4.5
Total observed minutes per day
50.2
4.4
Coherence among activities
(teacher reported, times per week)
Students write about their readings
1.5
1.3
Students discuss their readings
3.4
1.7
Students discuss what they have written
1.3
1.0
Nature of questions
(observed percentage)
Authentic teacher questions
26.6%
19.2
Questions with uptake
25.7%
11.8
Films, filmstrips, and teacher reading aloud were included under lecture.
Other includes student presentation, students reading aloud, tests, and
quizzes.

----- Page 53 (native) -----
48
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Scnools
tional differences among classes be explained by their organizational con-
texts? We thought three conditions might be important. First, in eight of
the nine schools, students were divided into ability groups for English
class. These groups were easily identified by their names, such as "honors,"
accelerated," "regular," "remedial," or "basic." Based on recent studies,
we expected to observe higher-quality discourse in the honors and acceler-
ated classes, and more rigid, drill-and-worksheet instruction in remedial
and basic classes. Oakes (1985), for example, found that students in high-
track English classes had more opportunities for critical thinking tasks,
whereas low-track students more often engaged in memorization and
simple comprehension work. Similarly, Page (1987) described low-track
classes as "caricatures" of regular classes. Low-track classes deemphasized
academic concerns, she observed, and teachers did not take responsibility
for the learning of low-track students. Both authors also found low-track
instruction to be more fragmented, emphasizing small bits of information
instead of broad ideas. We expected these differences to be manifested in
our measures of instructional quality.
Second, we thought class size might affect the quality of instructional
discourse. Smaller classes might encourage closer personal relations, and
this could prompt teachers to incorporate students' ideas into the flow of
instruction. Thus, we expected to find greater use of authentic questions
and uptake in smaller classes. We further reasoned that teachers could
more easily carry on discussions in smaller classes. Finally, we hypothe-
sized that more experienced teachers would be more adept at leading
discussions. With fewer problems of classroom management, experienced
teachers might also be more willing to relinquish some of their control by
allowing students to influence the course of the lesson. On the other hand,
it seemed equally possible that experienced teachers would be set in their
ways, making even greater use of prescribed questions and predetermined
answers.
Differences Associated with Ability 3rouping
As it turned out, we found little evidence to confirm these expecta-
tions. High-ability classes devoted less time to seatwork and more time to
questionanswer recitation, as expected, but there were no significant
differences in the amount of discussion time. Of the four classes averaging
more than a minute of discussion, two were honors-level, one was regular,
and one was remedial. Eight honors classes exhibited no discussion time at
all. Authenticity and coherence were highest in regular classes, and uptake
was highest in remedial classes, but these differences were small and statis-
tically indistinguishable from zero.

----- Page 54 (native) -----
Taking Students Seriously
49
Differences Associated with Class Size and Teacher Experience
Class size and teacher experience were also largely unrelated to dis-
course quality. Smaller classes spent less time on routine procedures, but
more time on seatwork. For example, classes with fewer than 10 students
averaged about 18 minutes per day of seatwork, while larger classes aver-
aged just under eight minutes.' Experienced teachers allocated less time
for discussion and reported fewer interrelations among activities. Other-
wise, years of teaching experience was unrelated to our measures of in-
struction.
Discourse Quality and Other Measures of Engagement
We think of high-quality discourse as substantively engaging because
it draws students into the content of the lessons. In this sense, classes with
more authentic questions, uptake, discussion, and coherent discourse may
be seen as having more engaging instruction, compared with classes that
generally lack these features. This notion, however, is not necessarily the
same as students' views of engaging instruction. We expected students to
report more interest and effort, and to exhibit more consistent participa-
tion, in classes with higher-quality discourse. Again, however, our expec-
tations were largely frustrated. First, we constructed a scale from three
questions posed on student questionnaires.
In English class, how often do you
.
.
.
Try as hard as you can?
Think what you are learning is interesting and worthwhile?
Find yourself concentrating so hard that time passes
quickly?
This measure of engagement was essentially unrelated to the discourse
quality of the class. We also examined student reports of assignment com-
pletion and homework time, as well as observed data on the proportion of
students offtask. Again, we found no consistent relations between dis-
course quality and these participation indicators.
These findings reflect the complexity of measuring student engage-
ment. As noted in Chapter 1, investment and effort in academic work are
not easy to observe. One student could appear to be daydreaming, yet
actually be thinking about the lesson topic. Another could seem to be
hard at work, but not really be concentrating. Survey questions are also
problematic. How accurately do students report their levels of effort and
concentration? How sensitive are such reports to fluctuations in students'

----- Page 55 (native) -----
50
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
moods or in recent, as opposed to typical, classroom events? Moreover,
positive responses to questions about effort and homework may reflect
procedural engagement even when students' intellectual commitment to
the material that is, their substantive engagement
is attenuated. Weak
correlations among indicators of engagement and engaging instruction
probably result from both the unreliability of the measures and the fact
that different indicators may tap different aspects of engagement.
Discourse Quality and Literature Achievement
Which, if any, aspects of instruction and engagement are related to
student achievement? To address this question, we must first consider
what we mean by achievement. Given our focus on instruction that incor-
porates students' ideas into the academic content, we had little interest in
conventional multiple-choice tests of vocabulary or reading comprehen-
sion. At the same time, we favored a test that was relevant to the actual
content students had covered in class. To assess the effects of instruction
and engagement, we reasoned, one should measure how much students
learned from the material they were taught.
A Test of Literature Achievement
These concerns led us to design our own test of literature achieve-
ment, which we administered in the spring. The teachers provided us
with lists of all the novels, short stories, and plays students had been
assigned to read over the course of the year. From these lists, we chose
five representative selections for each class, and on the tests, we asked a
series of questions about the selected readings. The questions ranged from
simple recall (e.g., "Who were the main characters in [name of story]?")
to ones calling for in-depth understanding (e.g., "Relate the theme of
[name of story] to the main conflict and to the ending."). The questions
were the same for each class, but the readings they asked about differed,
depending on what had been read in each class. In addition, students
were asked to write an essay about a character from any story they had
read in school that year. With this procedure, we hoped to satisfy our
dual goals of allowing students to speak with their own voices and of
testing their knowledge of material they had been taught.'
Despite these advantages over conventional tests, our system has its
own limitations. It is important to bear in mind that the test covered only
literature achievement and did not assess learning in other areas, such as
grammar, speech, specific writing skills, and so on. Literature was the

----- Page 56 (native) -----
Taking Students Seriously
51
one topic that was common to all 54 classes, but the classes did not all
focus on literature to the same degree.
Another limitation is that we do not know the extent to which ques-
tions on the test elicited students' own syntheses of knowledge, or simply
required them to restate conclusions that had already been provided in
class. Whereas the open-ended question asking students to explain their
admiration for some character was reasonably authentic, a question such
as, "What is the main theme of Great Expectations?" may or may not be
an authentic question, depending on whether and how the issue was
treated in class. Although we believe our test provides better measures of
_authentic learning than conventional paper-and-pencil tests, we acknowl-
edge ambiguity about the extent of authenticity elicited by our test.
To measure the effects of instruction and engagement on achieve-
ment, we carried out a regression analysis. This technique statistically
adjusts for differences among students in order to rule out spurious associa-
tions caused by preexisting conditions. For example, if uptake is associated
with higher achievement, regression analysis may show whether the rela-
tion occurs because previously higher-achieving students receive more up-
take, or because uptake leads students to obtain higher achievement. The
regression technique estimates the effect of each variable while statistically
holding constant each of the other variables. Instead of assessing the rela-
tion of each condition to achievement one at a time, we measure the
effects of all our predictors simultaneously. Our analysis controls for the
effects of background variables (sex, race, ethnicity, family socioeconomic
status) and prior achievement (fall tests of reading and writing skills).6
The complete regression results are displayed in Table 2.2.
Effects of Psychological and Behavioral Engagement
Our results suggest that psychological engagement as measured by
the scale described earlier had no effect on literature achievement. This
finding is, of course, subject to the measurement problems noted above.
Behavioral indicators of procedural engagement, both student-reported
and observed, were more closely tied to achievement. Students who com-
pleted all their reading and writing assignments scored about two points
higher on the test than students who finished two thirds of their work.'
This represents a moderate impact: It would move a student from the
50th to the 58th percentile. Similarly, students whose classes averaged 10
percent of students pfftask scored about 1.2 points lower than those whose
classes typically had no students offtask. With these items controlled,
homework time had no additional impact.
(continued on p. 54)
:t

----- Page 57 (native) -----
Table 2.2
Effects of Instruction and Engagement on 9th Grade Literature Achievement
Dependent variable: Spring literature
N = 971 students, R
2 for regression =
achievement (mean = 21.82,
.52.
(le.
.05, **p<.01.)
s.d. = 7.66).
VARIABLE
Background variables
MEAN
STANDARD
DEVIATION
REGRESSION
COEFFICIENT
STANDARD
ERROR
Sex (female = 1)
.51
.50
1.47**
.37
Race (black = l)'
.07
.26
-.46
.72
Ethnicity (Hisp = 1)
.09
.28
-1.56*
.65
SES
-.02
.80
.44
.25
Fall reading
31.88
5.34
.40**
.04
Fall writing
5.71
1.28
.90**
.15
Ability groups
Honors/accelerated
.24
.43
.25
.96
Basicremedial
.10
.30
-1.09
1.13
Other
.09
.29
.57
1.16
Psychological enga ement
2.42
1.40
-.02
.14
Engagement scale

----- Page 58 (native) -----
Behavioral engagement
Writing completed
87.88%
19.68
.03**
.01
Reading completed
83.04%
24.62
.03**
.01
Homework time (hrs/wk)
1.27
1.27
.19
.15
Offtask in class
3.22%
3.27
-.12*
.06
Instructional discourse
Authentic questions:
In honors classes
24.30%
11.41
.10**
.03
In regular classes
28.13%
18.81
-.02
.01
In remedial classes
27.40%
18.86
-.09**
.04
In other classes
36.90%
26.03
-.20**
.03
Uptake
25.90%
11.26
09**
.02
Discussion
.24
.48
-.18
.40
Coherencec
13.01
7.07
.12**
.03
a
Cther classes include two claeses in a school-within-a-school program, and two classes in a
heterogeneously grouped school.
Engagement scale based on student responses to the following questions, coded on a weekly scale:
In English class, how often do you .
.
Try as hard as you can?
Think what you are learning is interesting and worthwhile?
Find yourself concentrating so hard that time passes quickly?
Coherence measure based on teacher responses to the following questions, coded on a weekly scale:
About how often do students in your class write about (or in response to) things they have read?
About how often do you discuss writing topics with your students before asking them to write?
About how often do you and your class discuss the readings you assign?
When you ask students about their reading assignments in class, how frequently do you attempt to do
each of the following: Ask them to relate what they have read to their other readings.
About how often does your class relate its discussion to previous discussions you have had7
About how often do you and your class discuss things students have written about?
eV"

----- Page 59 (native) -----
54
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Seconoary Schools
Effects of Instructional Discourse
Discussion time failed to exert a significant impact in the regression
analysis. However, both uptake and discourse coherence offered positive
contributions. Classes in which 40 percent of the questions used uptake
produced about 1.3 additional points on the test, compared with the typi-
cal class in which 25 percent of questions followed up on student re-
sponses. Achievement was about 1.6 points higher in classes in which
activities were well-connected (coherence one standard deviation above
the mean) compared with classes in which instructional activities rarely
related to one another (coherence one standard deviation below the
mean).
The analysis of authenticity revealed some surprising results. Initially,
authentic teacher questions appeared to exert zero or even negative effects
on achievement.8 Exphratory analyses suggested that authenticity had
different effects in different kinds of classes. Upon closer inspection, we
discovered that authenticity had moderate positive effects in high-ability
classes, and similarly sized negative effects in low-ability classes. Honors
classes with 20 percent more authentic questions (one standard deviation)
produced two additional points on the test, but remedial classes with 20
percent more authenticity reduced achievement by almost the same
amount. Authentic questions had no impact at all in regular classes.
To interpret these findings, we posed the following question: Do the
varying effects of authenticity result from teachers asking different types
of authentic questions in different sorts of classes, or from students in
varied classes responding differently to teachers' authentic questions?
Authenticity in High- and Low-Ability Classes
A closer look at the data revealed that teachers in honors and remedial
classes were not talking about the same issues when they asked authentic
questions. Much more often in remedial classes, we found strings of au-
thentic questions about topics unrelated to literature. One example was a
discussion of test-taking skills and attitudes: "How do most of you feel
about tests?" "What would your parents say if you got an A on next week's
test?" Another was a brainstorming session: "What things would you asso-
ciate with lying in the sun?" Another set of authentic questions emerged
in a lesson on note-taking: "Do you ever have to take notes?" "Do you ever
get lost because you fall behind?"
In another low-ability class, we observed that the teacher posed au-
thentic questions when talking about literature generally, but more con-
,
4

----- Page 60 (native) -----
Taking Students Seriously
55
ventional recitation when asking about the actual texts studied. Here we
observed two lessons on literary devices (e.g., symbolism) in which stu-
dents had opportunities for original contributions (e.g., by inventing their
own metaphors). Yet when this teacher asked students about a particular
text, the vast majority of questions called for summarizing and clarifying
what happened in the story.
By contrast, authentic questions in high-ability classes generally fo-
cused on the ideas and issues embedded in literary texts. For example, in a
discussion of Great Expectations, a teacher in an accelerated class asked
questicns such as, "Do you think Pip could ever really be happy?" "You
say 'No% why not?" "What could Stella tell Pip to make him happy?" "Do
you think she really does want to marry him?" Questions like these take
students into the novel, leading them to see the characters' motivations
from the inside. Indeed, at one point the teacher had students assume the
identity of the characters: "Stella, what would you tell Pip to be happy?"
Another example of the type of authentic questions teachers asked in
honors classes comes from a discussion of Chekhov's story "The Bet": "Do
you think the sacrifice was worth it, to gain that much self-knowledge?"
"Can you expand on that?" This teacher also gave student voices a promi-
nent place in determining the interpretation of the text. Our impression
that authentic questions in honors classes more often concerned the texts at
hand is supported by a tally of authentic questions: 68 percent of authentic
questions in honors classes were about a specific piece of literature,
whereas this could be said of only 25 percent of authentic questions in
remedial classes.
These findings suggest that the reason authenticity had positive effects
in honors classes and negative effects in remedial classes is that honors
teachers more often asked authentic questions about literature, which
was, after all, the subject of the test. Our results do not show that authen-
tic questions have no effect in low-abiIity classes; nor did we find that
low-track teachers ask fewer authentic questions. Instead, we discovered
that the kind of authentic questions asked in low-ability classes failed to
pay off for literature achievement.
On the one hand, one could argue that our test was unfair: Had we
tested students on the topics emphasized in remedial classes, we might
have come up with different results. On the other hand, we think it is
significant that students' ideas about literature received less emphasis in
low-ability classes. Page (1987) claims that low-track teachers have relin-
quished responsibility for their students' learning. Our results are consis-
tent with the argument that in low-ability English classes, academic con-
tent is not taken seriously.

----- Page 61 (native) -----
56
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
RAISING THE QUALITY OF INSTRUCTIONAL DISCOURSE
As others have found, our study shows that most classroom discourse
is recitation. The dominant feature of instruction is the transmission of
information. Teachers mainly play the role of examiner, and they treat
learning as the recall of transmitted information. In pursuing these goals,
most teachers ask questions that test student knowledge rather than elicit
original interpretations or help students formulate their own ideas. The
authentic questions teachers did ask, we found, tended to help students
understand literature only in the high-track classes, though this seems to
be because in low-track dames teachers' authentic questions tended to be
about thing3 other than literature; the proportion of anthentic questions
about literature was.nearly three times as great in the hign-track as in the
low-track classes. In addition, teachers usually do not follow up on student
answers. We found, in short, that high-quality discourse rarely occurs in
9th Grade literature instruction.
Instruction dominated by recitation trivializes important bodies of
knowledge in the form of superficial, decontextualized facts that students
recite in fill-in-the-blank and short-answer questions for homework, and
in recitation during class. If student learning is to consist of more than
short-term memorization of these snippets
if students are to have more
than a superficial familiarity with broad domains of knowledge, if they
are to think critically and originally about this information, and especially
if they are themselves to develop in-depth understandings
then they must
be involved in a far different and more substantial kind of discourse.
Rather than merely recite other people's ideas and information, they must
entertain and develop ideas of their own, and they must argue original
points of view; they must learn to interpret, not merely recall. To accom-
plish these goals, teachers must approach students not as "rememberers"
and memorizers; rather they must take students seriously as thinkers. They
must elicit students' thoughts, listen carefully to what they have to say,
and skillfully help them elaborate their ideas.
When instruction proceeds in this way, recitation gives way to some-
thing more conversational. In this sort of discourse, as in conversation,
all the participants, not just the teacher, potentially affect the course of
interaction. As in conversation, there is a reciprocal exchange of informa-
tion, not merely a continuous evaluation of whether students have learned
all the right facts and main points.
Bringing about such discourse is not a simple task. Unhappily,
we found no simple answers or "magic bullet" for accomplishing it. We
found, for example, that quality of discourse is not consistently related to
class size, ability group, or teacher experience. Improving the quality of

----- Page 62 (native) -----
Taking Students Seriously
57
instructional discourse is subtly complicated by many fundamental prem-
ises about the nature of knowledge, curriculum, and instruction and the
role and preparation of the teacher. We believe that the most fundamental
recommendation for improving literature instruction relates to the latter:
Teachers must first have a strong undergraduate preparation in and sensi-
tivity for literature. They must understand that a literary text is funda-
mentally different from a news report, involving more than information
of the sort that is covered adequately through recitation and short-answer
study questions concerning who, what, when, where, and why. Because
of this, effective literature instruction must do more than teach basic tex-
tual information related to character, plot, setting, theme, and so on.
Effective preparation of prospective English teachers must teach them
how to read literature and respond to the idiosyncratic features of literary
texts (Fish, 1980; Purves, 1991).
Skilled readers read nonfictional texts such as newspaper and maga-
zine articles for the main point, and they remember those points of infor-
mation they are able to relate to the main point as they understand it
(van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983). But they read novels and short stories quite
differently; they read literature aesthetically by "living through" the nar-
rative, especially in terms of their own experience, savoring "the qualities
of the structure ideas, situations, scenes, personalities, emotions called
forth, participating in the tensions, conflicts, and resolutions as they un-
fold" (Rosenblatt, 1988, p. 5).9 For these reasons, learning how to read
and fully experience literature involves personal response, and it is just
this process that authentic teacher questions tend to promote. In contrast,
classroom discourse confined to recitation misses the character of litera-
ture. Unless teachers have themselves experienced ample literature selec-
tions in this way, unless they value literature and can respond to its idio-
syncratic qualities themselves, and unless they are prepared to model
mature responses to literature and elicit students' own personal responses,
there is little chance they will succeed in teaching literature effectively.
Literature teachers who merely "cover the main points" trivialize litera-
ture instruction into sets of poor reading lessons.
From this perspective, it should be clear that multiple-thoice tests
and short-answer questions foster inappropriate ways of reading and un-
derstanding literature, and thereby stifle high-quality classroom discourse.
Effective literature instruction is, however, enhanced by regular, open-
ended questions probing student responses, which they must develop into
extended pieces of written prose. These writing assignments are most effec-
tive, moreover, when teachers read them not as examiners but as trusted
adults (cf. Britton, Burgess, Martin, McLeod, 8.r Rosen, 1975) seeking to
draw out and develop students' interpretations of what they have read.

----- Page 63 (native) -----
58
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
If teachers are to engage students in such substantive conversations,
the literature curriculum they teach must not be overspecified with long
lists of facts, points, and obligatory principles to teach. Curriculum guides
should guide more than dictate, and teachers must have ample latitude to
address major curricular aims in ways that are best for them. For each
class, the teacher must have the freedom to work out the curriculum with
respect to the interests and capabilities that individual students bring to
class. Schools might attract more effective teachers by considering only
candidates with undergraduate majors in literature.
Unless teachers have a more than a superficial understanding of the
titles they teach, they may avoid asking authentic questions simply be-
cause the answers to such questions are often unpredictable. When teach-
ers ask authentic questions and engage their students in substantive con-
versations, they must be prepared to move with an unfolding discussion
that they will not always be able fully to anticipate before class begins
and that cannot be repeated from class to class; for any given class, they
will not always be able to anticipate just which aspects of the text they
may need to discuss. They must also be prepared to deal with the personal
responses of their students. The more fully students respond to the text,
the more comprehensive, in-depth, and fast-paced the discussion will be.
In this sort of discussion, therefore, teachers must have a supple yet firm
grasp of the text and be prepared to think quickly on their feet.
Staff development can no doubt help teachers develop many of these
skills. We have found that some teachers benefit quickly when they discuss
the importance of authentic questions and uptake. Some have found new
confidence in their own teaching after learning from our research about
the importance of such questions. Some teachers have also used our ana-
lytic scheme to assess and reflect on the quality of their classroom dis-
course. Since most school learning in fact occurs in classroom discourse
what Cazden (1988) calls "the language of learning" staff development
on these matters has great potential to improve instruction.
This kind of classroom discourse, if it is to be pedagogically effective,
requires teachers to deftly negotiate an instructional path somewhere be-
tween a Scylla of correct answers and a Charybdis of free student re-
sponse. As Harker (1991) explains, teachers must ask "not only those ques-
tions firmly anchored to textual evidence, but those which permit students
to explore and develop an awareness of their responses to literature in an
environment which permits and encourages individual risk-taking and
self-exploration" (p. 72). He continues,
Seen in this way, the classroom becomes a collaborative social system in
which students' responses are extended and refined under tbe guidance

----- Page 64 (native) -----
Taking Students Seriously
59
of their teachers and in collaboration with their peers. It is not that
teachers arbitrarily impose their own interpretive strategies on their
students or that students' individual responses are given totally free play.
Rather, it is that students' responses are taken as points of departure for
their further development, initially in collaboration with teachers and
peers, but ultimately with growing independence in the minds of stu-
dents themselves as instruction moves
.
. . towards more inclusive inter-
pretations at higher levels of literary competence. In this sense, ne
direction of instruction is from collaborative, public reading involvi
students with their teachers and peers, to more private, independent
reading carried on by students themselves. (p. 72)
The lively nature of substantive conversation makes it a somewhat risky
enterprise. It is not for tired teachers or the faint of heart or for teachers
who don't read literature though it certainly has the potential to be more
interesting as well, for both teacher and students. Teachers engaging in
such classroom discourse escape the mind-numbing routine of having to
teach exactly the same lesson to several classes. Instead, they gain opportu-
nities to use literature to enrich their lives.
NOTES
Additional support for this chapter caine from the first author's Spencer
Fellowsh p at the National Academy of Education. The authors are grateful for
research assistance from Mark Berends, John Knapp, and James Ladwig, and for
the cooperation of the teachers and students who participated in the study.
1. All names in this chapter are pseudonyms. Information about Susan's class
came from a student questionnaire and a classroom observation. The description
of Susan is a composite picture of students in the class, representing the experiences
of a typical student.
2. Such descriptions are provided h
he olational Commission on Excellence
in Education (1983); Goodlad (1984); Powell, Farrar, and Cohen (1985); McNeil
(1986); and Sedlak, Wheeler, Pullin, and Cusick (1986).
3. "Uptake" is a term used by Collins (1982) and Cazden (1988).
4. The use of seatwork may have been more effective in smaller classes be-
cause teachers could work individually with more students.
5. The tests were scored holistically on a variety of dimensions such as recall,
depth of understanding, understanding of character motivations, and so forth.
Each test was scored by two readers, and the scores were averaged. The two
readers' scores correlated at .82. We found a multiple correlation of .60 of the
spring literature test with the fall tests of reading and writing skills.
6. Sex, race, and ethnicity were identified with dummy variables from stu-

----- Page 65 (native) -----
60
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
dent questionnaires. Family socioeconomic status (SES) was indicated by an un-
weighted additive composite of father's and mother's education, the higher of
either parent's occupational status, and a list of home resources, as reported on
student questionnaires. Fall reading skills were measured by a multiple-choice test
of reading comprehension, and fall writing skills were measured by a holistically
scored writing sample. Further details on the background variables and achieve-
ment controls are provided by Gamoran and Nystrand (1991).
7. This inference is derived as follows: Students who completed 33 percent
more of their reading (as in the comparison of those who completed all their work
with those who completed two thirds of their work) scored, on average (33 x
.03) = .99 point higher (.03 is the coefficient for completion of reading from the
regression results in Table 2.2). The same coefficients appear for completion of
writing, adding another .99 point, for a total of about a two-point difference
between those who complete all their reading and writing and those who do only
two thirds of it.
8. This finding was surprising not only because it contradicted our expecta-
tions, but because in a similar study of 8th Grade literature achievement, we
earlier found a small positive effect of authentic teacher questions (Nystrand &
Gamoran, 1991).
9. As Rosenblatt (1978, 1988) explains, learning to read literature requires
learning to distinguish between efferent and aesthetic readings: Hence, we read
newspaper reports "efferently," for example, carrying away with us "the bottom
line" or what psychologists call the gist of the text. By contrast, reading "aestheti-
cally" requires "living through" and experiencing vicariously the "story world."
REFERENCES
Britton, J., Burgess, T., Martin, N., McLeod, A., & Rosen, H. (1975). The devel-
opment of writing abilities: 11-18. London: Macmillan.
Cazden, C. (1988). Classroom discourse: The /anguage of teaching and learning.
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann,
Collins, J. (1982). Discourse style, classroom interaction and differential treat-
ment. Journal of Reading Behavior, 14, 429-437.
Fish, S. (1980). Is there a text in this class? The authority of interpretive communi-
ties. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gamoran, A., & Nystrand, M. (1991). Background and instructional effects on
achievement in eighth-grade English and social studies. Journal of Research
on Adolescence, 1(3), 277-300.
Good lad, J. I. (1984). A place called school: Frospects for the future. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Harker, W. J. (1991). Reader response and the interpretation of literature: Is
there a teacher in the classroom? Reflections on Canadian Literacy, 8(2,3),
69-73.

----- Page 66 (native) -----
Taking Students Seriously
61
McNeil, L. M. (1986). Contradictions of control: School structure and school
knowledge. New York: Rout ledge & Kegan Paul.
National Commission on Excellence in Education. (1983). A nation at risk. Wash-
ington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
Nystrand, M., & Camoran, A. (1991). Instructional discourse, student engage-
ment, and literature achievement. Research in the Teaching of English,
25(3), 261-290.
Oakes, J. (1985). Keeping track: How schools structure inequality. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Page, R. N. (1987). Lower-track classes at a college-preparatory school: A carica-
ture of educational encounters. In G. Spindler & L. Spindler (Eds.), Inter-
pretive ethnography of schooling: At home and abroad (pp. 447-472). Hills-
dale. NJ: Erlbaum.
Powell, A. G., Farrar, E., & Cohen, D. K. (1985). The shopping mall high
school: Winners and losers in the educational marketplace. Boston: Hough-
ton Mifflin.
Ilurves, A. C. (1991). Indeterminate texts, responsive readers, and the idea of
difficulty in literature learning. In A. C. Purves (Ed.), The idea of difficulty
in literature (pp. 157-170). Albany: State University of New York Press.
Rosenblatt, L. (1978). The reader, the text, the poem: A transactional theory of
the literary work. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Rosenblatt, L. (1988). Writing and reading: The transactional theory (Tech. Rep.
No, 13). Berkeley, CA: The Center for the Study of Writing.
Sedlak, M. W., Wheeler, C. W., Pullin, D. C., & Cusick, P. A. (1986). Selling
students short: Classroom bargains and academic reform in the American
high school. New York: Teachers College Press.
van Dijk, T., & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of discourse comprehension. New
York: Academic Press.

----- Page 67 (native) -----
CHAPTER 3
Higher-Order Thinking
and Prospects for
Classroom Thoughtfulness
Fred M. Newmann
National panels have increasingly called on American schools to teach
reasoning, problem solving, critical thinking, and creative use of the
mind) Consistent with this movement, the model of instructional dis-
course presented in Chapter 2 urged teachers to aim beyond student repro-
duction of authoritative knowledge. It explained how teachers can em-
power students by helping them to integrate formal knowledge in ways
that enhance the meaning of their personal experience. Nystrand and
Gamoran found that this sort of discourse rarely occurs, unhappily sup-
porting the findings of other studies that document the low level of cogni-
tive work in most secondary school classrooms (Cuban, 1984; Goodlad,
1984; Hoetker & Ahlbrand, 1969; McNeil, 1986; Powell, Farrar, & Co-
hen, 1985).
This chapter extends the inquiry on classroom discourse. To engage
students it is necessary not only to incorporate their own ideas into conver-
sation about the subject, but also to challenge them to think. Higher-order
thinking is both a means to student engagement and a central aim of
education. Injunctions for schools to put more emphasis on thinking are
plentiful, but implementing them is problematic, partly because of multi-
ple, confusing, and unworkable conceptions of the term. Therefore, I first
propose a conception of higher-order thinking that can guide teaching,
together with a framework for observing the extent to which it is promoted
in classrooms. Second, I report on a study to determine whether it is
actually possible for high school teachers to teach students to use their
minds well, and to depart from the familiar path of paming on numerous
fragmented bits of information that students try to memorize but soon
62

----- Page 68 (native) -----
Higher-Order Thinking and Prospects for Classroom Thoughtfulness
63
forget. Is classroom thoughtfulness determined completely by the commit-
ment and competence of individual teachers, or can it be institutionalized
throughout a department? If some departments are more successful, what
accounts for their success in contrast to the apparent difficulties faced by
the majority?
Based on a study of 16 high school social studies departments, I sum-
marize findings on the association between student engagement 'and
higher-order thinking, overall levels of classroom thoughtfulness, and dif-
ferences due to teachers, departments, and student characteristics. Next I
suggest factors in teachers' thinking, school leadership, and organization
that seem critical to success. Finally, I outline important barriers that
must be addressed by leadership, staff development, and school restruc-
turing.
WHAT IS HIGHER-ORDER THINKING?
A Definition
Higher-order thinking signifies challenge and expanded use of the
mind; lower-order thinking signifies routine, mechanistic application, and
constraints on the mind.' Challenge or expanded use of mind occurs when
a person must interpret, analyze, or manipulate information, because a
question to be answered or a problem to be solved cannot be resolved
through the routine application of previously learned knowledge. The
explorer trying to travel successfully over unknown terrain illustrates the
idea that previously acquired knowledge (e.g., about map and compass
use, weather, and survival techniques) must be applied in a new situation
to reach the destination. Success requires considerable knowledge, but,
because of the novelty of the task, how to apply the knowledge poses a
significant challenge. In contrast, lower-order thinking generally involves
repetitive routines such as listing information previously memorized, in-
serting numbers into previously learned formulae, or applying the rules
for footnote format in a research paper.
Challenging problems can appear in many forms, in all curriculum
subjects. They may lead to single, correct, and well-defined answers or to
multiple, ambiguous, conflicting solutions. The challenges may involve
different kinds of inquiry (logical, empirical, aesthetic, ethical), different
forms of expression (oral, written, nonverbal), and different types of intel-
ligence (verbal, mathematical, kinesthetic, interpersonal).
No particular question or problem, however, necessarily leads to
higher-order thinking for all students. For one person, trying to under-
411.

----- Page 69 (native) -----
64
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
stand and follow a bus schedule may require higher-order thought, but
for another the same task will be routine. In this sense, higher-order think-
ing is relative: To determine the extent to which an individur.1 is involved
in higher-order thinking, one would presumably need to know much
about the person's history. Furthermore, to assess the extent to which an
individual is participating in the analysis, interpretation, and manipula-
tion of information, one would want to "get inside" the person's head or
experience his or her subjective state of thought.
This definition poses an operational problem. It is difficalt to deter-
mine reliably the extent to which a person is involved in higher-order
thinking. Teachers who interact with several students at once have little
opportunity to diagnose students' individual mental states. Instead, they
must make assumptions about the prior knowledge of groups of students
and about the kinds of mental work that particular tasks are likely to
stimulate. The teaching of thinking, therefore, is a rather imprecise enter-
prise. The best we can do is to engage students in what we predict will be
challenging problems, to guide their manipulation of information to solve
problems, and to support their efforts.
This conception of higher-order thinking has several positive features.
I. It assumes that any person, young or old, regardless of experience, can
participate in higher-order thought. Students will differ in the kinds of
challenges they are able to master, but all are capable of confronting a
challenge in the interpretation, analysis, and manipulation of their
knowledge.
2. It encompasses problem solving in a wide range of school subjects as
well as in nonacademic areas.
3. It does not require acceptance of any particular theory of cognitive
The Need for Knowledge, Skills, and Dispositions
essarily help them develop the competence to meet the challenges success-
fully. Research on the nature of thinking (summarized by Walsh & Paul,
processing or rely on a restrictive pedagogy. This is an advantage,
because solid knowledge on the best techniques for the promotion of
thinking does not exist. The effectiveness of technique will probably
of students exposed to them. Furthermore, this conception is hospitable
skills, and dispositions of thoughtfulness.
depend on the nature of the mental challenges presented and the kinds
to providing students with three important resources for thinking that
are recognized widely in the literature: content knowledge, intellectual
Merely presenting students with higher-order challenges will not nec-

----- Page 70 (native) -----
Higher-Order Thinking and Prospects for Classroom Thoughtfulness
65
1987) indicates that for students to cope successfully with higher-order
challenges, they need a combination of in-depth knowledge, intellectual
skills, and attitudes or dispositions of thoughtfulness. These three compo-
nents are the core of a curriculum focused on higher-order thinking, but
how much emphasis to give to each is widely disputed. Consider a teacher
trying to help students answer the question, "Were the American colonists
justified in using violence to secure their independence from England?" To
enhance students' success in addressing this problem, how much attention
should teachers give to developing students' knowledge, skills, and disposi-
tions? Building on a previous review of literature (Newmann, 1990a), we
summarize here key arguments that can be made for each of these critical
resources.
The Knowledge Argument
Regardless of what side the student takes, a successful answer to this
question demands in-depth knowledge of the circumstances of colonial
life under British rule, including colonial grievances, British responses,
principled arguments dealing with inalienable rights, taxation without
representation, and ethical reasoning related to the destruction of property
and the taking of human life. Beyond substantive knowledge about the
historical period, students will need analytic knowledge; for example, on
elements of a well-reasoned argument, distinctions between empirical and
normative issues, and criteria for judging the reliability of evidence. Meta-
cognitive knowledge may also be important, such as having a systematic
approach for organizing one's thinking or an awareness of how one's
thought processes and perceptions of others in a discussion might lead to
error. The behavioral manifestations of some of these points might be
labeled skills or dispositions, but they may all be considered knowledge in
the sense that they all can be represented as cognitive beliefs. Skills and
dispositions may facilitate the application of knowledge, but these points
suggest that knowledge itself is the most critical foundation of under-
standing.'
The Skills Argument
Knowledge is undoubtedly important, but for the purposes of the
teaching of thinking, skills are critical, because they are the tools that
permit knowledge to be used or applied to the solution of new problems.
Some skills may be specific to the domain under study, and others may be
more generic. To intelligently address the problem above, for example,
one must be able to detect bias in the documents of colonial history and
mw.

----- Page 71 (native) -----
66
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
logical fallacies in inferences and arguments over the justification of the
American Revolution. One must be able to distinguish relevant from irrel-
evant information, to anticipate and respond to arguments in opposition
to one's own, and to state one's views clearly and persuasively. Skills therr -
selves may be construed or labeled in a variety of ways, but the main
point is to recognize their role as cognitive processes that put knowledge
to work in solving problems. In practice, knowledge is usually transmitted
from teacher to student without an expectation that the student will ma-
nipulate the knowledge to solve higher-order challenges. Unless the essen-
tial processes of using knowledge (i.e., skills) are stressed as central goals
of education, higher-order thinking is likely to be neglected and the knowl-
edge transmitted to remain inert. Perhaps for this reason many educa-
tional reformers prefer to advocate not the teaching of thinking, but in-
stead the teaching of thinking skills.'
The Dispositions Argument
Without dispositions of thoughtfulness, neither knowledge nor the
tools for applying it are likely to be used intelligently. If raising questions
about the justification of the war for American independence threatens
patriotic feelings, this could jeopardize critical inquiry. Some people may
avoid almost any argument to protect themselves from uncomfortable
feelings of conflict. Those who emphasize the importance of dispositions
suggest several traits: A persistent desire that claims be supported by rea-
sons (and that the reasons themselves be scrutinized); a tendency to be
reflective
to take time to think problems through for oneself, rather than
acting impulsively or automatically accepting the views of others; a curios-
ity to explore new questions; and the flexibility to entertain alternative and
original solutions to problems. Thoughtfulness thereby involves attitudes,
personality or character traits, general values, and beliefs or epistemolo-
gies about the nature of knowledge (e.g., that rationality is desirable;
that knowledge itself is socially constructed, subject to revision, and often
indeterminate; and that thinking can lead to the understanding and solu-
tion of problems). Without dispositions of thoughtfulness, knowledge and
skills are likely to be taught and applied mechanistically and nonsensi-
cally. Of the three main resources, dispositions have attracted the least
attention in professional literature, but a good argument can be made
that dispositions are central in generating both the will to think and in
developing those artistic, ineffable qualities of judgment that steer knowl-
edge and skills in productive directions.'
It is important that teachers design instruction explicitly to help stu-
dents acquire and use in-depth knowledge, skills, and dispositions, but

----- Page 72 (native) -----
Higher-Order Thinking and Prospects for Classroom Thoughtfulness
67
there appears to be no clear ordering of priorities among the three re-
sources. The observation scheme presented next attempts to capture teach-
ers' efforts to develop knowledge, skills, and dispositions, without giving
center stage to any one resource.' Neither does it prescribe the precise
kinds of knowledge, skills, and dispositions that should be promoted for
the teaching of a particular subject. The reasoning behind this choice is
explained as we introduce a framework for assessing classroom thoughtful-
ness.
A FRAMEWORK FOR ASSESSING
CLASSROOM THOUGHTFULNESS
The overall goal of our research project was to search for social studies
departments successful in promoting higher-order thinking and to learn
from their work. Rather than concentrating primarily on differences
among individual teachers, this study explored the problem of institution-
alization: What is required for department-wide promotion of higher-
order thinking? The strategy was to identify exemplary social studies de-
partments (that is, those that make a serious department-wide effort to
emphasize higher-order thinking) and then, by contrasting these depart-
ments with others, to draw inferences about barriers and opportunities
for success.
This called for a method for assessing classroom interaction that
would provide comparative indicators of the extent to which higher-order
thinking was promoted in classes that studied a variety of social studies
subjects (e.g., U.S. history, world history, geography, government, sociol-
ogy). Since it was logistically impossible to examine the actual thinking of
individual students during the lessons, we needed a tool for describing
thoughtfulness in the lesson as a whole. But how specific should the crite-
ria be?
Interviews with history and social studies teachers indicated that
highly specific lists of knowledge, skills, and dispositions were unlikely to
generate widespread consensus. Instead, social studies teachers are likely
to support a plurality of types of thinking, but even these will be grounded
primanly in the teaching of their subjects. Thus, a broad conception of
thinking, adaptable to a variety of content and skill objectives, is more
likely to generate serious interest among a diverse population of high
school teachers.
Rather than translating thinking into specific knowledge problems,
skills, and attitudes for students, we began by asking what oly;ervable
qualities of classroom activity would be most likely to help students
achieve depth of understanding, intellectual skills, and dispositions of

----- Page 73 (native) -----
68
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
thoughtfulness. Thus, we moved from consideration of the nature of
thinking in individual students to consideration of qualities that promote
thoughtfulness in classrooms. Promoting classroom thoughtfulness re-
quires both presenting students with higher-order challenges and helping
them apply knowledge, skills, and dispositions to solve them. Emphasizing
general qualities of classroom talk and activity rather than highly differ-
entiated behaviors helps avoid the danger that in teaching a host of iso-
lated thinking skills, one can actually undermine productive thinking.' A
more general approach may also hold more promise both for students to
solve new problems and for teachers to promote thinking across diverse
lessons.
A broad set of criteria can strike at the heart of an underlying malady
identified by many studies. At best, much classroom activity fails to chal-
lenge students to use their minds in any valuable ways; at worst, much
classroom activity is nonsensical or mindless. The more serious problem,
therefore, is not the failure to teach some specific aspect of thinking,
but the profound absence of thoughtfulness in classrooms. Our general
conception of thinking can address this basic issue. Ultimately, of course,
teachers must focus on the content-specific activities that enhance under-
standing of their subjects, but the point here is to arrive at a general
framework through which classrooms studying diverse subjects can be
interpreted as promoting or undermining higher-order thinking.
In devising indicators of classroom thoughtfulness responsive to the
points above, we initially rated lessons on 15 possible dimensions of class-
room thoughtfulness, summarized in Table 3.1. Each was used to make
an overall rating of an observed lesson on a five-point scale from 1 = "a
very inaccurate" to 5 = "a very accurate" description of this lesson. After
observing these qualities in 160 lessons in five "select" social studies depart-
ments and further examining them from a theoretical point of view, we
chose the six main dimensions described below as n ost fundamental.'
1. There was sustained examination of a few topics rather than superficial
coverage of many. Mastery of higher-order challenges requires in-
depth study and sustained concentration on a limited number of topics
or questions. Lessons that cover a large number of topics give students
only a vague familiarity or awareness and thereby reduce the possibili-
ties for building the complex knowledge, skills, and dispositions re-
quired to understand a topic.
2. The lesson displayed substantive coherence and continuity. Intelligent
progress on higher-order challenges demands systematic inquiry that
builds on relevant and accurate substantive knowledge in the field and
that works toward
.e logical development and integration of ideas. In

----- Page 74 (native) -----
Higher-Order Thinking and Prospects for Classroom Thoughtfulness
69
contrast, lessons that teach material as unrelated fragments of knowl-
edge, without pulling them together, undermine such inquiry.
3. Students were given an appropriate amount of time to think, that is, to
prepare responses to questions. Thinking takes time, but often recita-
tion, discussion, and written assignments pressure students to make
responses before they have had enough time to reflect. Promoting
thoughtfulness, therefore, requires periods of silence when students can
ponder the validity of alternative responses, develop more elaborate
reasoning, and experience patient reflection.
4. The teacher asked challenging questions and/or structured challenging
tasks (given the ability level and preparation of the students). By our
definition higher-order thinking occurs only when students are faced
with questions or tasks that demand analysis, interpretation, or manip.
ulation of information; that is, nonroutine mental work. In short, stu-
dents must be faced with the challenge of how to use prior knowledge
to gain new knowledge, rather than the task of merely retrieving prior
knowledge.
5. The teacher was a model of thoughtfulness. To help students succeed
with higher-order challenges, teachers themselves must model thought-
ful dispositions as they teach. Of course, a thoughtful teacher would
demonstrate many of the behaviors described above, but this scale is
intended to capture a cluster of dispositions likely to be found in any
thoughtful person. Key indicators include showing interest in students'
ideas and in alternative approaches to problems; showing how he or
she thought through a problem (rather than only the final answer);
and acknowledging the difficulty of gaining a definitive understanding
of problematic topics.
6. Students offered explanations and reasons for their conclusions. The
answers or solutions to higher-order challenges are rarely self-evident.
Their validity often rests on the quality of explanation or reasons given
to support them. Therefore, beyond offering answers, students must
also be able to produce explanations and reasons to support their con-
clusions.
The six dimensions were combined into a single scale (CHOT) that
served as the indicator of classroom thoughtfulness for an observed lesson.'
How often do high school social studies classes reflect the criteria of
thoughtfulness just mentioned? How much do teachers differ? How much
do departments differ? To what extent does the level of thoughtfulness
observed depend on student background characteristics of the class? To
answer these questions we conducted a study of high school social studies
departments according to the design described below.
(continued on p. 72)

----- Page 75 (native) -----
Table 3.1
Nature of Discourse in 287 High School Social Studies Lessons (161-ligh Schools)
classes were rated from 1-5. 1 w "very inaccurate" description of class; 5 w 'very accurate." Fmdings are reported as the percent of lessons receiving eachrating.
'1
In this class, there was sustained examination of a few topics
FEWIGP
rather than superficial coverage of many.
'2
In this class., the lesson displayed substantive coherence and
SIJECOH
continuity.
3
In this class, students were given an appropriate amount of
TIME
time to think, that is, to prepare responses to questions.
4.
In this class, the teacher carefully considered explanations and
TCONS
reasons for conclusions.
.5.
In this class, the teacher asked challenging questions and/or
TCIIAL
structured challenging tasks (given the ability level and
preparation of the students).
6.
In this class, the teacher pressed individual students to justify
TSOC
or to clarify their assertions in a Socratic manna.
7.
In this class, the teacher tried to get students to generate
TORIG
original and unconventional ideas, erplanations, or solutions
to problems.
1
2
2
4
5
8
17
24
26
24
8
26
29
26
11
0
1
8
36
54
25
37
23
12
4
4
19
25
29
23
53
32
11
2
3
38
37
18
4
3

----- Page 76 (native) -----
g.
TMOD
In this classroom, the teacher was a model of thoughtfulness.
(Principal indications arc The teacher showe:t appreciation
for students' ideas and appreciation for alternative approaches
or answers if based on sound reasoninr, the teacher explained
bow he (she) thought through a problem; the teacher
acknowledged-the difficulty of gaining a daaitive
understanding of the topic.)
9.
In this class, students assumed the roles of questioner and
SCRIT
critic.
10.
In this class, students offered ceplanations and reasons for
SEXPL
their conclusions.
11.
In this clam, students generated original and unconventional
SORIG
ideas, explanations, hypotheses, or solutions to problems.
12.
In this class, student contributions were articulate, germane to
SARTI
the topic, and connected to prior discussion.
13.
What proportion of students were active participants?
TALK
4
15
35
47
4
24
36
24
11
19
25
25
16
15
20
21
25
23
13
12
17
49
20
2
2
16
29
36
16
0-25%
25-50%
50-75%
75-100%
X4.
What proportion of time did students spend engsged in
0%
1-25%
25-50%
50-75%
>75%
D IS C
thoughtful discourse with eact, other?
54
30
8
2
15.
What proportion of students showed genuine involvement in
25%
25-50%
50-75%
INVO
the topics discussed? (Cues include raising hands,
19
28
26
24
attentiveness manifested by [trial =passion and body-
language, interruptions motivated by Involvement, length of
student responses).
*These variables are considered minimal requiremmts for a thoughtful lemon.
_ ' I

----- Page 77 (native) -----
72
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
Between Fall 1986 and Spring 1990, the project conducted almost 500
lesson observations, and in-depth interviews with teachers, social studies
department chairs, and principals in 16 demographically diverse high
schools. Through national searches that involved nominations, phone in-
terviews, and site visits, we identified three different sets of social studies
departments: (1) those that place special emphasis on higher-order think-
ing, but that organize instruction according to familiar patterns in the
comprehensive high school (henceforth the five "select" departments of
Phase I); (2) those that make no special department-wide efforts toward
higher-order thinking and are also conventionally organized (henceforth
the seven "representative" departments of Phase II); and (3) those that
involve a departmental emphasis on higher-order thinking and, in addi-
tion, have made significant changes in the organization of instruction
(henceforth the four "restructured" departments of Phase III). Initial evi-
dence of departmental emphasis on higher-order thinking was drawn from
phone interviews with the department chair, examination of course syl-
labi, and classroom observations and teacher interviews completed in a
one-day, two-person site visit.
Since we sought an estimate of the highest levels of classroom thought-
fulness, the strategy was to concentrate on those teachers in each depart-
ment who emphasized higher-order thinking the most. But we also wanted
evidence of opportunities for thoughtfulness for all students, not just the
high achievers. The department chair at each school selected three main
courses, taught by different teachers, to be observed at least four times
over the school year. The three classes were to illustrate as much higher-
order thinking as possible, but they were to include (1) a class with a
substantial proportion of lower- and middle-achieving students; (2) a his-
tory course with a diverse range of students; and (3) any other class that
best illustrated an emphasis on higher-order thinking (which usually com-
prised high achievers). Our analyses are based on four lesson observations
from each of these three classes, plus six other lessons observed in each
department drawn from at least two additional teachers. Within schedul-
ing constraints, teachers were encouraged to select for our observation
those lessons that placed most emphasis on higher-order thinking. In addi-
tion to recording ratings on the five-point dimensions, observers also wrote
descriptive notes, especially to elaborate on high-scoring dimensions.'
Teachers, department chairs, and principa '. completed at least two
hours of interviews." These probed their written responses to question-
naires that explored their conceptions of and commitment to higher-order
thinking as an educational goal, the factors they perceived as necessary to

----- Page 78 (native) -----
Higher-Order Thinking and Prospects for Classroom Thoughtfulness
73
accomplish it, the barriers that stand in the way, and the kind of leader-
ship devoted to it within the school.
Students were interviewed and/or surveyed about the kind of instruc-
tion they found engaging and challenging. In the representative and
restructured schools students also took a test that called for higher-
order thinking: writing a persuasive essay on a constitutional issue. The
relationship between classroom thoughtfulness and student performance
is discussed elsewhere:" the emphasis here is on the promotion of thought-
fulness in social studies classrooms.
STUDENT ENGAGEMENT AND COGNITIVE CHALLENGE
Are students more engaged when they are challenged to think? A
number of findings suggest that they are.
1. Observers rated both the level of thoughtfulness and the level of student
engagement for each lesson. The correlation between the two was
.57."
2. Students indicated how engaged they were in their social studies class
and how much it challenged them. The correlation between these rat-
ings was .55."
3. Comparing the top 25 percent with the bottom 25 percent of the classes
on observer-rated engagement, we found that students in the top classes
reported more cognitive challenge. Conversely, comparing the top 25
percent with the bottom 25 percent of the classes on observer-rated
classroom thoughtfulness, students in the more thoughtful classes re-
ported more engagement.'
4. When students indicated which subjects (English, social studies, sci-
ence, math) they found most engaging and most challenging, the corre-
lations ranged from .60 to .69."
5. In open-ended interviews students were asked to identify a really en-
gaging lesson or assignment in social studies and then asked if they
were required to think very hard in that lesson or assignment. About
three quarters of the students said they were. They were also asked to
identify questions or tasks within a lesson that they found interesting,
as well as questions or tasks that made them think or really us.: their
mind. About half of the examples were identical.'
6 When students were asked to identify, independently, the most inter-
esting and NA, orthwhile class taken in the past year, and the class that
made them think the hardest, almost 60 percent named the same class.
This association was especially strong among students from lower socio-

----- Page 79 (native) -----
74
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
economic groups. When students were asked to identify the class in
which they put forth the most effort and the one they found most
mentally challenging, over two thirds of the students nominated the
same class.
7. Students were asked to rate the degree of interest and degree of diffi-
culty they encountered when their social studies teacher engaged in
certain pedagogical behaviors (e.g., solving problems where there is no
single correct answer; questioning or criticizing arguments of other
students). Correlations between interest and difficulty on four of five
items ranged between .42 and .55.
These diverse findings indicate that students are more likely to try, to
concentrate, and to be interested in academic study when they are chal-
lenged to think. The correlations do not prove that intellectually challeng-
ing classes necessarily cause higher student engagement. It is possible, for
example, that teachers respond to engaged students by promoting more
thinking, and this issue will be addressed later. Having found an associa-
tion between classroom thoughtfulness and student engagement, we will
next report on how often and under what conditions students are chal-
lenged to think.
LEVELS OF CLASSROOM THOUGHTFULNESS AND
DIFFERENCES DUE TO TEACHERS, DEPARTMENTS,
AND STUDENT BACKGROUND
Overall Levels
How much thoughtfulness was actually observed across all schools?
Table 3.1 presents frequencies on 15 dimensions. Some dimensions oc-
curred very rarely, especially Socratic reasoning (6), teacher encouraging
originality (7), and students participating in thoughtful discourse with
each other (14). Others showed high frequencies, such as teachers allowing
enough time for students to respond (3) and students participating in class
(13). Frequencies on the six minimal dimensions of thoughtfulness showed
considerable variance, except for time, which was consistently high. Using
the six minimal dimensions as a scale of classroom thoughtfulness, the
mean of 287 lessons was 3.40 on the five-point scale.' The mean of the
four highest-scoring departments was 3.92. We conclude that even among
the more successful teachers and departments there is considerable room
for improvement.

----- Page 80 (native) -----
Higher-Order Thinking and Prospects for Classroom Thoughtfulress
75
Teacher Differences
Teachers varied from a high mean of 4.63 to a low of 2.21, and
several teachers were represented at different points in the distribution.
Of the 48 teachers observed, only 12 averaged above 4, but 12 averaged
below 3. Teachers were reasonably consistent in the degree of thoughtful-
ness found in the four or more lessons observed. The research did not
assess the consistency of individual teachers in different types of classes
such as advanced placement, "regular," or "basic" tracks, but later we
will see that higher-ability classes generally showed higher levels of
thoughtfulness. In short, teachers vary considerably from one another in
the levels of classroom thoughtfulness they promote, and most teachers
are rather consistent in the extent to which they promote thoughtfulness
across several lessons within a class.'
Departmental Differences
Even with considerable variation among teachers, is it possible that
some social studies departments have more thoughtful lessons than others?
If so, analysis of the properties of the more successful departments might
reveal strategies that would enhance thoughtfulness in others. Department
totals varied considerably. Departmental means, summarized graphically
in Figure 3.1, ranged from 2.88 to 4.05. The mean of the highest four
departments (3.92) far exceeded the mean of the lowest four (2.92). As
indicated in Figure 3.1, there was overlap among the three groups of
select, representative, and restructured departments, but :,1 relative terms
the means of these groups also differed considerably.' The actual signifi-
cance of departmental differences on lesson thoughtfulness, however, may
depend in part on the influence of background features of each class.
Student Background Features o'? the Class
Would teachers assume that older students are more capable of com-
plex thought and therefore emphasize higher-order thinking more fre-
quently in 12th Grade than 9th Grade classes? Wowd classes with a pre-
ponderance of high-achieving students offer consistently higher levels of
thoughtfulness than classes with large numbers of low achievers? Would
the proportion of African-American students in a class be associated with
the level of thoughtfulness? Are elective courses more likely to promote
thoughtfulness than required courses? We examined these issues by re-
gressing CHOT on the relevant variables.

----- Page 81 (native) -----
76
Student Eno-,ement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
Figure 3.1
Distribution of Departmental Means on Classroom Thoughtfulness
(CHOT = 1-5)
2.50
5
SELECT
DEPARTMENTS
4
RESTRUCTURED
DEPARTMENTS
7
REPRESENTATIVE
DEPARTMENTS
3.50
Rs
3.73
4.00
4.50
X SE
5?hP = mean of 7 representative departments
RS = mean of 4 restructured departments
SE = Mean of 5 select departments
Results indicated that when these background factors were simultane-
ously controlled, the ability level of the class (and only this variable) had
a sizable association with lesson thoughtfulness.' If a causal reLationship
were to be inferred, the hypothesis of teacher expectations would make
sense: Teachers perceive higher-ability groups a, more capable of partici-
pating in thoughtful discourse, and therefore they offer such groups more
opportunities. This finding was expected and is further evidence that

----- Page 82 (native) -----
Higher-Order Thinking and Prospects for Classroom Thoughtfulness
77
classes with higher percentages of low-achieving students are deprived of
educational opportunities.22 On the other hand, it can be considered good
news that when class ability level was held constant, neither race nor age
of the students seemed to determine the degree of thoughtfulness, and that
the variance in lesson thoughtfulness explained by all background features
together was less than 10 percent. This supports the more hopeful prospect
that other variables (perhaps unmeasured) have far more impact than
student background.
We found, for example, that departmental differences in classroom
thoughtfulness had at least twice the association with the thoughtfulness
of lessons than did class ability level. The strong impact of the department
in relation to background features offers hope, because, in contrast to
background characteristics of students (age, race, prior school achieve-
ment), features of departments can conceivably be changed for the better.
Within the group of select departments, student background features had
no effect, which indicates that some departments are successful not only
in promoting classroom thoughtfulness, but also in delivering it equitably
to classes of students with different background characteristics.
QUALITIES CRITICAL TO SUCCESS
Differences in thought and practice between the most and least suc-
cessful teachers and departments can suggest possible factors that need to
be changed to increase classroom thoughtfulness. First we compare the
thinking of individual teachers, and then we compare the kinds of leader-
ship and institutional contexts that appear to promote thoughtfulness.
Teachers' Thinking
Onosko (1989, 1991a) studied differences in the thinking of teachers
whose lessons scored in the highest one fifth versus the lowest one fifth on
classroom thoughtfulness. While the sample was small 10 teachers in
each group
interesting differences emerged in teachers' instructional
goals, their thoughts on the problem of depth versus breadth of content
coverage, and their conceptions of thinking.
In contrast to lower scorers, high scorers were more likely to identify
student thinking as their highest priority goal, and they found the develop-
ment of students' thinking more interesting than exposing students to su')-
ject matter content. When asked what gave them satisfaction as a teacher,
they tended (more than lower scorers) to identify student behaviors closely
associated with thinking (e.g., "seeing students start to make connections,"

----- Page 83 (native) -----
78
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
"students wrestling with values and making links," "teaching students to
generalize from data"). High scorers' open-ended goal statements were
lengthier and more detailed, with a more impassioned focus on thinking.
On the issue of depth versus breadth of content coverage, both groups
felt persisting conflict, but high scorers were more likely to identify cover-
age as detrimental to students' thinking. High scorers were more likely to
attribute the pressure to external sources such as state tests, curriculum
guidelines, and the department chair, whereas lower scorers said the main
pressure came from within themselves. Lower scorers, including some
who had taught advanced placement U.S. history courses, felt that broad
coverage was important, but high scorers believed that breadth of cover-
age inhibited thinking. Larry, a lower scorer, explained,
We really have to sacrifice depth to introduce the students to the
areas we feel are important.
.
. . We are a survey course: we
want to introduce the student to the areas and we encourage
them to take other courses later on if they are interested.
Harold, a high scorer, felt too much coverage pressure from the state
curriculum guidelines and tests.
I do not preoccupy myself with finishing the curriculum. In-
stead, I attempt to teach whatever I teach well and select class-
room topics and materials very carefully.
.
.
. I don't emphasize
content coverage. It's ludicrous to attempt to cover 100 years of
history in a month or two. I focus on concepts or ideas.
Teachers were asked two questions to explore their conceptions of
thinking: Do you have a conception of thinking that guides your teaching
(If so, summarize its main aspects)? Consider your best thinkers; what
distinguishes them from other students?
Higher scorers had more to say about the nature of thinking. They
included points of clarification and subtle distinctions between their own
views and possible alternative conceptions. For example, Hans challenged
the notion that Bloom's cognitive skills should be viewed hierarchically,
Hilary argued that students' intellectual curiosity should not be equated
with inherent cognitive capacity, and Hanson asserted that the develop-
ment of students' thinking should not be divorced from the development
of students' values. Elaboration of this sort was missing in the brief state-
ments of lower scorers.
In contrast to lower scorers, higher scorers identified a greater variety

----- Page 84 (native) -----
Higher-Order Thinking and Prospects for Classroom Thoughtfulness
79
of dispositions and thinking skills. Hugh illustrates the importance of dis-
positions.
A good thinker isn't afraid if someone challenges a position .
.
.
is willing to take a look at someone else's hypothesis or theory
even if it's 180 degrees apart from his own. .
.
. I'd like kids to
always be questioning, to always be probing. You should always
be on edge, never comfortable, no matter how well you've di-
gested the material.
The main skills mentioned by higher scorers dealt with understand-
ing, analyzing, manipulating, and generalizing from data; understanding
the relevance of data to a central theme, formulating hypotheses and
conclusions; and relating learning to one's own life experience or to cur-
rent affairs.
Even if differences in teachers' thought are associated with differences
in practice (i.e., in their levels of classroom thoughtfulness), this alone
does not establish a causal link from thought to practice. Nevertheless,
these findings are consistent with previous research that highlights a con-
nection between teachers' thought and practice, and they suggest that it
may be useful to help teachers reflect more systematically on their goals,
conceptions of thinking, and management (if the dilemma of depth versus
coverage. Other strategies for helping individual teachers to promote
higher-order thinlzing are summarized in Newmann, Onosko, and Steven-
son (1990).
Leadership
The main purpose of our study was to understand the extent and
determinants of differences at the school or departmental level. Having
found that departments do in fact differ in the levels of classroom thought-
fulness they promote, we asked about the extent to which differences in
school leadership and organizational structure might account for differ-
ences in classroom thoughtfulness. We defined the most successful schools
as those scoring more than one standard deviation (.38) above the mean
for all schools (3.40). These included three select schools: Grandville,
Carlsberg, and Arnold. The least successful were those scoring more than
une standard deviation below the mean, which involved four representa-
tive schools: Erskine, Downing, Wadsworth, and Pierce.
Based on observations and staff interviews dealing with the nature of
departmental and principal leadership, we found differences between the
.
4'

----- Page 85 (native) -----
80
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
top-scoring and bottom-scoring schools related to goals, curriculum, peda-
gogy, and school culture.
In the top schools, department chairs, with
support from principals, worked to develop a focus within the social stud-
ies department on the goal of promoting students' thinking. The three top
schools varied considerably in their approach to higher-order thinking,
but in contrast to the bottom schools all of which lacked a coherent
departmental focus on thinking social studies departments in the top
schools each aimed toward a common vision for promoting students' think-
ing. Grandville uset1 a modified version of Bloom's taxonomy to structure
generalizations, concepts, and themes in all courses. Carlsberg adopted a
common procedure for each lesson: first, posing a central question at the
beginning to focus student thinking, and second, structuring teacher-
centered discussion to answer the question. Arnold also presented students
with a central question or issue that framed each unit and asked them to
create metaphors, analogies, and other sources of evidence and insight to
achieve understanding
The common goals were reinforced and implemented by the depart-
ment heads' active participation in curriculum development with col-
leagues in the department who often worked in teams of teachers who
taught the same course. The top departments varied in resources allocated
for curriculum development, but all three schools worked on curriculum
during the school year and/or summers. The main objective was not sim-
ply to update course content, but to do so in ways that would operation-
alize the department's approach to developing students' thinking. At two
of the top schools, principals provided special support for curriculum de-
velopment. In contrast, low-scoring schools participated in curriculum
development, but it tended not to be focused on a common departmental
vision cf thinking.
Department heads in the top three schools made special efforts to
comment in considerable detail on their colleagues' teaching and to sup-
port peer observation and discussion of specific pedagogy that promotes
thinking. At Carlsberg, the department head taught demonstration les-
sons, with colleagues observing and criticizing afterward. Department
meetings there have been used to view videotapes of colleagues' teaching
and to jointly plan lessons. The principal at Carlsberg also took an active
role in detailed observation and clinical supervision of teaching. In the
low er-scoring schools, department heads' and principals' attention to ped-
agogy involved only perfunctory required visits for formal evaluation.
The efforts of department heads and principals f
the high-scoring
schools to s
pe goals, curriculum, and pedagogy toward an emphasis on
thinking seem to have nurtured the kind of collegial faculty culture in
these schools that has been found in other research to contribute to school
/

----- Page 86 (native) -----
Higher-Order Thinking and Prospects for Classroom Thoughtfulness
81
effectiveness (e.g., Bryk, Lee, & Smith, 1990; Rosenholtz, 1989). These
schools show how leaders can build such a culture by helping teachers
develop and keep their sights on a common instructional mission, by di-
recting technical assistance both from within and outside the system on
this goal, and by providing material and emotional support for teachers
to help one another approach the work critically.
Organizational Features
Some teachers may be committed to the promotion of higher-order
thinking, but find too many obstacles in the existing organizational struc-
ture of high schools. Discussions on the restructuring of education suggest
that major organizational changes may be needed to assist teachers in the
promotion of higher. order thinking; for example, increased opportunities
for team planning among teachers to generate curriculum oriented toward
thinking; smaller classes and reduced student load to allow teachers to
respond more thoughtfully to students' work; changes in the scheduling of
instruction to allow for more sustained inquiry than is possible in short
class periods. How important are structural features such as these?
To investigate the importance of organizational features, we exam-
ined four social studies departments that we perceived in the selection
process to indicate a sincere emphasis on higher-order thinking but that
also operated in schools with organizationally innovative structures along
the lines just mentioned. Each of the four used extensive team planning,
and in three of the schools this occurred across different subjects. Three of
the four included classes well below 25 students, and three of the four
included scheduling changes that permitted flexibility in the conduct of
instruction.
Information in Figure 3.1 shows that although the restructured de-
partments scored above the representative departments and above the
overall mean, none of the restructured departments scored highly enough
or. classroom thoughtfulness to be included in the top group. Furthermore,
the highest-scoring schools did not differ substantially in structural fea-
tures from the lowest-scoring ones, except that in two of the three highest-
scoring schools, the department chair taught only one class per semester
a structural feature that allowed considerable time to exercise program
leadership. How might we explain the finding that innovative structural
features do not seem critical to achieving high levels of classroom thought-
fulness?
In examining the influence of organizational features on higher-order
thinking, Ladwig (1991) distinguishes between organizational structures
and organizational programs. Structures include the amount of time avail-

----- Page 87 (native) -----
82
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
able to teachers for planning and sharing ideas with colleagues; the
amount of time that teachers and students work together in classes and
the degree of flexibility in how the time is spent; the number of students
in a class and the total number taught by teachers; and the degree of
authority teachers have individually and collectively to make important
decisions about curriculum and teaching. Organizational programs could
include departmentally coordinated curriculum design and revision; staff
development activities using both outside authorities and collegial exper-
tise to develop common goals and curriculum; and an organized program
of peer observation and critique of individual teaching.
Organizational structures and programs are logically independent of
one another. That is, having innovative structures does not necessarily
entail having any particular instructional program. One would expect the
highest levels of classroom thoughtfulness to occur in schools that com-
bined a strong programmatic focus on higher-order thinking with the
innovative organizational structures that seem to facilitate such a focus.
The restructured schools we studied, however, did not manifest strong
organizational programs aimed at promoting higher-order thinking. These
departments expressed a clear interest in the goal and worked to imple-
ment it in several classes. In this sense they distinguished themselves from
and scored higher than the representative schools. On the other hand,
their programmatic efforts for higher-order thinking were not as focused
nor as comprehensive as those in the highest-scoring three departments
located in conventionally organized schools.
The select high-scoring departments in conventional schools had fo-
cused programmatic agendas for higher-order thinking. In contrast, staff
in the restructured schools were involved in several programmatic activi-
ties at once that usually encompassed a number of educational goals be-
yond the promotion of higher-order thinking; for example, individualizing
and personalizing school experiences for students; empowering faculty to
develop curriculum and school policy; reducing negative consequences of
tracking and ability grouping; creating interdisciplinary curricula; build-
ing special experiences for students at risk; and developing new methods
of assessment. it is possible that having to deal with such a variety of
issues tended to dilute the programmatic concentration that might other-
wise have been channeled to the promotion of higher-order thinking.
Within the group of restructured schools, it is interesting to note that
the two highest-scoring departments were part of efforts to restructure the
entire school, the next was a restructured program within a traditionally
structured school, and in the lowest scoring of these departments, restruc-
turing occurred primarily within individual courses. The sample is too
small to allow generalization about the process of restructuring in a larger,

----- Page 88 (native) -----
Higher-Order Thinking and Prospects for Classroom Thoughtfulness
83
mote diverse set of schools, but this finding suggests that school-wide
efforts to restructure may offer more potential for reinforcing organiza-
tional programs for higher-order thinking than restructuring aimed only
at schools within schools or within courses. School-wide initiatives could
offer more of the support that teachers need from administrators and
colleagues to emphasize student thinking and depth of understanding,
rather than absorption of knowledge fragments and coverage of informa-
tion.
The relative position of restructured schools (in Figure 3.1) illustrates
several points: (1) Innovative structural features alone offer no advan-
tages; strong program design may be more important. (2) Conventional
school structures do not preclude reasonably high levels of classroom
Lhoughtfulness. (3) Schools that combine significant restructuring with a
strong programmatic emphasis on higher-order thinking may conceivably
achieve levels of classroom thoughtfulness higher than we have yet been
able to observe. In short, the keys to success seem to be strong organiza-
tional programs aimed at teachers' thinking and practice; and if these are
supported through restructuring, we might well expect even higher levels
of classroom thoughtfulness.
CONFRONTING THE BARRIERS
In our search for thoughtful classrooms and for characteristics that
distinguish between more and less successful departments, we have been
struck by persistent and deeply rooted obstacles within teachers, schools,
and the larger society that inhibit the promotion of higher-order think-
ing for students. Although we have identified some patterns of leadership
and organizational features that seem to facilitate success, we have not
discovered proven strategies for changing weak departments into strong
ones or for improving the performance of the more successful.
Observations and interviews have convinced us, however, that leader-
ship, staff development, and restructuring activities should aim directly at
reversing or reducing the negative impact of four major barriers.
(1) The dominant conception of education as transmission of items of
knowledge covering a broad range of topics, rather than the develop-
ment of thinking; (2) The belief that students are incapable of or unin-
terested in higher order thinking; (3) Insufficient time for teachers to
work with individual students and to plan instruction; and (4) A culture
of professional isolation that prevents teachers from helping one another
to achieve the difficult goal of teaching for higher order thinking.
(Onosko, 1991b)

----- Page 89 (native) -----
84
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
Unless improvement strategies within and out of schools attack these
problems directly, little progress will be made. The following elaboration
on these barriers can guide leadership, staff development, and restructur-
ing in this area.
Although the promotion of thinking is widely endorsed as the ultimate
end of education, it is persistently undermined by the effort to transmit
information on countless topics to ensure that children possess basic (cul-
tural, scientific, mathematical, economic, and civic) "literacy." Learning
new information is, of course, critical for education and for thinking, but
the pressure to cover material leaves little time to reflect on what is learned
and to develop understanding and the capacity to use knowledge in cre-
ative ways to answer unforeseen questions. As a result, most of the time
students receive only superficial exposure to countless items of knowledge
that low-achieving students rarely learn and that high-achieving students
remember only long enough to succeed on tests.
The pressure to transmit broad surveys of information is intense. It
comes from interest groups professional, political, economic, and other
who influence curriculum guidelines, textbooks, tests, and the education
of teachers in universities. Teachers, administrators, and others will need
a lot of help in bringing to curriculum more balance between the legiti-
mate need to transmit a variety of information, on the one hand, and, on
the other, the necessity of excluding material so that some topics can
be studied in sufficient depth for students to develop understanding, the
capacity to master higher-order challenges, and the intellectual empower-
ment that this brings.
One of the first steps is to help educators develop rationales for educa-
tion that include well-reasoned conceptions of thinking applicable to all
students. As we have indicated, in-depth knowledge is required to master
higher-order challenges, but so are intellectual skills and dispositions of
thoughtfulness. Research has indicated that students of all ages are capa-
ble of complex thought; that the more experience one has with a subject,
the better the quality of thought; and that high-quality thinking about a
problem does not necessarily require prior memorization of large quanti-
ties of information. Information is necessary to meet higher-order chal-
lenges, but information can be accessed through methods other than mem-
ory (e.g., having books and computers available to consult), and large
quantities of information are not always needed
the amount and type of
information needed depends on the nature of the problem. In order to
develop informed staff commitment to the promotion of thinking, teachers
will need time to study and carefully consider conceptions of thinking, the
role of information in it, and the actual capacities of children. The points
just mentioned will challenge assumptions and deeply held beliefs of many

----- Page 90 (native) -----
Higher-Order Thinking and Prospects for Classroom Thoughtfulness
85
teachers, and so it is important to examine these matters within a suppor-
tive climate of open dialogue.
If teachers are to stress depth of understanding as much as vague
awareness, and if they are to help students manipulate knowledge to solve
new problems, rather than only to absorb knowledge and reproduce it,
changes will be needed in curriculum content, instructional materials,
teaching techniques, and tests. While some exceptional teachers manage
to promote high levels of thoughtfulness in conventionally organized
schools, we believe that most will need more time during the school day
for planning, for responding to students' individual work, and for getting
help from colleagues on how to traverse new, unknown, and often formi-
dable educational territory.
Several organizational barriers stand in the way, especially the small
amount of time that teachers have for these activities and the way teach-
ers' time is organized. Planning periods of 50 minutes per day are inade-
quate, especially when teachers are responsible for more than 100 students
daily and must prepare two or more different courses. Preparation periods
are rarely scheduled to permit departmental colleagues to observe and
confer with one another about the teaching of common courses. Staff
development time, offered only a few half-days per year, is usually unre-
lated to any long-term agenda such as the promotion of thinking in social
studies. When students are instructed in classes of 30 that meet 50 minutes
per day, there is little opportunity to develop sustained inquiry how
often do adults solve problems in 50-minute blocks scheduled at the same
time each day? The dominant mode of large-group instruction deprives
students of feedback from both teacher and peers on their individual work.
To attack these problems, schools should reconsider not only increas-
ing the amount of time available and reducing the number of students per
teacher, but, more important, reorganizing the time; for example, by
arranging for common planning time among teachers, by clustering both
planning time and instructional time into longer continuous blocks, and
by devoting more of the instructional time to small-group and individual
study to allow more students to participate in thoughtful dialogue.
Suppose many of these suggestions were followed, and that teachers
actually received technical help in understanding the nature of thinking
and how to teach it, and administrators reorganized schools to allow more
productive interaction among teachers and students. We suspect that in-
creased technical and organizational assistance would not be enough to
ensure the promotion of higher-order thinking for all high school students.
In spite of paying lip service to the ideal for years, most students, parents,
teachers, civic leaders, and other citizens have consistently made the culti-
vation of thoughtfulness a low priority among educational aims. Why?
1

----- Page 91 (native) -----
86
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
The question leads to the hypothesis that the powerful forces of human
personality, social structure, and cultural values may stand in the way of
committed implementation of these otherwise reasonable proposals.
Higher-order thinking often calls for the resolution of conflicting
views, tolerance for uncertainty and ambiguity, self-criticism, indepen-
dence of judgment, and serious consideration of ideas that may challenge
conventional wisdom. In this sense, thinking involves difficult mental
work that can be personally unsettling, because it disrupts cognitive stabil-
ity, order, and predictability. For many, it is psychologically more com-
fortable not to think too deeply about anything.
Critical thinking also increases the probability of youth challenging
adult authority and of citizens challenging economic and political centers
of powar. Thus, thinking can be considered subversive and socially dan-
gerous by dominant interests whose legitimacy is questioned. Some would
argue that the very survival of certain social institutions (e.g., advertising,
hierarchies of labor within corporations, capitalism) depends on iimiting
the opportunity to think to a small segment of the population.
Finally, cultural orientations that prescribe certain forms of interper-
sonal relations, religious and artistic expression, and play and -vreation
can minimize the importance of the kind of cognitive activity promoted
here as higher-order thinking.
Our findings indicate that it is possible for high school departments
to promote higher-order thinking and that students are more engaged in
thoughtful classes. If those committed to the promotion of thinking in
education are to confront the fundamental issues just raised, however,
they will need to view this as a long-term project. To begin, it will be
necessary to break down barriers of professional isolation, especially evi-
dent in secondary schools, in which teachers take pride in and are re-
warded primarily for working alone. Collegial networks must be culti-
vated to provide emotional and technical support for teachers trying to
work with students in new ways, and also to build a political base from
which to confront resistance in the society at large. In short, transforming
education into critical use of the mind involves far more than absorbing
new research knowledge, adopting new programs, or changing a few
teaching methods. Instead, it must be seen as a complex, long-term, and
risky adventure in social change.
NOTES
Major contributions to this work have been made by Dae-Dong Hahn, Bruce
King, James Ladwig, Cameron McCarthy, Joseph Onosko, Francis Schrag, Rob-
ert Stevenson, and the cooperative staff and students in sixteen high schools.

----- Page 92 (native) -----
Higher-Order Thinking and Prospects for Classroom Thoughtfulness
87
l. Examples of national reports emphasizing thinking include American As-
sociation for the Advancement of Science (1989), Committee for Economic Devel-
opment (1985), National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (1989), and Quality
Education for Minorities Project (1990).
2. Material in this section is discussed in more detail in Newmann (1990a). ,
3. Various points in the argument for the centrality of knowledge have been
made by Glaser (1984), Mc Peck (1981), and Nickerson (1988).
4. Various points in the argument for skills as the most central resource have
been made by Beyer (1987); de Bono (1983); Herrnstein, Nickerson, De Sanchez,
and Swets (1986); and Marzano et al. (1988).
5. Various points in the argument for dispositions as a central resource have
been made by Cornbleth (1985), Dewey (1933), and Schrag (1988).
6. Those who emphasize interaction and interdependence among these re-
sources include Bransford, Sherwood, Vye, and Rieser (1986); Ennis (1987);
Greeno (1989); Perkins and Salomon (1989); and Walsh and Paul (1987).
7. The high degree of specificity that can occur in the naming of thinking
skills is illustrated in Marzano et al. (1988), which notes 21 different core thinking
skills, including such items as defining problems, setting goals, observing, order-
ing, inferring, summarizing, and establishing criteria.
8. The development o; these indicators and selection of the six most critical
are described more fully in Newmann (1990a, 1990b). See also Schrag (1987,
1989).
9. Items on the scale have a reasonably high level of internal consistency
(Cronbach alpha = .82). Exploratory factor analysis and LISREL modeling also
identified these dimensions as a distinct construct of thoughtfulness. Such analyses
for a sample of select departments were reported in Newmann (1990b). Analyses
for the entire sample of lessons showed similar results.
10. To estimate inter-rater reliability, 87 lessons were observed indepen-
dently by different pairs of raters drawn from a team of six researchers. Consider-
ing the six dimensions in the CHOT scale, each scored from 1 to 5, the two
observers agreed precisely in 64 percent of the ratings, they differed by one point
or less on 96 percent of the ratings, and the overall average correlation between
t wo raters was .76.
11. Principals in the representatiN
schools were interviewed for one hour.
12. Newmann (1990c) describes the test. Newmann (1991) initially found a
positive association between classroom thoughtfulness and student performance,
but the relationship disappeared after controlling for student scores on a rigorous
pretest. Since none of the observed teachers concentrated instruction either on
constitutional understanding or on persuasive writing, and since our indicators
of classroom thoughtfulness were so general (i.e., not derived from the specific
understandings and skills measured in the tests), these results were predictable.
Effects of these qualities of classroom thoughtfulness on students thinking would
best be investigated through performance tasks designed to assess the unique goals
of each teacher. In this study it was logistically impossible to conduct such an
assessment.
13. Based on 479 observed lessons in all 16 schools.
14. To assess engagement and challenge, we created two scales. For engage-

----- Page 93 (native) -----
88
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
ment, students were asked, "In this social studies class, how often (from never to
almost every day) do you
.
. . Try as hard as you can? .
. . Think what you are
supposed to learn is interesting and worthwhile? .
. . Find yourself concentrating
so hard that time passes quickly?" Challenge was measured by asking students,
"How often in this social studies class do you .
. . Feel yourself challenged to think
hard and use your mind? .
. . Have to explain to the teacher how you got your
opinion? .
. . Have to show that you really understand, not just give the right
answer?" The correlation is based on student surveys in the 11 schools of Phases II
and III (N = 1,315). The alpha reliability for the engagement scale was .59 and
for challenge it was .65.
15. The findings are based on classes observed in Phases II and III. Differ-
ences in student-perceived challenge and engagement amount to about one point
on a nine-point scale, which is about half a standard deviation. Student ratings of
engapment and cognitive challenge were based on their perceptions of the entire
class throughout the year, which included homework, tests, arid other activities.
Observer ratings were based only on approximately four lesson observations. This
may account for the lack of a stronger relationship betwee i engagement and
cognitive challenge in this type of analysis.
16. This question was asked only of students who were interviewed in Phase
III (N = 48).
17. Findings in points 5,6, and 7 are taken from Stevenson (1988) and based
on student interviews (N = 45) in Phase I schools.
18. The standard deviation was .82, indicating that about 64 percent of the
lessons ranged between 2.58 and 4.22.
19. Differences between teachers accounted for 51 percent of the total vari-
ance among lessons.
20. The difference between the top and bottom quartiles was 2.6 times the
overall departmental standard deviation (.38) or 1.2 times the overall standard
deviation among lessons (.82). The difference between the select and representa-
tive departments was about 1.4 times the overall departmental standard deviation;
the restructuredrepresentative difference was about I standard deviatioi, and
the difference between the select and restructured department was about .6 of the
overall departmental standard deviation. These differences accounted for about
21 percent of the total variance in thoughtfulness among lessons.
21. Ability level was measured as the teacher's estimate of the percentage of
students whose grade-point average placed them in the lowest (1), middle (2),
and highest (3) one third of the school achievement distribution. On average, a
one-point increase in class ability level (scaled from 1 to 3) would be associated
with about a one third point increase in classroom thoughtfulness for the lesson
(scaled from 1 to 5).
22. In calling attention to teacher expectations (an unmeasured variable
here) as a way of explaining the correlation between class ability and clessroom
thoughtfulness, I do not mean to underestimate the actual difficulties teachers
face in promoting higher-order thinking with low-achieving students.
23. This analysis of kadership is based on McCarthy and Schrag (1990) and
King (1991).

----- Page 94 (native) -----
Higher-Order Thinking and Prospects for Classroom Thoughtfulness
89
REFERENCES
American Association for the Advancement of Science. (1989). Science for all
Americans: A Project 2061 report on literacy goals L. science, mathematics
and technology. Washington, DC: Author.
Beyer, B. (1987). Practical strategies for the teaching of thinking. Boston: Allyn &
Bacon.
Bransford, J., Sherwood, R., Vye, N., & Rieser, J. (1986). Teaching thinking and
problem solving. American Psychologist, 41(10), 1078-1089.
Bryk, A. S., Lee, V. E., & Smith, J. B. (1990). High school organization and its
effects on teachers and students: An interpretive summary of the research. In
W. Clune & J. Witte (Eds.), Choice and control in American education:
Vol. 1. The theory of choice and control in American education (pp. 135-
226). Philadelphia: Falmer Press.
Committee for Economic Development. (1985). Investing in our children. Wash-
ington, DC: Author.
Cornbleth, C. (1985). Critical thinking and cognitive processes. In W. B. Stanley
(Ed.), Review of research in social studies education: 1976-1983 (pp. 11-
63). Boulder, CO: ERIC Clearinghouse for Social Studs ,s/Social Science Ed-
ucation.
Cuban, L. (1984). How teachers taught: Constancy and change in American
classrooms: 1890-1980. New York: Longman.
de Bono, E. (1983). The direct teaching of thinking as a skill. Phi Delta Kappan,
64(10), 703-708.
Dewey, J. (1933). How we think. Boston: D.C. Heath.
Ennis, R. H. (1987). A taxonomy of critical thinking dispositions and abilities. In J.
B. Baron & R. J. Sternberg (Eds.), Teaching for thinking. New York: Freeman.
Glaser, R. (1984). Education and thinking: The role of knowledge. American
Psychologist, 39(2), 93-105.
Goodlad, J. I. (1984). A place called school: Prospects for the future. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Greeno, J. G. (1989). A perspective on thinking. American Psychologist, 44(2),
134-141,
Herrnstein, R. J., Nickerson, R. S., De Sanchez, M., & Swets, J. A. (1986).
Teaching thinking skills. American Psychologist, 41(11), 1279-1289.
Hoetker, J., & Ahlbrand, W. (1969). The persistence of recitation. American
Educational Research Journal, 6(2), 145-167.
King, M. B. (1991). Leadership efforts that facilitate classroom thoughtfulness in
social studies. Theory and Research in Social Education, 29(4), 366-389.
Ladwig, J. G. (1991). Organizational features and classroom thoughtfulness in
secondary social studies departments. Theory and Research in Social Educa-
tion, 19(4), 390-408.
Marzano, R. J., Brandt, R. S., Hughes, C. S., Jones, B. F., Presseisen, B. Z.,
Rankin, S. C., & Suhor, C. (1988). Dimensions of thinking: A framework
for curriculum and instruction. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision
and Curriculum Development.

----- Page 95 (native) -----
90
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
McCarthy, C., & Schrag, F. (1990). Departmental and principal leadership in
promoting higher order thinking. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 22(6), 529-
543.
McNeil, L. M. (1986). Contradictions of control: School structure and school
knowledge. New York: Rout ledge & Kegan Paul.
Mc Peck, J. E. (1981). Critical thinking and education. New York: St. Martins.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1989). Curriculum and evaluation
standards for school mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
Newmann, F. M. (1990a). Higher order thinking in social studies: A rationale for
the assessment of classroom thoughtfulness. Journal of Curriculum Studies,
22(1), 41-56.
Newmann, F. M. (1990b). Qualities of thoughtful social studies classes: An empiri-
cal profile. Journal of Curricu/um Studies, 22(3), 253-275.
Newmann, F. M. (1990c). A test of higher order thinking in social studies. Social
Education, 54(6), 369-373.
Newmann, F. M. (1991). Classroom thoughtfulness and stLients' higher order
thinking: Common indicators and diverse social studies courses. Theonj and
Research in Social Education, 19(4), 409-431.
Newmann, F. M., Onosko, J., & Stevenson, R. B. (1990). Staff development
for higher order thinking: A synthesis of practical wisdom. Journal of Staff
Development, 11(3), 48-55.
Nickerson, R. S. (1988). On improving thinking through instruction. In E. Z.
Rothkopf (Ed.), Review of Research in Education, 15 (pp. 3-57). Washing-
ton, DC: American Educational Research Association.
Onosko, J. (1989). Comparing teachers' thinking about promoting students' think-
ing. Theory and Research in Social Education, 17(3),174-195.
Onosko, J. (1991a). Differences in teacher thought between the most and least
successful in promoting classroom thoughtfulness. Paper presented to the
annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago.
Onosko, J. (1991b). Barriers to the promotion of higher order thinking in social
studies. Theory and Research in Social Education, 19(4), 340-365.
Perkins, D. N., & Salomon, G. (1989). Are cognitive skills context-bound? Educa-
tional Researcher, 18(1), 16-25.
Powell, A. G., Farrar, E., & Cohen, D. K. (1985). The shopping mall high
school: Winners and losers in the educational marketplace. Boston: Hough-
ton Mifflin.
Quality Education for Minorities Project. (1990). Education that works: An action
p/an for the education of minorities. Cambridge: Author, Massachusetts In-
stitute of Technology.
Rosenholtz, S. J. (1989). Teachers' workplace: A social organizationa/ analysis.
White Plains, NY: Longman.
Schrag, F. (1987). Evaluating thinking in school. Madison, WI: National Center
on Effective Secondary Schools.
Schrag, F. (1988). Thinking in school and society. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.

----- Page 96 (native) -----
Higher.Order Thinking and Prospects for Classroom Thoughtfulness
91
Schrag, F. (1989). Are there levels of thinking? Teachers College Record, 90(4),
529-533.
Stevenson, R. B. (1988). Engagement and cognitive challenge in high school: A
study of student perspectives. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University
of Wisconsin-Madison.
Walsh, D., & Paul, R. W. (1987). The goal of critical thinking: From education-
al ideal to educational realitY. Washington, DC: American Federation of
Teachers.
p

----- Page 97 (native) -----
CHAPTER 4
Building New Programs
for Students at Risk
Gary G. Wehlage and Gregory A. Smith
Thus far our colleagues have examined how authentic instructional con-
versation and promoting higher-order thinking can help to engage stu-
dents. Teachers, parents, and students tell us, however, that even with
the "best" teaching, some student., are more likely to be engaged ir school
than others. They say that students at risk of school failure are far more
difficult to engage than others. Youth can be "at risk" in different ways
and for different reasons. An adolescent girl can be at risk of pregnancy; a
boy can be at risk of drug abuse. And the presence of one risk factor can
lead to others. This chapter focuses on students who are at risk of school
failure and dropping out. Although definitions and estimates vary, we
think at least 30 percent of the students in American secondary schools are
at risk in the sense that they have only marginal prospects for succeeding
in school.'
The causes of failure and dropping out are complex. Students' social
class and family background are most often cited. Coming from a single-
parent home, for example, is considered to be a risk factor, and the num-
ber of students coming from such homes has been increasing for several
years. The former "typical" home of parents and their two children has
almost vanished in the United States. Hodgkinson (1991) pointed out that
the "Norman Rockwell" family of a working father, housewife mother,
and two children now constitutes only about 6 percent of American
homes.
Hodgkinson also described the economic, health, anti educational
consequences of changes in family structure and welfare. Trends at the
end of the 1980s indicated that single mothers who have never been mar-
ried were raising about 4.3 million children (about 10 percent of the K-12
student population), and that about 50 percent of the nation's youth will
92
a

----- Page 98 (native) -----
Building New Programs for Students at Risk
93
spend some time before age 18 being raised by a single parent. Currently
15 million children are being raised by single mothers whose incomes are
near or below the poverty line. About 25 percent of pregnant women
receive no medical care during the first trimester of their pregnancy. Al-
though the United States is often seen as a land of opportunity, its young
people are actually more vulnerable to poverty, divorce, homicide, infQ.nt
mortality, and teen pregnancy than children in other industrialized na-
tions.
We see two implications of the escalating proportions of youth at risk.
One is that social policy in the society as a whole must confront more
directly the challenge of rebuilding social capital. This will be discussed
in Chapter 7. The second is that in spite of the difficulties of building
social capital through institutions beyond schools, schools must assume
immediate responsibility for the success of at-risk youth. In Chapter 1,
in the case of Marvin, we saw how schools undermine membership and
authentic work for at-risk students, thereby increasing the likelihood
of school failure and dropping out. Other research, such as that dealing
with retention in grade, the quality of instruction in low-track classes,
and schools' relationships to low-income minority parents, i irther docu-
ments the schools' contributions to increasing failure rates for at-risk stu-
dents.'
On a more positive note, we have studied individual schools that
avoid these problems and find ways to increase engagement and achieve-
ment of students at risk. We have also studied entire school districts that
have launched ambitious programs to improve education for at-risk stu-
dents in many schools at once. This chapter reports what we have learned
from both individual schools and entire districts that have taken responsi-
bility for building new programs for students at risk.
FOUR EXEMPLARY SCHOOLS
A growing body of literature provides der,criptions of schools that
actively nurture and support at-risk students in ways that produce school
success (Foley & McConnaughy, 1982; Schorr, 1988; Slavin, Madden, &
Karweit, 1989; Wehlage, Rutter, Smith, Lesko, & Fernandez, 1989).
When teachers take on the role of mentor, friend, and confidant as well
as instructor; when schools modify their policies in ways that acknowledge
the difficult circumstances often encountered by students in their day-to-
day lives; and when classrooms come to he characterized by learning
activities that are meaningful for students and demand their active
involvement, alienated students can develop a high level of engagement

----- Page 99 (native) -----
94
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
that results in achievement. In this section, we describe four schools that
have provided this environment.
The schools were among 14 schools selected during Spring 1986 in a
study of schools effective with at-risk students. Selection of schools was
based on five criteria. A school had to
1. Serve students who could be identified as at risk of dropping out
2. Enroll a range of age, racial, and/or ethnic groups
3. Use a variety of intervention strategies and innovative practices
4. Show a record of some success with at-risk students, such as raising
attendance rates or reducing drop-out rates
5. Demonstrate potential for serving as a model adaptable to other
schools.
Schools were selected from nominations made by sources knowledge-
able about schools serving dropouts and potential dropouts. Final selec-
tions were based on written information, phone interviews, and site visits
to nominated schools.
Included in the study were two large comprehensive inner-city
schools with all-minority populations, several schools serving largely white
working and lower-middle-class youth, an alternative junior high school
in a medium-sized city, several small alternative programs located within
comprehensive high schools, and specialized alternative schools such as
one serving pregnant and mothering teen girls. Thirteen of the schools
were in urban settings; one was located in a rural county. In studying
these schools, a variety of data was gathered. Measures of academic
achievement were obtained in reading, writing, and mathematics. Self-
esteem, locus of control, and social bonding were among the social-
psychological dimensions measured. Field researchers spent at least three
weeks during the school year in each school observing classes and inter-
viewing students and teachers.
The study provided concrete examples of how teachers and school
administrators were able to promote membership and provide authentic
student work. Here we describe four of the programs that were among the
more effective and that represented quite different contexts and strategies.
Despite differences among these schools and the wide variety of students
they served, we found that all successfully developed school membership
and authentic work that led to student engagement. The schools are:
Sierra Mountain High School in Grass Valley, California; the Media Acad-
emy in Oakland, California; the School-Within-a-School at Memorial
High School in Madison, Wisconsin; and the New Futures School in Albu-
querque, New Mexico.

----- Page 100 (native) -----
Building New Programs for Students at Risk
95
Sierra Mountain High School
Sierra Mountain High School is a small "school of choice" that serves
approximately 90 to 100 9th and 10th Grade students who share patterns
of poor attendance and an unwillingness to coopt:ate with the behavioral
standards and procedures of conventional schools.
Sierra Mountai s program is distinguished by its informality and the
strong sense of community among students and staff. The school is espe-
cially successful with students who respond positively to increased atten-
tion from adults. Teachers consciously present themselves as potential
friends and confidants as well as academic instructors. As one teacher
reported,
I tend to treat the kids with respect and come straight across
with them. I have expectations of what their behavior should be
and what their achievement should be in my classes, and I put
that out without any conditions to my respect other than respect
returned. I think that I put out affection for these kids. I feel real
protective of them. They're my kids. I think that helps. Treating
the kids with a feeling that they are your kids, the kids sense
that. They sense that I care about them and what happens to
them.
Most classes in the school are structured as workshops in which stu-
dent and staff interaction is frequent and ongoing. Teachers use a variety
of instructional strategies but tend to emphasize lessons that demand ac-
tive involvement. Because of frequent communication and cooperative
participation, relations between teachers and students can achieve a de-
gree of intimacy and concern generally absent in more traditional educa-
tional settings.
Given the support and care students encounter at Sierra Mountain,
they become willing to take the risks that allow them to extend their own
range of competency, a critical step for students who may have experi-
"need little encouragement and regular failure in their previous schools.
As the physical education teacher at the school noted,
Typically, the students we deal with hit the wall and stop. They
spend so much energy trying to find a way around it instead of
climbing it, but once they do climb it, they feel Quccessful, and
they'll go to the next one and it may be bigger, and it may be
tougher, but they'll start up it. But you've got to be there to keep

----- Page 101 (native) -----
96
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
them going because if you don't, they'll fall down and you'll see
them going back to the same old pattern of trying to find a way
around and spin and spin and spin their wheels.
The dynamics of this process of challenge and encouragemer t can be
seen in the following vignette drawn from a drama class:
This class focuses on the concept and experience of personal
boundaries and the dramatic meaning of crossing. After present-
ing a variety of exercises designed to encourage students to recog-
nize the way that space communicates meaning, the teacher
chooses a boy and girl to enact a scene set in 1736 between a
prosecuting attorney and a woman charged with murdering a
nobleman. The woman, a former prostitute who has recently
converted to Quakerism, is six months pregnant.
The teacher has the students initially read the play. The act-
ing is stilted. Dissatisfied, he takes away the play nooks arid asks
the students to improvise, asserting that "you can't say a wrong
word if you become the person and go for your objectives." After
a few minutes, the boy objects, saying, "I can't do this." 'The
teacher responds, "How can you say you can't do this when you
are doing it." He insists that they continue. When the boy stum-
bles again, the teacher hands him a book to use as a prop. With
something in his hands, the boy relaxes and suddenly assumes
the role of the lawyer. At one point, he crosses over to the girl
with a pointed accusation. She backs away naturally, demon-
strating the essence of the lesson. The teacher stops the students
with a brief statement of praise, "You've peaked there."
This scene demonstrates how support and challenge can encourage
students to transcend self-imposed limits and ....:hieve more than they be-
lieve is possible. The girl involved in this scene observed that before she
came to Sierra Mountain, she had been satisfied with lower grades because
4 4
they [teachers] didn't really care. They just looked at you as an
individual." It was her impression that teachers felt that if students
"messed up," it was their own fault. At Sierra Mountain, she was earning
A's and B's, largely because the attention of teachers had kindled her own
ambition. "I'm doing good," she said, "and I'm going to go higher."
The Media Academy
The Media Academy in Oakland, California similarly offers students
the support, encouragement, and coaching needed to take the risks associ-

----- Page 102 (native) -----
Building New Programs for Students at Risk
97
ated with academic success. Approximately 120 primarily African-Ameri-
can and Hispanic students are enrolled in the program for three years of
high school. There, they major in print and electronic media and partici-
pate in the production of the school's publications: a newspaper, a year-
book, a Spanish/English community newspaper, and a teen magazine.
After their sophomore year, coursework not associated with journalism or
social studies is taken in the regular high school. The Media Academy
succeeds in providing curriculum and instructional activities that are both
extrinsically and intrinsically valuable for students.
Students' three-year stay in the Academy allows them to form per-
sonal ties to both their teachers and peers. As was the case at Sierra Moun-
tain, this can contribute to higher levels of student achievement. A boy
who had transformed his grades from C's and D's to A's and B's stated, "I
had never experienced this before where teachers are close and encour-
age me." What seems particularly important about learning in the Media
Academy is that such success is seen as a vehicle foL advancing not just the
welfare of individuals, but also the welfare of all students in the program.
Some minority students are quick to charge peers who do well in school
with "acting wl.ite," but at the Media Academy the directing of academic
efforts to group products frees students from fear of being condemned by
their friends. As one girl observed, "No one is pu: down for doing well in
subjects."
Within this socially supportive and academically focused setting, stu-
dents who might be overlooked and neglected in conventional classrooms
become willing to step forward to assert themselves and share their talents
in ways that encourage further involver .ent and engagement. The follow-
ing scene, for example, took place in the transmission studio of the Harbor
Bay Teleport, a satellite communication system used by international busi-
nesses. The teleport is operated by one of the many community sponsors
who serve on the Media Academy's advisory committee. On this visit to
the teleport, Academy students interviewed via satellite John Drury, a
television news anchorman at a San Francisco station.
Maria, a recent immigrant to the United States from Mexico, has
stepped to the microphone to ask a question. Because her English
is still halting, coursework at the Media Academy has been diffi-
cult. In preparation for the interview, she worked closely with
the Academy's lead teacher to make sure that her questions were
phrased in correct English. Carefully measuring her words, she
asks, "Does one have to pass a government examination to be-
come a television reporter?" After hearing Mr. Drury's answer,
Maria continues with a follow-up question. "Is a college degree

----- Page 103 (native) -----
98
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
in journalism required for one to be a television reporter?" As she
returns to her seat, she glances at her teacher, who raises his
hand in a well-done signal.
Near the conclusion of the 45-minute session, other students
cluster around the microphone taking turns to ask more ques-
tions. Maria, who had been sitting at the back of the room, has
edged her way through her classmates to the microphone. Al-
though time is almost gone, she asks one more question. "Does
television make more people do things like taking hostages be-
cause they know television will be there?"
Through the Media Academy, students like Maria gain access to a
world that may have previously seemed inaccessible. With the support
and encouragement of their teachers as well as the example of their bolder
classmates, they are presented with opportunities to explore their own
potential and take on the role of adults successful in the broader society.
The self-confidence that can come from such expez fences can have an
invaluable impact- on stii:lents' conception of their own futures. What may
have seemed impossible in the past, given their own backgrounds, now
becomes approachable.
The link between schooling and desirable jobs is underscored by the
Academy's effort to expose students both to media professionals and to
different forms of work within various media establishments. Teachers in
the program strive to introduce their students to reporters, cartoonists,
and eaitors who have grown up in similar neighborhoods. Internships and
summer jobs are also available in local newspapers and radio and televi-
sion stations. This is all to demonstrate that skills learned in the Academy
can be translated into meaningful work.
Students do not have to wait until they finish school to put into
practice the skills they are learning in journalism classes. Their work on
school publications requires them to take on the role of photographers,
reporters, editors, lay-out artists, and advertisement solicitors. Not only
do such activities give students the opportunity to act as media profession-
al ?. in training, but they also give them the chance to cultivate and share
talents and interests that may be intrinsically valuable to them. Because
of their long-term relationship with the Academy, students are able to
develop an increasing level of competence, and with this competence they
earn the right to share in important decisions related to production activi-
ties. Novice students know that as they acquire the requisite skills they
will be able to take on the jobs of their older colleagues. They know as
well that they are responsible for and "own" the results of their efforts.
Teachers at the Academy consciously facilitate rather tban manage, avoid-
..)

----- Page 104 (native) -----
Building New Programs for Students at Risk
99
ing tight direction and supervision. They are
illing to delegate the choice
of news articles and editorials to their students and to accept the results.
This offers fresh and expanding opportunities for students to turn their
growing confidence and ability into the exercise of responsibility, leader-
ship, and commitment. The validation that comes from engagement be-
comes in itself the source of further engagement.
Madison Memorial School-Within-a-Schou!
The School-Within-a-School at Memorial High School in Madison,
Wisconsin has also developed a curriculum and instructional practices
that emphasize students' active involvement in tasks that are socially and
personally meaningful. Established in 1984 in an effort to reduce the
drop-out rate among older high school students seriously deficient in cred-
its, the program is small, enrolling no more thar! 64 students, about
equally divided between the junior and senior classes.
One of the strongest elements of the School-Within-a-School is its
work experience program. A central concern of teachers in this alternative
school is helping students master both the academic and social skills they
will need to make a transition to employment after earning their diplomas.
To assist with this transition, staff have devised a series of vocational units
required of all juniors. Scheduled during the afternoon after a morning
of primarily academic coursework, three of these units take place outside
the school for a nine-week period each. In one, a team of approximately
16 students works with a community organization that renovates olL:er
houses. In another, students assist in day-care centers. During the third
vocational experience, students work in different health care institutions.
In each case, juniors in the program work with adults outside the school
on projects that have important effects in the broader community. The
final unit for juniors is taught within the school and focuses on business
skills. Seniors take classes in either food services or marketing and are
placed in paid positions in these areas. The goal of these placements is to
help students gain extended experience in a single job site while retaining
the support of school staff when and if problems arise.
The work experience program at the School-Within-a-School leads to
higher levels of student engagement in a number of ways. First, students
are g4ven the chance to learn new skills that can lead to positive, quickly
realized, and obvious accomplishments. As at Sierra Mountain and the
Media Academy, their growing competence can enhance their self-esteem
and self-confidence. Second, student work is infused with social meaning.
Houses that are renovated with the help of School-Within-a-School stu-
dents are sold to low-income families who might otherwise not be able to

----- Page 105 (native) -----
100
Student Engagemerv and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
afford a home. The personal rewards of working with young children or
the elderly are even more immediate and clear. Finally, in nearly all the
work environments in which School-Within-a-School students are placed,
they have the opportunity to interact with adults who often treat them as
fellow workers, rather than children. For adolescents who often perceive
themselves to be outside the society of adults, the attention and recognition
they receive at job sites also contributes to their growing sense of compe-
tency and worth. The following scene shows how these experiences can
increase students' involvement with school-related activities:
The work site is an older but well-built, two-story home on
Madison's east side. The interior remains largely gutted, but new
exterior siding is already in place, giving the house a finished
quality. The work looks professional. Students arrive close to
1:00 p.m. via bus or personal cars. Bruce, the supervisor, greets
them and begins to assign chores. Karen, Margo, and Serena are
sent to the living room, where they are shown how to putty over
finishing nails and then stain the putty. Bruce emphasizes how
important not marring the wood and removing all the putty will
be if they want the job to look right. Ken and David are sent
downstairs to paint the bathroom. Bruce accompanies Lauren,
Teresa, and Nate to the attic, where they are given the task of
installing a second layer of insulation and additional two-by-
fours to keep the insulation in place.
Bruce works in the attic most of the time, patiently answer-
ing the recurrent question, "What do I do next?" He takes time
to show Nate how to use an electric drill to place holes and set
screws. The girls are already skilled in using hammers and take
delight in their strength and ability. The work is taxing, sticky,
and dirty, but even when Bruce leaves to check on how the other
students are doing, the attic crew stays on task. When students
make mistakes in their measurements or drilling, Bruce encour-
ages them to try again and get it right the second time around.
When the insulation and new two-by-fours are in place, Teresa
stands back and looks at their handiwork. "This place looks a lot
nicer," she says. Her friends nod in agreement and then head
down the stairs to take on another job.
At the School-Within-a-School students learn in an environment
where they are helped to acquire skills that have obvious economic worth.
But often their work becomes its own reward as they take pleasure in
the completion of tasks they know are of value to others. Repairing and

----- Page 106 (native) -----
Building New Programs for Students at Risk
101
remodeling of homes is authentic and lacks the make-work quality of
many of the activities that go on in most schools. Students' internship
experiences can play an important role in helping them learn the persis-
tence and care needed to succeed not only on the job but also in their
classes. Although not all students in the School-Within-a-School transfer
what they learn on their job sites to English or math, acquiring habits
deemed valuable by employers offers them important preparation for the
work they will face as adults.
New Futures School
The New Futures School is an alternative public school for pregnant
and mothering girls from 12 to 21 years old. Its comprehensive program
offers the 250 girls typically enrolled health care, parenting classes, day
care for 75 children, academic classes, and a jobs program. New Futures
is distinguished by its comprehensive approach to teenage motherhood.
Its staff see students as capable of being good mothers, good students,
and successful adults. This positive outlook helps the girls adjust to their
pregnancies and accept the responsibilities of motherhood. Small classes
and attentive teachers help the girls improve their academic performance,
which further boosts their self-esteem and belief in future possibilities.
Regular interactions with counselors also promote self-reflection, goal set-
ting, and problem solving. Students frequently credit New Futures as
essential to their finishing high school, considering postsecondary school-
ing, and going on with their life plans.
One of the most powerful elements of the program for engaging stu-
dents is the way that issues related to pregnancy and motherhood have
been woven into the curriculum. Three special parenting classes, for ex-
ample, deal specifically with diet, exercise, anatomy, growth of the fetus,
labor and delivery, child development, and the care of toddlers. These
topics are covered in depth, with the aim of preparing girls for the de-
mands of labor and parenthood. As one girl noted, "When I went into
labor, I knew everything that was going to happen to me." A companion
agreed, "You learn the name of every part of you and what's happening.
You'know so much."
The courses related to child development and parenting involve typi-
cal classroom instruction as well as hands-on experience in the school's
nursery. Students not only learn what to anticipate in regard to their
infants' needs and development, but they are given the chance to apply
their knowledge while
Iring for their classmates' children. As in the three
other programs described above, teachers build student involvement into
the very nature of assigned activities.

----- Page 107 (native) -----
102
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
At one meeting of the sixth-hour child development class, 11
girls gather in the school's infant nursery. Dressed in blue jeans
or corduroy pants and loose-fitting smocks, they are led by their
teacher to a sink where they are instructed to carefully wash
their hands with soap and a soap brush. Evaluation in this class
is tied to the care they demonstrate in personal hygiene and
other tasks.
Gerry, the Hispanic woman who oversees the nursery, then
takes the girls to a changing table where she has arranged for a
more experienced student to demonstrate how to bathe and dia-
per a baby. Details such as remembering to place the pins out-
side the baby's reach and different techniques for diapering boy
and girl babies are empliasized. Gerry makes a point of telling
the students that mothers expect expert care, saying that "little
things mean a lot to a mother." She goes on to relate a story
about a mother who was upset one day when she discovered that
her baby had been scratched by a diaper pin and no one had told
her. Gerry reiterates to her students that such details are impor-
tant to a mother.
Issues related to parenthood are also drawn into other courses as well.
A math teacher, for example, developed a text on math applications in
the home, which was written to be adaptable to regular math classes, to
GED classes, and for use by students alone. In an effort to help prepare
young mothers for the financial obligations of parenthood, the school also
provided classes on seeking employment and further training.
Unlike educators in many other schools, teachers at New Futures see
pregnancy and motherhood as a powerful motivator for student engage-
ment. Students are encouraged to believe that they can be effective care-
givers and providers. A girl who had been out of school for one-and-a-half
years prior to entering New Futures was now intent on completing her
GED. She had a one-year-old daughter and said she had returned to
school because "my daughter will need lots of things. I need to make more
money than in fast food."
For many students, parenthood brings with it a new maturity. New
Futures enables these young women to link their concern for their children
to an educational process aimed at empowering them to be good parents.
The extrinsic value of educational effort and success is inescapable when
presented in this way. So, too, is the intrinsic value of such involvement
when the applicability of information taught in classes has so much bear-
ing on one's immediate personal experience. Focusing on topics in depth
and providing experjential settings in which lessons can be mastered help

----- Page 108 (native) -----
Building New Pwgrams tor Students at Risk
103
students at New Futures to develop the competencies they will need in the
labor room and in their own homes after delivering their children.
In summary, the four exemplary schools demonstrate major depar-
tures from conventional education to respond to the needs of students at
risk. These relatively small and autonomous organizations offer different
programs and structures to groups of students who are not well-matched
to traditional definitions of school. The programs emphasize different pat-
terns of social relations than generally exist between students and staff in
larger public schools. Many educators have suggested that these examples
of curricular and instructional experimentation and social relations will
enhance engagement not only for at-risk students, but for most others as
well. As we argued in Chapter 1, the key is to find ways of affirming
membership and designing authentic work. The ways in which these
schools have created caring communities and opportunities to apply one's
mind to problems of public and personal significance can serve as lessons
to all schools. An important issue remains: Is it possible to replicate the
policies and practices that produce membership and authentic work in
these alternative schools so that conventional schools embedded in large
bureaucratic systems can better engage students at risk? We confront this
in the next .;ection.
DISTRICT PROGRAMS FOR AT-RISK YOUTH:
THE ANNIE E. CASEY NEW FUTURES INITIATIVE
Transporting the structures of small successful alternatives to conven-
tional schools with large enrollments of at-risk students appears difficult.
Several problems surface immediately. Since the successful alternatives we
studied were often newly created, unique organizations, they did not show
us how to change existing schools on a large scale. They were typically the
product of a small group of educational "entrepreneurs" who saw a need
to serve disengaged students and were able to design their own unique
response. These entrepreneurs generated consensus and unity because they
were highly focused on targeting a particular group of students. They
forged consensus not only on the goal of serving these youth, but also on
the means of doing so.
Existing secondary schools with all their factions, traditions, and cul-
tural baggage pose obstacles to educational entrepreneurs' gaining the
opportunity and resources to create powerful, effective, school-wide alter-
natives. A typical comprehensive middle or high school has a diversity of
interest groups in its different subiect areas or departments, at least some
of whom have competing notions about what public education should
J._

----- Page 109 (native) -----
104
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
offer and demand of students. High school teachers, in particular, value
a high degree of professional autonomy that is likel, to impede the crea-
tion of school-wide changes that substantially alter curriculum, instruc-
tion, and social relations both among staff and between staff and stu-
dents.
The problem is even more complex when taken beyond the school to
a system such as a district or state. Changing individual schools from the
bottom up is one thing, but how does a system stimulate change in many
different schools simultaneously? Some of these alternatives were success-
iul
because they were ignored bv their central office. Systemic
change calls for a coordinated effort among central office and staff from
several buildings. The tendency of central offices is usually to insist on
some degree of uniformity of policy and practice, which tends to stifle
inventiveness and entrepreneurial spirit.
We studied this problem by examining a major national effort to help
several communities restructure their educational, economic, political,
and socid serve institutions to serve at-risk youth. In 1988 the Annie E.
Casey Foundation launched the five-year New Futures Initiative in Day-
top, Little Rock, Pittsburgh, and Savannah.
New Futures is a comprehensive community-based initiative aimed
at improving the education and opportunities of disadvantaged youth. It
contains a number of components, including coordination of social ser-
vices, employment opportunities, and school restructuring, each devel-
oped through a collaborative organization representing youth-serving
agencies and public interest groups. While New Futures extends beyond
school reform, its efforts at changing school policies and practices affecting
at-risk youth in conventional schools are especially informative.
Six middle schools were studied intensively in three of the cities over
three year., two high schools were also studied during the same time in
the fourth city. Marvin, whose experiences we described in Chapter 1,
attended one of the middle schools. Based on a variety of data
observa-
tions, interviews, and quantitative measures of student outcomes we
have arrived at some prelim:nary conclusions about the impact of school
restructuring activities in New Futures cities at the halfway point of the
initiative. These preliminary cunclusions have been considered in the cities
with the intent of overcoming some of the problems encountered in trying
to restructure schools.
In all, about 18 major educational interventions were developed un-
der New Futures sponsorship in the four cities during the first half of the
initiative. The primary interventions implemented in each school system
are listed and described below.
IL
a

----- Page 110 (native) -----
Building New Programs for Students at Risk
105
Dayton
In Dayton, two middle schools were selected to try a number of
interventions. The proposal called for
1. Clustering of students and teachers
2. An advisory period called "home-based guidance"
3. Extended day activities
4. Incentives to reward student performance
5. "Beyond the Basics" curriculum and interdisciplinary units
6. Case managers for all students
Clustering was the centerpiece innovation in Dayton; it brought to-
gether core subject teachers (English, reading, math, social studies, and
scien .;) to share a common group of about 120 to 150 students. Cluster
teachers have been given a common daily planning period during which
they can address a variety of issues that range from difficulties with a
particular student to jointly planned and taught lessons. In principle,
clustering has provided an opportunity for students and teachers to partici-
pate in a learning community capable of providing a level of caring and
support generally absent in large secondary schools.
To cultivate more supportive teacherstudent interaction, a home-
based guidance period was added to the daily schedule. The 16 to 20
students enrolled in each home-base were to receive counseling from
teachers on a regular basis in an effort to overcome the inability of typical
counseling staffs to provide frequent, personal contact with students.
To encourage student engagement in academic work, cluster teachers
were to implement a variety of curricular reforms. Among these was a
"Beyond the Basics" curriculum that stressed problem solving and the
discovery of meaning, connections, and patterns as opposed to rote learn-
ing. To facilitate the development of this curriculum, each cluster was
given the freedom to create interdisciplinary teaching units, vary instruc-
tional gr ups, and alter class schedules. Assistance for implementing these
changes was to come from the central office in the form of funding and
advice, whim
lay-to-day teaching was to be supplemented by remedial
teachers or n
the cluster setting.
For the students, particularly those having academic difficulties, in-
centives have been offered. A fund of $15,000 was available to teachers in
each pilot school to create student rewards for good attendance, academic
irr .1-..rovement, and good behavior. The money was spent on items such as
T-shirts, pizzas, and amusement park trips.

----- Page 111 (native) -----
106
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
Little Rock
In Little Rock, five junior high schools participated in the reform
effort during the first three years. The proposal called for
1. Clustering in several grades based on four core subject teachers
sharing about 120 students
2. In-school suspension (in year 2)
3. A pilot program using teachers as student advisors (TAP)
4. Interdisciplinary units
5. Case managers for some at-risk students
Like Dayton, Little Rock placed its greatest hopes on clustering. Un-
like Dayton, clustering did not involve all grade levels or all pilot schools.
Teaching staffs could vote on whether or not they wanted to cluster, and
*some chose not to do so. In one school, 7th and 8th Grade teachers clus-
tered, while at another, it happened only in the 8th Grade. As in Dayton,
the purpose of this structure was to create common times for teachers to
discuss students, teaching, and curriculum. The proposal argued that
closer teacher-student relations could be developed as a result of cluster-
ing, something especially beneficial for children at risk. Cluster teachers
were expected to develop one or more interdisciplinary units during the
year. These units were to study a common theme from the perspective of
each discipline. For example, a unit on violence included reading a novel
on the subject, discussing causes of violence (in social studies), and reading
statistics on violent crimes (in math).
The in-school suspension (ISS) program was developed in response to
disciplinary problems and the high rate of suspension in these schools.
Students were assigned to the ISS self-contained classroom for "nonaggres-
sive" disciplinary infractions, such as repeated tardiness to class. While in
ISS, students were required to continue work on their regular assignments.
This new program was intended to avoid the harsh consequences of out-
of-school suspension, which often results in coursefailure and even reten-
tion because of missed academic work.
The Teacher Advisor Program (TAP) was established at two junior
high schools where 16 teachers agreed to counsel about 190 students identi-
fied as those most at risk. Teachers meet with students regV,arly to serve
as mentors and counselors regarding both school and nonschool topics.
Pittsburgh
In Pittsburgh, eight schools, including elementary, middle, and high
schools, were proposed sites for New Futures, but the major reform activi-

----- Page 112 (native) -----
Building New Programs for Students at Risk
107
ties have occurred at two high schools. In addition to case management,
educational interventions have taken two forms: (1) academies within the
traditional high school, and (2) extended day or after-school activities.
The academy concept was adapted from a successful business and
finance academy already operating in the city. At one high school, "health
care technology" has been adopted as the curricular theme for about 40
10th Grade students. A contract between parents and students
nd the
faculty has been developed to elicit commitments from students th,..t they
would attend and participate in class in exchange for a promise from
teachers that students would graduate on time. Curriculum and instruc-
tion have emphasized cooperative learning and a "hands-on" approach to
health care. Students have been bused for one class to a local technical
school for the health care training.
At the other high school, about 90 incoming 9th graders not enrolled
in several other special options have been targeted. Four core subject
teachers with a common planning period have taught this group. This
academy has no specific vocational theme, but teachers concentrate on
providing a more personal school-within-a-school atmosphere. Students
with high math scores have been placed in a college-bound program, and
those with lower s^ores have been placed in the vocational program. The
elimination of the "general" track in Pittsburgh has also been part of the
general school restructuring proposal.
Savannah
In Savannah, three middle schools served as pilots for a set of inter-
ventions that included
1. A STAY team in each school (counselor, social worker, nurse, and
in-house suspension specialist)
2. An Individual Success Plan for each at-risk student
3. Comprehensive Competency Program (CCP) learning labs
4. Accelerated promotion policy for retained students
5. Modified academic curriculum for at-risk students
6. In-school suspension
7. Extended day activities
8. Case managers for all identified at-risk students
In conjunction with case managers, the STAY teams have written
Individual Success Plans for all at-risk students, similar to the individual
educational plan employed in special education programs. By involving
case managers, the school social worker, and the nurse, the Individual
Success Plans were meant to address students' home and social problems
_L_

----- Page 113 (native) -----
108
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
that interfere with school success. Home visits and conferences with par-
ents have been included.
Maximizing students' academic success has been the goal of the "mod-
ified curriculum" and the Comprehensive Competency Program. The lat-
ter has been situated in a specially constructed laboratory setting in which
students use programmed materials and computer-assisted instruction de-
veloped originally for job Corps participants. Students scheduled into the
CCP lab spend about three hours a day learning math, language arts, and
an amalgam of "social functions" subjects. The modified curriculum was
essentially a remedial program designed to teach basic skills in each of the
core subjects.
To encourage student engagement in the modified curriculum and
CCP labs, a new district policy allowed previously retained students to
receive "accelerated promotion." Those who succeeded in raising their
achievement on a standardized test to a higher grade level were promoted
an additional grade at the end of a semester. For example, a twiceretained
6th Grade student ca
skip 7th Grade by testing at that level in math and
reading.
In response to the very high rate of out-of-school suspension, Savan-
nah middle schools also implemented an in-school suspension program like
the one in Little Rock.
In summary, the four districts undertook a variety of strategies, some
of them quite similar. Intended to respond to the academic problems
and to the social/personal needs of students, the strategies were implicitly
designed to enhance engagement and in the long run produce more favor-
able outcomes for students.
Did these interventions result in greater student engagement in
school? To answer this question we examined the extent to which schools
were successful in (1) developing more supportive and positive social rela-
tions between students and teachers that resulted in greater school mem-
bership; and (2) bringing about changes in curriculum, instruction, and
assessment practices that generated more authentic forms of academic
work.
MEMBERSHIP
Survey data indicated that nearly all children in New Futures schools
believe that education is important, but fewer are certain that teachers
are committed to their success. To build a sense of membership, par-
ticularly for typically marginalized groups, educators must demonstrate
commitment to the success of all students regardless of their academic

----- Page 114 (native) -----
Building New Programs for Students at Risk
109
achievement, race, or social circumstances. The clear articulation and fair
application of performance and behavioral expectations in conjunction
with sustained support and encouragement can also increase the likelihood
that students will have a positive school experience (Wehlage, Rutter,
Smith, Lesko, & Fernandez, 1989).
Some positive impact on peer and student-teacher relations occurred
as a result of New Futures educational interventions. Although few of
the improvements in social relations have become school-wide in scope,
interventions have provided some teachers with both the opportunity and
permission to assume more personal and supportive roles with students.
This has been especially true in the small Pittsburgh academies, CCP labs
in Savannah, and clusters in Little Rock and Dayton. Each of these has
placed teachers with smaller student groups that cultivated improved ex-
pectations and working relationships. These grouping practices have facil-
itated more care and support by teachers for students in academic trouble.
Some teachers eventually came to speak of students as "our kids" and
during common planning periods explored strategies for addressing stu-
dents' problems. Unfortunately, teachers' discussions frequently resulted
in recommendations to refer students elsewhere (e.g., to school counselors,
psychologists, social workers, or other human services professionals) and
thus did not become a catalyst for more fundamental changes in teachers'
own practice.
Despite pockets of enhanced membership, as a whole teacher-student
relations in most New Futures schools remain adversarial. Even though
some teachers developed positive social relations with at-risk students,
these practices have not been adopted by the majority of faculty. Instead,
school staff are otten preoccupied with maintaining control and discipline
through punitive methods. This contributes to an environment character-
ized more by conflict and exclusion than by care and support. Even
though alternatives to suspension, such as in-school suspension, have been
introduced into a number of New Futures schools, these programs have
not called into question either the use of disciplinary sanctions for fairly
trivial offenses such as tardiness, gum chewing, or loose shirttails, nor
have tl,ey led to an investigation of the underlying institutional causes of
student misbehavior.
Adversarial relations between staff and students in the Savannah mid-
dle schools were identified very early as a major problem area, and pro-
posals indicated a need for schools to revise their practices. Yet data on
out-of-school suspensions have continued to reveal the persistence of the
problem. For example, about one third of all 6th Graders in the Savannah
system were suspended during the 1988-89 and 1989-90 school years.
Slightly more than one half of all African-American male 6th Graders

----- Page 115 (native) -----
a
1 1 0
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
were suspended during each of these two school years. These data reflect
a well-entrenched practice by school administrators of suspending students
for a wide variety of offenses, including being tardy to class, "sassing" a
teacher, and "not showing proper respect" to adults. A large number of
the suspensions are for more than one day, resulting in many. unexcused
absences. This means that classwork cannot be made up, which, in turn,
leads to lowered grades and even failure and retention in grade for some
students.
Despite an explicit intention to reduce out-of-school suspensions
through the use of ISS and the counseling assistance of the STAY teams,
former punitive practices continued. During the second year (1989-90) of
the initiative, one school suspended 215, or 66 percent, of its New Futures
students. A second school was somewhat more successful, suspending 127,
or 42 percent, of its targeted at-risk students. A third school, just beginning
a small pilot New Futures program, suspended 00, or 74 percent, of its
at-risk students during the year. Of course, suspending students is some-
times necessary and should remain one of the tools available to administra-
tors, but the scale on which it is used in Savannah has a serious negative
impact on the learning environment of the schools.
Within individual schools social relations also reflect inconsistencies
easily interpreted as hypocrisy, which further undermine membership. In
Dayton, for example, one of the pilot schools has painted in large letters
on the most visible wall in the school office the following statement:
We will work as a team in a trusting environment where every
student will be treated with dignity, experience success, and
have access to caring and supportive adults.
Despite these words, a proposal to tighten conditions in the in-school
suspension room was brought before the faculty. The proposal, written by
teachers, advocated that blinds in the ISS room be kept closed all day,
that students not be allowed to eat lunch in the cafeteria, that the room
be stripped of its computer and television monitor, and that students be
prevented from contacting their friends between the first and last bells of
the day. During the discussion of the proposal, a teacher prot:sted that
ISS was not intended to be punitive and that the recommendations vergc d
on the inhumane. She said she would not allow her daughter to be placed
in this kind of detention. Nevertheless, a majority of faculty felt that the
purpose of ISS was to punish students and voted in favor of the proposal.
To foster students' attachment to the school, New Futures interven-
tions did provide informal academic and personal counseling and other
demonstrations of care and support by adults. In some schools, despite
jI
At

----- Page 116 (native) -----
Building New Programs for Students at Risk
111
these new opportunities, teachers continued to resist a more extended role
with students. Without forging a school-wide culture of adult support, as
is found in some alternative schools, adults may not accept the responsibil-
ity for mentoring students.
It has become clear that simply creating new structures such as
STAY teams, clusters, and case management
has not been sufficient to
bring about changes in social relations that also dominate the day-to-day
life of schools. Teachers have continued to respond to misbehaving stu-
dents in ways that undermine membership and the formally stated goals
of new programs. Rather than finding ways to alter the conditions that
lead to behavioral problems, many teachers and administrators respond
by removing students from the school. As yet, no New Futures school
have systematically examined how school experiences themselves plc dace
student misbehavior.
AUTHENTIC WORK
Curriculum characterized by "authentic work" emphasizes produc .
tion of socially useful, personally meaningful, and aesthetically valuable
knowledge. Curriculum should build on students' strengths and interests
(Knapp & Shields, 1990; Levin, 1988) while recognizing that they are
capable of exercising multiple forms of intelligence (Gardner, 1983).
As explained in Chapter 1, authentic work requires students to ac-
tively produce, rather than reproduce, knowledge. Authentic work in-
volves students in solving "r;ch problems" that allow them to construct
their own meanings and thereby give significance and coherence to ab-
stract concepts (National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, 1989; Res-
nick, 1987a, 1987b). In contrast to the superficial coverage of many topics
that tends to create shallow or false understanding, an authentic curricu-
lum stresses in-depth knowledge and a role for teachers that is akin to
coaching (Sizer, 1984).
The initial New Futures proposals promised to change teaching and
learning in order to increase student interest, motivation, and achieve-
ment. Most of the proposed interventions, however, were not implement-
ed, were implemented in only a cursory fashion, or were implemented
and then abandoned. As a result, the bulk of classroom activities observed
in most New Futures schools remained traditional. Teachers relied on
worksheets, textbooks, and district guides, and were preoccupied with
covering discrete facts and basic skills. That is, in New Futures schools,
remediation and a slower, low-level curriculum are the normative re-
sponse to underachieving students. Most schoolwork in New Futures

----- Page 117 (native) -----
1 1 2
Student Engagement and Achievement In American Secondary Schools
schools can be described as repetitive drill and practice exercises and the
accumulation of fragmented bits of information, apparently irrelevant to
re
world problems and the kinds of thinking done by productive adults
(cf. Newmann, 1988, 1991).
Authenticity comes partly from giving students concrete experiences
similar to those they will encounter in the social, political, and economic
organizations they will have to negotiate when they leave the classroom
(Wehlage, Rutter, Smith, Lesko, & Fernandez, 1989). Such a curriculum
not only reinforces the usefulness and applicability of knowledge, but also
introduces poor, minority, or otherwise marginalized youth to institutions
they might not otherwise encounter. A variety of community service, in-
ternship, apprenticeship, and college programs can provide the experien-
tial basis for the application of mathematics, science, language arts, and
social studies.
A curriculum characterized by authentic work requires more than
altering instructional strategies, teaching to different learning styles, or
developing new instructional materials
although all these might be nec-
essary. The more fundamental barriers to authentic work in school are
the beliefs in which the current model of curriculum is rooted. What is
needed is a paradigm shift at all levels of the school system and the forging
of a professional culture around a new conception of curriculum and
instruction.
Typical of the teaching in many classrooms is the following scene
from a 7th Grade social studies class in Little Rock:
The teacher asks, "What are the varieties of products in Latin
America?" Several students shout out answers. He lists then, on
the board. "Write these down. You'll need to know them for the
test.
Then he asks, "Why is the population growing?" A boy says,
"Because they want to urbanize." "Nol" he says and then pro-
ceeds to offer his own extended explanation. "Take that down,
too, it may be on there." There is no discussion.
They move on to labeling countries and capitals on mimeo-
graphed maps of Latin America. After finishing the labeling, the
teacher repeats and reviews the process they just completed, this
time on an overhead projection. A girl says, "El Salvador
isn't
that where they're having a lot of trouble?" "Well, yes," the
teacher replies, "it's very volatile, but we'll talk about that an-
other time."
After again reminding the class about the need to know the
information for the test, he tells the students to spend the re-
0:4

----- Page 118 (native) -----
Building New Programs for Students at Risk
113
maining 25 minutes of the period finding the answers to the
questions at the end of the chapter. Meanwhile three boys pass
around a comic book, another boy reads a sports magazine be-
hind his book. In the back row, a boy is rendering a remarkable
likeness of a 1957 Impala in his notebook, and there is an endless
procession to the pencil sharpener.
Of course, not all classes were as uninspired and mindless as this
one. We observed a few instances in which teachers attempted significant
curricular innovations that had the potential for making school interesting
and providing students with challenging, worthwhile content. In one case,
a math teacher in Little Rock used a number of imaginative techniques to
teach algebra to "regular"-track students who ordinarily would be taking
a general math curriculum. The teacher tried to make her students mathe-
matical thinkers and problem solvers, rather than stressing the memoriza-
tion of mathematical procedures. The experiment was successful in that
most of her "regular"-track students learned concepts and problem-solving
skills associated with algebra.
Yet the next year, upon entering Algebra II, these students were at a
disadvantage. They were not properly "prepared" because they had not
covered the same curriculum as other students, which was the expectation
of the Algebra II teachers. There was no institutional support for students
who had taken an alternative route to learning mathematics. A teacher's
innovations and success were canceled out because they were not part of a
school-wide effort to improve the level of math achievement for
"regular"-track students, most of whom were at risk.
The Health Academy in Pittsburgh has provided some engaging learn-
ing experiences for students. The health technologies class featured learn-
ing opportunities to build skills associated with different medical profes-
sions. For example, students had an opportunity to practice CPR and to
use different medical equipment. Student response to this program has
been positive, in part because of its use of experiential learning, but this
was restricted to one course. Curriculum and instruction in core subjects
such as social studies and English remained little changed from courses
found elsewhere in the Pittsburgh school district.
In Savannah's CCP labs, many students with long histories of school
failure found an instructional format that enabled them to succeed with
highly structured programmed basic skill materials. The self-paced and
supportive environment staffed by specially trained teachers produced
clear learning gains in conventional content by low-achieving and failing
students. Without the CCP labs, many of these students would have ended
their educational careers in middle school.

----- Page 119 (native) -----
1 14
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
But we must not neglect the content of CCP materials. The CCP
labs have provided remedial education by drilling students in basic skills
associated with reading, mathematics, and career awareness. They have
not challenged students to engage in problem solving or higher-order
thinking activities. This "successful" CCP intervention has provided low-
achieving students with little more than a mechanical education in nar-
rowly defined basic skills.
Overall, then, New Futures has not produced promising changes in
the substantive content that students learn. It has stimulated almost no
fundamental change in the primary intellectual activities that dominate
students' lives in school. In these districts no policies or interventions have
yet succeeded in moving educators, whether at the top of the school hierar-
chy or at the building level, beyond the patterns of curriculum and in-
struction that have characterized schools for decades. Most educators con-
tinue to rely on familiar objectives, methods, texts, and conceptions of
testing and assessment that fail to offer opportunities for higher-order
thinking and authentic work.
Our observations and conversations with educators suggested a num-
ber of reasons for the absence of fundamental curriculum reforms. The
most important reason was that the school and district staff saw little
need for fundamental changes in curriculum. Most educators in the New
Futures schools believed that the difficulties faced by at-risk students origi-
nated within the students and their families, not in the school and its
curriculum. At-risk students were seen almost exclusively as the product
of homes and communities in social disarray.
Further, it was assumed by some teachers that each subject was de-
fined by a clear sequence of topics, concepts, and skills that must be
learned in the proper order. Teachers expressed the belief, for example,
that students cannot perform more difficult "higher-order thinking tasks"
in a subject until they have mastered prior "basic" knowledge and skill.
We found other impediments to broad changes in curriculum and
instruction, but few have been addressed by the New Futures initiatives.
In all of the districts, national norm-referenced tests, pupil performance
objectives (PPOs), minimum performance tests (MPTs), or district-
mandated examinations have been cited by teachers as reasons for stifled
innovation. In Pittsburgh, each subject has a syllabus-driven exam origi-
nating in the central office for which teachers must prepare their students.
Teachers in Little Rock said they had little choice but to focus on rote
skills in subjects like mathematics and language arts because of the state's
MPTs, which determine whether or not students can move on to high
school.
A few teachers indicated a desire to develop more challenging curric-

----- Page 120 (native) -----
Building New Programs for Students at Risk
115
ula, but said they found little support from their district for the intensive
and extensive professional development needed to reshape curriculum and
instruction. With the exception of Pittsburgh, teachers pointed out that
no sustained and coherent staff development programs were available to
support the adoption of new instructional strategies. Although the Casey
Foundation has funded a number of staff development activities, these
have generally consisted of short introductions to discrete strategies such
as cooperative learning or interdisciplinary instruction; no long-term guid-
ance has been offered to teachers for restructuring the curriculum.
COMPARISONS AND CONCLUSIONS
In this chapter, we explored two kinds of innovations designed to
serve at-risk students: One was a set of small alternative schools, and the
other was an effort at the district level to restructure existing schools.
Generally, the small alternative schools were more successful than those
that attempted restructuring. But even the alternatives had their limita-
tions; social support for students that built school membership sometimes
came at the expense of developing a valuable, substantive curriculum. A
few succeeded in offering this kind of curriculum, but several were either
still struggling or had failed to confront the problem. That there were
clear examples of alternatives that created an exciting, more authentic
and intellectually stimulating curriculum, such as at the Media Academy,
was very encouraging. The high level of engagement at the Media Acad-
emy is a form of proof that it is possible to offer a program of experiences
that stretches the intellectual capacity of those considered at risk of failure.
In addition, several other alternative schools demonstrated the power
of authentic student work to engage otherwise disengaged and lower-
achieving adolescents.
On the other hand, the New Futures schools generally failed to gener-
ate either the degree of school membership or more authentic schoolwork
that is needed to produce significantly more engaged students. The one
possible exception to this was the small health technologies program in
one Pittsburgh high school. This exception proved interesting in that it
was a school-within-a-school similar in a number of respects to the alterna-
tives. However, efforts to create school-wide reforms that involved most
students and teachers were far less successful in each of the New Futures
cities.
What can we learn from comparing these two general strategies? One
interpretation is that the size of a school is an absolutely crucial variable
to engagement. Small schools are more likely to have conditions that pro-

----- Page 121 (native) -----
116
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
vide for engagement. Building school membership is more easily achieved
in small organizations where frequent face-to-face contact permits adults
to personalize their relations with students. Moreover, small organizations
are more likely to reach consensus about educational goals along with the
rules and roles that help achieve them. It may be that small school settings
encourage people to act consistently and fairly toward each other as a
result of this consensus. Clear, consistent rules and standards carried out
in a face-to-face and fair manner are likely to be interpreted by students
as evidence of care and commitment from adults. In contrast, the larger
bureaucratic schools tended to retain their impersonal, inconsistent, and
even chaotic character despite the efforts of some teachers to build a more
personal, caring environment.
A second interpretation of the findings is that academic engagement
by students grows largely out of the adults' own passion and expertise.
Passion refers to educators' commitment to their students' success; exper-
tise refers to educators' knowledge and skill in providing authentic work
and challenging experiences. To harness that passion and expertise, how-
ever, it seems that schools need to create more entrepreneurial opportuni-
ties for staff. Beyond believing in and being excited about what they do
with students, teachers probably need to express their commitment through
opportunities to invent, implement, and sustain innovative curricula and
programs, which in turn produce clear evidence of student growth and
success.
The Media Academy is an example of such entrepreneurship. The
staff, and particularly the lead teachers, have a vision of what young
people can become if they master the skills and substance of the disciplines
that are encompassed in the mass media. The vision is a powerful one for
students and teachers; it places students in the role of constructing their
own knowledge, not just learning what others have discovered, as they
create media products that have personal and social value. For teachers,
students' products were evidence of the development of fundamentally
important skills in reasoning and expressing ideas, basic strengths that
would serve a person in different ways as student, worker, and citizen.
The work that students produced was satisfying evidence of student and
teacher success; such concrete evidence may be as important to teachers as
it is to students if the former are to sustain their commitment and effort.
In contrast to the alternatives, no core group of staff in the New
Futures schools stepped forward with a vision that could generate consen-
sus about how to draw alienated youth into the process of education.
The lack of consensus meant that contradictory and counterproductive
practices continued unabated in the schools. While some teachers found
ways to personalize their rele'ons with students, others acted in ways that
only distanced themselves fro.n these same students. These schools failed

----- Page 122 (native) -----
Building New Programs for Students at Risk
117
to shed their culture of failure that had accrued over the years. The result
was that programs designed for at-risk students were too often unable to
generate passion among practitioners because too many professionals did
not believe that educating at-risk youth was possible.
The New Futures schools were unable to find ways of drawing upon
educators' entrepreneurial spirit, as the alternatives did, Most of the New
Futures school systems were not prepared to authorize entrepreneurship
at either the individual teacher level or the building level. The very notion
of an entrepreneurship that might stimulate truly unique variations of
curriculum and school organization was jarring to bureaucratic systems
that were more comfortable with uniformity of procedure and content.
Whatever the variations between and within schools that occurred in the
New Futures systems, they were conceived and implemented from the
organizational top of the system.
Perhaps inventing new schools, especially small ones, is much easier
than restructuring larger ones that already exist. Restructuring existing
schools to serve at-risk students appears to be especially difficult. These
schools tend to have a history of failure and a legacy of unproductive
practices. Developing a vision that challenges this cultural baggage be-
comes a prerequisite if schools are to be successful in generating academic
engagement in at-risk students. The process might begin by breaking such
schools into much smaller units that allow for new identities. Part of the
new identity can be created if educators within the smaller units are seen
as entrepreneurs charged with finding better ways of responding to their
clients. If student work provides both students and teachers with evidence
of success and competence, then there will be inherent rewards to teaching
and learning.
NOTES
1. We base this estimate on frequently cited high school drop-out rates of
about 25 percent, course failure rates in urban middle and high schools that often
exceed 50 percent, and Hodgkinson's (1991) synthesis of data suggesting that about
one third of preschool children are destined for school failure.
2. See, respectively, Shepard and Smith, 1989; Oakes, 1985; Epstein and
Dauber, 1991.
REFERENCES
Epstein, J. L., & Dauber, S. L. (1991). School programs and teacher practices of
parent involvement in inner city elementary and middle schools. Elementary
School Journal, 91, 289-301.

----- Page 123 (native) -----
1 18
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
Foley, I. M., & McConnaughy, S. B. (1982). Towards school improvement: Les-
sons from alternative high schools. New York: Public Education Associatiun.
Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences. New
York: Basic Books.
Hodgkinson, H. (1991). Reform versus reality. Phi Delta Kappan, 73(1), 9-16.
Knapp, M. S., & Shields, P. M. (1990). Reconceiving academic instruction for the
children of poverty. Phi Delta Kappan, 72(10), 753-758.
Levin, H. (1988). Accelerated schools for at-risk students. New Brunswick, NJ:
Center for Policy Research in Education, Rutgers University.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1989). Curricu/um and evaluation
standards for school mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
Newmann, F. M. (1988. Jan,:ary). Can depth replace coverage in the high school
curriculum? Phi Delta Kappan, 69(5), 345-348.
Newmann, F. M. (1991). Linking restructuring to authentic student achievem::nt.
Phi Delta Kappan, 72(6), 458-463.
Oakes, J. (1985). Keeping track: How schools structure inequality. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Resnick, L. B. (1987a). Education and learning lo think. Washington, DC: Na-
tional Academy Press,
Resnick, L. B. (1987b1 Constructing knowledge in school In L. S. Liben (Ed.),
Developmeat and learning: Conflict or corgruence? Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Schorr, L. (1988). Within our reach: Breaking the cycle of disaavantage. New
York: Doubleday.
Shepard, L. A., & Smith M. L. (Eds). (1989) Flunking grades: Research and
policies on retention. Philadelphia: Falmer Press.
Sizer, T. R. (1984)
I-lorac2's compromise: The dilemma of the American high
school. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Slavin, R. E., Madden, N., & Karweit, N. L. (1989). Effective program; for
students at risk. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Wehlage, G. G., Rutter, R. A., Smith, G. A., Lesku, N. L., ,Sr Fmrmdaz, R. R.
(1989). Reducing the rt.sk: Schools as communities of ripport
Falmer Press.

----- Page 124 (native) -----
CHAPTER 5
Cultivating Teacher Engagement:
Breaking the Iron Law of Social Class
Karen Seashore Louis and Bets Ann Smith
As indicated in Chapter 4, increasing numbers of students can be expected
to be disengaged from schooling because they differ substantially from the
white, upper-middle-class students that public secondary schools have
been designed to serve. In increasing numbers of public schools students
are raised in families with a range of cultural heritages and are deeply
affected by low incomes and an absent parent. This demographic shift
poses many problems in developing school membership and authentic
work for these students. This chapter delves more deeply into implications
of this demographic shift for teachers' own engagement with students.
Research literature suggests a strong association between the socineco-
nomic characteristics of students and teacher satisfaction and engagement
with their work. It has been predicted that as the proportion of low-
income families rises, it will be more difficult not only to engage students
in academ'c study, but also to recruit and reLai-i teachers who can teach
them successfully. Why should the concern for student engagement be
extended to engagement of teachers themselves?
Many reformers have attributed the problems of student learning to
poorly prepared teachers, but evidence suggests that an equally if not
more serious problem is an increasing level of teacher detachment and
alienation from their work and students (Corcoran, Walker, & White,
1988; Metz, 1990; National Education Association, 1987). Portraits of
unengaged teachers have appeared in the reform literature (see, for exam-
ple, Powell, Farrar, & Cohen, 1985). In our own study we heard such
teachers described as "bored teachers who just go through th
.L.tbook
and aren't thinking," teachers nicknamed "Mrs. Ditto or Mr. Fj
1p,"
teachers who "taught one year for 30 years," and teachers "who barely
knew their students' names."
119

----- Page 125 (native) -----
120
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
Because teachers' work and students' work are inextricably inter-
twined, teacher alienation is a primary stumbling block to improving
student engagement. From the student's point of view, teacher engage-
ment is a prerequisite for student engagement ("Why work for a teacher
who doesn't really care or make learning stimulating?"). From the teach-
er's point of view, student engagement is critical to teacher investment
("Why waste my time on students who don't try?"). In this sense, teacher
engagement is a critical step in the process of creating schools that increase
student learning opportunities and improve student achievement.1
This chapter explores the development and sustenance of teacher en-
gagement in three innovative schools with large numbers of low-income
students. First we explain in more detail the nature of teacher engagement
and its relationship to student engagement and social class. We then give
an overview of our study and four general factors that help explain levels
of teacher engagement. We present findings on each of these factors and
conclude with how the schools promoted different aspects of teacher en-
gagement.
TEACHER ENGAGEMENT, STUDENT ENGAGEMENT,
AND STUDENTS' SOCIAL CLASS
Teacher and student engagement both involve a psychological invest-
ment in doing good work, but teacher engagement has its own specific
character. It is a teacher's psychological investment in and effort toward
teaching the knowledge, skills, and crafts he or she wishes students to
master. Engagement can be indicated by a variety of behaviors, such as
planning and developing lessons and curriculum, and teaching through
describing, explaining, helping, listening, reflecting, encouraging, and
evaluating. And, just as student engagement involves more than ritualistic
completion of assigned tasks, teacher engagement involves more than
meeting the minimum outlines of assigned duties.
Four distinctive types of teacher engagement can be identified, two
of which focus on general qualities of human relationships in the school,
and two of which focus on specific goals of teaching and learning (Bryk
& Driscoll, 1988; Firestone & Rosenblum, 1988; Newmann, Rutter, 4:Sr
Smith, 1989; Wehlage, Rutter, Smith, Lesko, 15( Fernandez, 1989).
1. Engagement with the school as a social unit. This form of engagement
reflects a sense of community and personal caring among adults within
the school and promotes integration between personal life and work
life. We see this form of engagement among teachers who "wouldn't
want to work at any other school," teachers who refer to peers and

----- Page 126 (native) -----
Cultivating Teacher Engagement
121
students as friends and family, teachers who attend after-hours school
events as often as they can, and teachers who are quick to rally together
if faced with a troubling event.
2. Engagement with students as unique whole individuals rather than
only as vessels to be filled with specific, predetermined bodies of knowl-
edge. Teachers demonstrate this type of engagement when they lead
classes in ways that acknowledge and respond to students' thoughts
and knowledge, listen to students' ideas, involve themselves in students'
personal as well as school lives, and in general make themselves avail-
able to students needing support or assistance. Many types of formal
and informal coaching, sponsoring, mentoring, and counseling activi-
ties are additional examples of engagement with students.
3. Engagement with academic achievement. Curriculum writing and de-
velopment, sharing with other teachers ideas and experiences about
teaching as a craft, making creative use of class time, expressing high
expectations for performance, providing useful feedback to students,
and actively considering how students are assessed are all ways teachers
can be engaged in their students' achievement.
4. Engagement with one's subject and the body of knowledge needed to
carry out effective teaching. Particularly in secondary schools teachers
need to keep current in their content fields and incorporate new
subject-related ideas into their classrooms. Expressing one's personal
passion for a subject, seeking ways to connect the subject to students'
lives, being involved in professional organizations, and pursuing ad-
vanced degrees in ones field are examples of this form of engagement.
The four types of engagement are distinct, but distinct structures or
activities are not necr.ssarily required to sustain each dimension of engage-
ment. For example, a staff development retreat focusing on cooperative
learning can support both the development of a sense of community
among adults and a focus on student achievement.
When they enter the profession, most teachers are engaged with their
work on several of these dimensions. But over time, engagement is almost
always affected by the presence and absence of various demands on teach-
ers, including the demands teachers place on themselves and the demands
of their students, their peers, their principal, and students' parents. While
demands may be stressful, they can also energize: Students who ask for
more and parents who involve themselves in the school create an environ-
ment of high expectations for teachers. In order for engagement to be
sustained, however, teachers (like students) need positive reinforcers such
as a sense of membership in the school and the opportunity to invest
oneself in authentic work.
Some popular case studies have shown that even in the most unprom-

----- Page 127 (native) -----
sr
122
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
ising contexts where demands on teachers are low and positive rein-
forcers limited some forms of teacher engagement remain high among
some teachers (Freedman, 1990; Kidder, 1989). But teacher engagement
anchored in only a few of these dimensions will not necessarily serve
students well. A staff may be highly engaged with the social community
of adults in the school, but may neglect students and their achievement.
Or, they may become so obsessed with the achievement of some students
that they neglect others. While each form of engagement may be desir-
able, all need to be present for teaching to remain vital and effective for
all students.
As we shall see below, the patterns of demands and positive rein-
forcers often vary in schools of different socioeconomic climates in ways
that penalize teachers of lower-income students. Thus, redesign of school
organization so teachers working with disadvantaged children enjoy the
same opportunities for engagement as those who work with more advan-
taged children is as fundamental to improving education as is altering
curriculum.
The connection between teacher and student engagement and social
class is empirically demonstrated in recent qualitative studies and those
based on large-scale survey data.2 Dworkin (1987), for example, reports
that teachers in schools with students from low socioeconomic back-
grounds are more likely to be burned out and disengaged, while Purkey,
Rutter, and Newmann (1986-87) show that teachers in urban schools
(presumably with higher proportions of children from lower socioeco-
nomic contexts) are less satisfied with their work.
Metz's (1990; Metz & Colleagues, 1988) study of eight "ordinary"
high schools, which preceded this study, is most pertinent to this chapter.
Metz used detailed descriptions of three of the schools to demonstrate the
thesis that the socioeconomic characteristics of the community affect not
only the characteristics of students, but also the behaviors of parents in
relation to teachers, the socioeconomic and educational characteristics of
teachers who are recruited to the schools, the behavior of the principal,
and staff expectations of the role that education will play in the lives of
children. We briefly summarize the schools studied by Metz.
High SES Community
Cherry Glen, an affluent suburban school, had active parents who
intervened frequently when grades dropped and demanded much of
teachers. Most of the student population performed at or above national
norms, worked hard, and took school seriously. The principal hired "the
best" largely middle-class teachers with advanced degrees from good
universities and reinforced the value of hard work and ingenuity among
$

----- Page 128 (native) -----
Cultivating Teacher Engagement
123
teachers. The image presented by Metz is almost like that of a law firm:
hierarchical, but with a clear reward structure for the right kind of work.
Teachers were involved in students' learning, albeit with a preference
for higher-ability groups, where student engagement is much stronger.
Challenging students, hard work, and creative teaching were all valued
and promoted by policies that gave teachers autonomy in how they de-
signed and conducted their classes.
Middle SES Community
Pine Hill, an established blue-collar subuib, was markedly different.
First, the community wanted to keep education costs low. Parents wantcd
their children to graduate, "but they were less concerned about the level
of challenge they were exposed to, or the content of the curriculum"
(Metz, 1990, p. 53). Teachers felt little pressure to create a stimulating
classroom environment and often used over half of the classroom time for
"homework" or relatively unsupervised solitary activities. Curriculum and
instructional emphasis was on learning values, such as respect for author-
ity, rather than content, which most believed to be uninteresting to adoles-
cents. Teachers were largely working class in origin. Their lives outside
school involved significant gender segregation, finding gratifications they
did not receive from teaching, and a skepticism abcut the value of intellec-
tual work. Skepticism about the value of knowledge and intellectual in-
quiry was high for many, such as this (biology) teacher.
I think biology is probably one of the most useless courses in the world.
What do you remember about biology!
. . Some teachers think that
their subject matter is so godly important that if these kids don't get this
idea that I'm trying to put across, they're not going to be better peo-
ple .
.
. I know that if I would give the kids a test on what I taught six
weeks ago, they'd all flunk it. (Metz, 1988, p. 10)
Although the principal supported the few teachers who had new ideas for
courses or curriculum, he directe .1 his main efforts at maintaining good
relationships between the community and the school. Teachers who val-
ued learning did their best to lead productive classes, but their engage-
ment came from isolated personal commitments sustained with little sup-
port from those around them.
Lower SES Community
Demands and value orientations within low-income schools can pre-
sent contrasting pictures. Those who teach in lower-income areas are sub-
jected to more problems of value conflict and ambiguity. .n one of the

----- Page 129 (native) -----
124
Student Engagement and Achievement In American Secondary
:hooIs
schools studied by Metz, a largely African-American teaching staff worked
with fervor to deliver a traditional college preparatory program, including
calculus and physics, to low-performing students with tremendous educa-
tional and personal difficulties. Yet these standards did not elicit student
engagement and achievement. Many students failed, and few would go
to college. In another school, a predominantly white group of teachers,
overwhelmed by a student body that they perceived to be declining in
aptitude and interest, barely tried to deliver educational content above
the most basic skills. Both of theze responses were dysfunctional. In the
first case, the teachers denied the irrelevance of the curriculum to the
students' abilities and life circumstances, while in the second, teachers
abandoned the goal of pushing students to do their best.
The "Iron Law of Social Class"
The policy and research literature suggests three parts to what we
call an "iron law of social class"; namely (1) the higher the socioeconomic
status of the community, the higher the value placed on education; (Z) the
higher the value placed on education, the more the system will press
teachers to perform; (3) the greater the pressure on teachers to deliver, the
higher the performance of the students.
The policy implications of this line of argument are clear. Since low
performance of students in lower socioeconomic communities is largely
the fault of the community itself, the only way to change this is to pressure
teachers to have "high levels of expectation" in contrast to the community
(see also Hallinger & Murphy, 1986).
In traditionally organized schools where teachers' professional lives
focus almost exclusively within their classrooms, it is not surprising that
teachers who work with the most responsive and quickest students
pre-
dominantly those of the middle classes and the higher tracks
feel most
rewarded, since both positive reinforcement and demands are high. The
arguments of Metz (1988) and Cohen (1988) that teachers are dependent
on their students for their professional satisfactions are empirically accu-
rate. Yet the point may obscure how school organization can affect teacher
engagement.
AN ALTERNATIVE PERSPECTIVE:
OVERVIEW OF THE STUDY
Our study began with a different perspective. We realized that it is
not possible to change students' social origins. However, it may be possible
to change the relationship between social class and teacher commitment

----- Page 130 (native) -----
Cultivating Teacher Engagement
125
and engagement by creating organizational conditions that make it easier
for teachers to experience success with students. The main point of our
research was to study this prospect, that is,
see how to release teachers
from an unhealthy "ultimate dependenc;" on their students by irp:Teasing
the alternative sources of satisfaction and fulfillment.3 Thus, rather than
viewing teacher engagement solely as a function of student engagement,
we sought out the connections between teacher engagement and the orga-
nizational conditions of the school. In doing so we acknowledged that
success with students is fundamental to teacher satisfaction. We thought
it was also critical to acknowledge the range of professional and organiza-
tional conditions in schools that can provide additional sources of demands
and reinforcements.
From 1987 to 1990, we conducted research in eight public, nonselec-
tive high schools actively involved in efforts to improve working conditions
for teachers. We deliberately chose a diverse sample of community envi-
ronments. One school was in a predominantly affluent community; three
schools one suburban, one rural, and one urban
were in mixed socio-
economic communities of middle-class status over all, and four served com-
munities where over half of the student body came from disadvantaged
homes, including students from poor, minority, and immigrant families.
In these latter schools, between 55 and 65 percent of the students were
considered disadvantaged by the principal.'
In each school, two members of the research staff spent five to six days
observing classrooms, interviewing teachers individually and in groups,
interviewing groups of students, "shadowing" the principal, and attending
routine meetings and events, ranging from lunch to evening activities.
The focus of both interviews and observations was to gather information
about the impact of district and school organization on teachers' work
lives (see Louis, Purkey, Rosenblum, Rossmiller, SE Smith, 1991, for a
more detailed discussion of methodologies).
A Profile of the Schools and Their Communities
To illustrate how schools serving the disadvantaged can secure for
their teachers working conditions similar to those of schools serving more
advantaged students, we focus on three of the schools, referred to here by
pseudonyms.' These three schools had the least affluent student bodies of
all the eight schools in the study, based both on principal reports and our
own observations. However, when we analyzed survey data on engage-
ment with teaching, these schools reported levels of engagement for the
average staff member that were as high as or higher than the more affluent
schools. Specific survey measures of teacher engagement are shown in
Figure 5.1.6 Our point is not that these teachers prefer the professional
JL

----- Page 131 (native) -----
126
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
Figure 5.1
Ten Survey Items Measuring Teacher Engagement
I frequently take on extra tasks or responsibilities that I think will benefit the
school.
I wouldn't want to work in any other school
The reputation and performance of this school are important to me.
I try very hard to show my students that I care about them.
It's important for me to know something about my students' families.
I try to make myself accessible to students even if it means meeting with them
before or after school, during iny prep or free period, etc.
It is important that as teachers we try to ensure that all students master basic
skills and subject-matter coursework.
I am always thinking about ways of improving my courses.
Interdisciplinary classes benefit teachers as well as students.
Given the opportunity, I would take additional college or university courses in the
subject area I teach most often.
Standardized Item Alpha = .66. All items were measured on a six-point scale ranging from
"strongly agree" to "strongly disagree." A total of 26 items were included in the survey
battery, including measures of negative attitudes toward students, availability of resources
nceded for teaching, concerns about safety in the school, etc.
conditions of lower SES schools. In fact, teachers in lower SES schools had
many complaints about working conditions arid their students' behavior.
Nevertheless, in these schools teachers brought more effort, energy, and
hope to their teaching tasks than would be predicted by the "iron law."
City Park Secondary School
City Park is a small, innovative secondary school located in an impov-
erished section of a major northeastern city. Surrounded by a public hous-
ing project, stores, and other tenements, the community is one where
poverty, crime, drugs, and violence touch lives on a daily basis. The school
shares a large 1950s-era building with two other small schools
a common
practice in the district, which allows parents and students to choose which
school to attend. Although the immediate neighborhood is largely His-
panic, the school aims for a diverse enrollment and has largely succeeded:

----- Page 132 (native) -----
Cultivating Teacher Engagement
127
Its student body is approximately 45 percent African-American, 35 per-
cent Hispanic, and 20 percent white, with a broad range of academic
ability.
Opened in 1984, the school is rooted in the progressive education
tradition of John Dewey and Lillian Weber, and is structured around the
following principles: minimization of bureaucracy; a humanistic, open
environment characterized by equal respect for staff and students (stu-
dents do not need passes to go to the bathroom and students and staff are
both addressed by first name); no tracking; an integrated core curriculum
planned and developed by teams of teachers; significant teacher team
plar- ing time; instructional/learning strategies oriented around "essential
qu,
ions" and critical thinking; parent involvement; and an overall sense
of amily. City Park is a member of the Coalition of Essential Schools.
The school enrolls around 600 students. The organization consists of three
divisions (7-8, 9-10, and 11-12), which are further divided into houses of
about 80 students. There are no traditional departments, but within each
division there is a math-science team and a humanities team, each consist-
ing of about five teachers. Teams meet weekly for two hours and are the
primary unit for developing and coordinating curriculum, sharing ideas,
and discussing what has and has not worked. Scheduling is nontraditional,
with students and teachers meeting for two-hour blocks in cross-grade
groups (e.g., 9-10). Students stay with the same teachers for two years.
There is also a daily one-hour advisory period, where every teacher as-
sumes guidance responsibility for thr.: academic and personal growth of 12
to 15 students.
Brigham Alternative High School
Like City Park, Brigham was designed to provide an alternative
school experience to any student wishing to enroll. Established four years
ago in a small southern city, the school sought to emphasize "open educa-
tion" values, stressing a more interdisciplinary curriculum and student
responsibility for learning. For several years Brigham was used as a
"dumping ground" by other district schools, and it has continued to strug-
gle to shed its image as a place where other schools send their most trou-
bled and least successful students. Eighty percent of the student body is
African-American, and, with the exception of the few students who are
children of the school's teachers, most are from working-class or very poor
families.
The school's evolving educational philosophy is based on commitment
to experiential and cooperative learning, mixed-ability grouping, a hu-
manistic curriculum, and a family-like environment. However, the ability

----- Page 133 (native) -----
128
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
of the school to implement its ideas fully is impeded by the requirement
that it follow the rigid outcomes-based district curriculum and testing
program, known as CBOK (Common Body of Knowledge), as well as a
local culture that still strongly supports "paddling" as a form of student
discipline.
The organization of the school has traditional components, with de-
partment heads, 50-minute periods, and age grouping. Teachers in some
departments allocate teaching by grades, so that a small number of teach-
ers are familiar with all the students in a grade. thus permitting easier
monitoring of student performance and personal problems. The school
also uses an advisory, which is expected to provide both guidance and
opportunities for more personal interaction between students and teach-
ers, and has several committees to deal with shared governance.
Hillside High Scl-ool
Hillside is located only a few miles from a medium-sized "border
state" city, but it is in a hilly, rural setting that appears remarkably bu-
colic. Although the community is one of the oldest in the state, it never
prospered and remains sparsely settled. Most residents used to work at one
of several large irdustrial complexes close by, but layoffs and plant clos-
ings have created very high levels of unemployment. The educational level
of the community is quite low, and the graduation rate has recently been
only about 65 percent. Of those who graduate, only 30 percent have gone
on to some form of postsecondary education. Three quarters of the student
body are "local rednecks" a term students and staff use freely; one quar-
ter are African-Americans and are bussed in from the nearby city.
Unlike the two previously described schools, Hillside is a long estab-
lished and large school (over 1,000 students) with a mostly traditional
comprehensive curriculum delivered by 13 departments in a six-period
day. Only five years ago Hillside was viewed as one of the worst schools in
the district; now there is a waiting list of teachers who want to transfer
in. For the past four years the school has been involved in major reform
efforts stimulated by a local professional teacher academy's concern with
teacher reform. More recently, the school has become involved with the
Coalition of Essential Schools. Establishing ties with both the local acad-
emy and the Coalition has been approved by a staff vote and is strongly
supported by the principal. The most critical change was the steering
committee, which is composed of elected faculty members, the principal
and assistant principal, a counselor, the athletic director, representatives
from the district's teacher center, students, parents, and an elected mem-
ber of the nonprofessional support staff. The open meetings of this corn-

----- Page 134 (native) -----
Cultivating Teacher Engagement
129
mittee are used to develop directions for program improvement at Hill-
side, and most of the work is carried out in subcommittees. Tie steering
committee has introduced many new programs, such as a aaily period
that is used for teachers to work with students on specific problems or
issues, multidisciplinary curriculum units, and a "9th-Grade bridge,"
which focuses on the development of an interdisciplinary curriculum and
team teaching for a group of approximately one third of the incoming
freshman class.
A Framework for Analyzing Influences on Teacher Engagement
In studying how these schools promote teacher engagement, we con-
sidered each of the following four factors:'
1. The community and district environment of the school. A number of
researchers have argued that life inside schools, particularly schools in
larger districts, is continuously and often negatively affected by local
politics and the district office (Farrar, 1988). Conversely, Louis (1989)
notes that where district and community support is strong, the school
works better" and is more easily able to work on improvement issues;
therefore, one might logically argue that teachers' sense of a "payoff"
from making a commitment would be greater. As noted above, many
hypothesize that the effects of community socioeconomic status are
greater than all others this chapter deals centrally with whether other
factors are at least as important, if not more so.
2. School culture, and particularly teacher culture. Metz (1990) argues
that school and teacher culture tend to conform to local community
norms about education, which are socioeconomically based, and that
where middle-class staffs teach in lower socioeconomic schools, it is
especially difficult to generate both high expectations for achievement
and sensitivity to students' social backgrounds. We were particularly
curious to see whether school and teacher culture in these schools could
break this "iron law" and reveal instead norms of high engagement
and achievement.
3. The leadership of the principal and others in the school. Virtually every
study of schools that function more effectively for students emphasizes
the role of the principal and other leaders in matters such as setting a
tone for what is expected, 9nergizing staff, and creating an order-
ly environment (Brookover, Beady, Flood, Schweitzer, & Wisenbaker,
1979; Wilson & Corcoran, 1988). Louis and Miles (1990) have shown
that certain forms of principal leadership and management are associ-
ated with improvement in working relations among teachers and gen-

----- Page 135 (native) -----
130
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
eral climate. Leadership style would, therefore, also seem to have a
major impact on teachers' willingness to engage.
4. The alternative or unusual structures and activities in the school. This
study was initiated in a period when there was a growing assumption
that schools could be altered to improve teachers' work. Reports such
as those from the Holmes Group (1986) and the Carnegie Forum (1986)
have argued that until the organization surrounding the classroom
and even the classroom and curriculum itself
is changed we can ex-
pect no improvements in our ability to attract and retain the best
teachers. The implied problem is that current work is structured so as
to be alienating rather than engaging. We wanted to learn about the
extent to which innovative structures contributed to teacher engage-
ment.
HOW THREE SCHOOLS PROMOTE TEACHER ENGAGEMENT
We discuss findings in relation to each of the four factors just de-
scribed.
Community and District Context
Community and district contexts can be demanding environments for
urban schools and schools that serve lower socioeconomic communities.
But these three schools didn't simply react to their contexts; they at-
tempted to mold and create them in a variety of ways.
Stressing Challenge and Respect for the Community
Metz (1990) argues that school norms tend to conform to local com-
munity norms about the value and purpose of education, some stressing
challenge, others stressing compliance. City Park, Brigham, and Hillside
have all departed from such mirroring by stressing their own norms about
education's importance. Despite the fact that parent and community sup-
port for educational achievement has often been very weak, the schools
seem to have reconciled two potentially conflicting norms. While being
sensitive to community feelings and respecting parents, they also push
students toward levels of success that may appear to exceed parents' own
initial expectations.
By reaching out to r. arents, the schools established the norm that
parents care about their children's education and deserve to be listened to.
Each of the schools designed conference schedules and locations that were

----- Page 136 (native) -----
Cultivating Teacher Engagement
131
supportive of explicit and clear communication, even bringing in third-
party social workers and counselors to help mediate differences and pro-
viding translators for parents who are not comfortable speaking in En-
glish. The schools also set high standards for parent involvement and
knowledgeability. City Park required parents to visit the school and to
discuss their child with an administrator or teacher before the child was
admitted. They also required parents to come to the school for conferences
if the child was not performing well. Similar requirements and relation-
ships were sought by Brigham and Hillside. Also, all three schools involved
parents in various school committees, including major governance com-
mittees at Hillside.
Negotiating Positive or Minimal District Relations
More often than not, high schools serving low socioeconomic commu-
nities operate within large districts, while those serving mcre advantaged
communities operate in much smaller, more supportive, and less regula-
tory districts. Our case studies suggest that schools serving disadvantaged
students can support teacher engagement by seeking school relationships
with the district office more like those in high socioeconomic communities,
where high schools typically enjoy considerable autonomy. Nevertheless,
the difficulties of achieving better school-to-district relationships should
not
underestimated.
In Brigham, the district office and other schools were generally
viewed as unsupportive and even hostile. Much of this attitude was traced
to the school's beginning, where its "alternative" title was confused with
the regional proliferation of "alternative schools" that were last-chance
institutions for dropouts, disruptive students, or other children who failed
to thrive in a normal school environment. As one teacher said,
This school has had a lot of negative publicity that was unwar-
ranted, and still today a lot of people will be surprised that if
you work at Alternative that we [don't] work in a prison or
something.
In addition to the negative image of the school among fellow educators
and the community at large, Brigham teachers and administrators worked
in a district setting universally perceived to be unfriendly to the goals of
the school and to teachers in general.
I don't feel that teachers are a respected force downtown, within
the district.

----- Page 137 (native) -----
132
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secor.dary Fchook
.
. We are so lucky that, almost by chance, we report to the
Associate Superintendent for junior high schools. He is vippli
tive of what we do [and helps us to get around some of the rules
governing the curriculum], but if we reported to anyolie else we
wouldn't have a chance to try anything that deviated from dis-
trict policy.
To support their contentions, Brigham teachers pointed to their extremely
low salaries, the efforts of the district to develop a "teacher-proof curricu-
lum" in which teachers had virtually no choice about what to teach or
when to teach it, and the lack of money for inservice or professional,
activities. In addition, -esources that many schools take for granted
such
as up-to-date audiovin tl equipment
were not available, and the school's
discretionary budget was minute compared with other schools in our sam-
ple of eight.
Surprisingly, despite these conditions, most teachers reported that the
environment allowed them to come together and build an esprit de corps
that might not have otherwise existed. Many teachers said that their deter-
mination for success increased after a terrible first year during which they
were sent "the rejects" from other schools and shared the building with
another school whose staff was antagonistic.8
I think [the faculty] were strong and I think they were commit-
ted and I think they were very determined that this school was
going to make it come hell or high water, no matter what.
.
.
.
The ability of the school to build itself into a strong community was, in
part, a consequence of the fact that the principal was able to attract and
hire the staff that she wanted, rather than being "sent" teachers from
downtown.
The bureaucratic environment of City Park, despite its location in a
school system noted for its massive and insensitive central structure, was
in many ways more benign. The district in which the school is located
had demonstrated a decade of support for innovative, alternative pro-
gramming. In addition, because it was designated as an alternative school,
City Park had the prerogative to request flexibility in rules such as hiring
practices, class size, and curriculum issues. City Park also benefitted from
the national visibility of its principal. Considerable media publicity for
the school helped to buffer it from district interventions. Thus, although
teachers didn't look at the city school system as an advantage, the district
did not figure heavily in their perception of their work setting. In general,
teachers viewed the district and school system as a "black box" that the

----- Page 138 (native) -----
Cultivating Teacher Engagement
133
principal dealt with effectively, and the community as a turbulent envi-
ronment that posed many hazards for their students.
Finally, district leadership provided Hillside with a powerful catalyst
for heightening teachers' morale and commitment. The district loosened
its requirements on schools and allowed them more individual flexibility
in determining their programs. For example, the district supported Hill-
side's request, made in order to establish the teacher-guided assistance
program, for a schedule that was not in compliance with state mandates.
Furthermore, teachers who worked on new projects were provided both
professional and psychological sustenance from the nearby profersional
academy. During the week that our research team was at Hillside, a 9th
Grade teaching team spent an entire day at the academy building to plan
for several weeks of instruction. There, teachers had access to consulta-
tion, working space, and reference materials. In short, the academy pro-
vided both time and resources to create, develop, and implement new
ideas.
School Site Control
What all three schools sought
and gained to some extent
was con-
trol over several key functions, including the ability (1) to develop an
educational mission specific to their school, (2) to hire staff directly, (3) to
develop their own curriculum and instruction plans, and (4) to design
staff development opportunities accordingly. Having this sense of organi-
zational control improved the sense of membership and ownership among
the school staff. Teachers in all three of these schools emphasized how
important it was for them to be part of a school that pursued a collective
definition of goals and strategies. Released from predetermined condi-
tions, they were freer to develop a school environment and program re-
flecting the educational values they were most committed to. By being
allowed to conduct their own hiring, these schools could employ teachers
who were committed to work with the school's vision rather than against
it. All these benefits helped the schools promote teacher engagement in
their schools as a whole, and in their students' personal and academic
development.
Teacher Culture
All three of the schools share norms that make teachers' work life
different from that in conventional schools. We will limit the discussion
here to norms that seem to have a significant positive impact on teacher
engagement.

----- Page 139 (native) -----
134
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
A Strong Sense of Being in "a School with a Mission"
Teachers in all three schools emphasized how important it was to
them to be part of a school that had (or was striving for) a collective
definition not only of its goals (high achievement) but also of its strategies
for reaching them. A teacher at Brigham spoke for most of her colleagues
when she said,
I had previously taught at the elementary level and I taught
reading on the junior high level. And I was attracted to this
sci nol becaus of the philosophy about reading not being just
one discipline, but covering all the areas.
.
. I was approached
by a faculty member here who knew my philosophy on educa-
tion, plus I had worked with the principal before.
.
. . We both
had the same ideas about education.
In City Park, where the coherence of the pedagogical approach and the
need to develop this approach through teamwork were most forcefully
articulated, the need to subscribe to the sense of mission and to draw
energy from it were often mentioned.
People know that [the team approach] is
.
. . how we are going
to work and they know why. If you want to work in this school,
that is the bottom line.
.
.
. I think [it] makes the job of teaching
a creative experience, and creativity feeds on itself.
And at Hillside, where the faculty were still struggling with the precise
nature of the "special quality" of the school, there was a strong sense of
being engaged in a risky_ but exciting, joint venture. As one physical
education teacher said,
My personal goals, as far as teaching, go along with this school.
Now, not everybody would want to be here, not everybody
would want to teach in [this community].
.
.
. I like the changes
that have come about
.
.
. I like it because we are experiment-
ing. We don't know really where we're going.
.
.
. And after 23
years of teaching, to have that freedom to do some things, and
the fact that I do not work alone anymore, that I work with a
group of people
it's made it so much easier.
Developing or being part of a collective vision of education necessitated
commitment. As one City Park teacher put it, when asked if she would

----- Page 140 (native) -----
Cultivating Teacher Engagement
135
want to teach somewhere else, "There is nowhere else to teach." There
was a "bottom line" either the teachers subscribed to the vision and were
part of the dominant group, or they did not and were viewed as "part of
the minority, the small group that doesn't really see the point." While
teachers can stay in the school and maintain a detachment from the collec-
tive commitment, teachers at Hillside and Brigham reported that it was
hard on the more isolated teachers, some of whom "converted."
One of the things that I have seen happen is that some of the
people who were very negative about the whole deal at the be-
ginning, three or four years ago, that I never thought would
come on board and work on it, have finally come around and
have started working on things because they felt like they've
wanted to and they needed to.
In other words, a mission and vision create social pressures for teachers to
make commitments to the school as a social unit and to the version of
educational excellence that is embodied in the mission.
An Emphasis on Closeness and Helping Among Staff Members
At Brigham, this special quality was often described in terms of fam-
ily imagery.
Sure, this is what we stress here, this family group, this close-
ness. And I don't think we ought to grow (in size).
.
.
. We are
trying to be close to each other [as teachers], and know each
othar.
.
.
.
In City Park and Hillside there was less use of the family imagery to refer
to relationships among adults. However, there was much talk about trust.
When I came here
.
.
. I had to learn a lot. I got a tremendous
amount of help. [The principal] helped me; [another teacher]
with 14 years of experience became my best friend here.
.
.
. I
used to meet him every morning to talk about what we were go-
ing to do and how we were going to do it
.
. and he would
come observe my classes.
At Hillside, similar comments were heard, the most frequent being, "Ev-
eryone here is supportive."

----- Page 141 (native) -----
136
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
An Emphasis on Respect and Caring for Students
The theme of respect and caring as significant aspects of teachers'
work in restructured schools has been extensively developed elsewhere.
The emphasis on caring for students, and the way in which it is inter-
twined with teacher and student engagement, is probably best summa-
rized by a teacher from City Park.
Part of teaching is lending your ego for a kid to learn.
.
.
. If
you are only teaching a subject and not teaching kids what you
are talking about is communicating a subject. I am saying .
.
.
that you may teach a subject well, but that you are only teach-
ing it to the people who can pick it up exactly as you have pre-
sented it. [But] if you are teaching the kids, you see where each
kid is and what their next step is. You have to perceive all of the
differences
.
. . you have to handle the resistance so that they
may make steps for themselves.
.
. . You have to do that, and
that is an engaging process.
In Hillside, students talked openly about teachers' caring.
They're out to help you. They want you to learn. They will also
sit down with you q lot of time, I mean work personally [with
you]. It seems lil
hey'll do it all the time, you know, to make
sure you understand it.
At Brigham, caring was built info the school's vision, which emphasized
the affirmation of individual worth. Brigham teachers saw this as a critical
feature of the school, because it gave them a sense of self-worth as well.
[This school] emphasizes self-worth. And if you can encourage,
or you're successful in helping and enabling, a person to feel
good about themselves and about what they are doing, then the
opportunity for that person to be a successful person is enhanced
significantly. And that's what we're doing here. We are doing
that.
Caring is good for students, of course, but it is also good for teachers.
Caring makes schools into ethical and moral environments, not just arenas
for "getting the job done." Studies of beginning teachers indicate that the
desire to be involved with a profession that has a moral character is a
significant motivation. This is not simply altruism, but the teacher's need
`1, 6

----- Page 142 (native) -----
Cultivating Teacher Engagement
137
to be engaged with work that has significance broader than making a
better widget.
A Demand for Active Problem Solving Among Teachers
This theme arose repeatedly in the three schools. At City Park, one
teacher commented about the way in which the problem-solving focus
was reflected in student-teacher relationships.
The assumption is that the kids are basically trying tc, do the best
that they can, and that might not be so great at a given point in
time, and you try to get everybody together and acknowledge
that there's a problem, and rather than trying to blame some-
one, you try to deal with what the problem is, what are the dif-
ferent factors, and what can we do to change the situation. And
that's the way problems are dealt with, even academically.
It should be noted that at all the schools, it was expected that teachers
would involve themselves in maintaining constructive human relations,
regardless of where they took place:
I used to walk past two kids rolling around on the floor, having
a fight. That wasn't my business, that was up to the security
guards. That doesn't happen at City Park. Everything that hap-
pens is everybody's business. After all, in your house, if your kids
are acting crazy, your husband doesn't wait until you get home!
As a consequence of this strong focus on solving problems at their source,
disciplinary problems were rare.
The problem-solving focus was also articulated in Hillside, where the
emphasis was placed on the responsibility given to teachers to manage
their own environment. As one new teacher explained,
If you have an idea [you go to the principal] and usually, if you
give her your idea she will say, "and how do you plan to put this
idea into action?"
We observed another new teacher making the following remark to her
colleagues in a meeting:
You're all talking about what you want to accomplish at
school.
.
. At every other school I've ever been in they would
1 41

----- Page 143 (native) -----
138
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
be complaining and whining and griping and saying how bad
the administration is. You all are figuring out what you're going
to do
that's good, and it's really different.
'The essence of teachers' remarks was that at Hillside it was okay to com-
plain about something, but only if you had ideas about how to fix it.
Problem solving was emphasized at Brigham, too, although teachers
also stressed that "if the district says no, then it's no." One teacher pointed
out that many of her colleagues "have been in traditional schools where
they feel that they're not going to be heard .
. . so it's just a habit [they
have] of complaining to each other and not doing something about their
concerns." Still, relative to other schools in the district, Brigham teachers
saw themselves as being more active in looking for and solving problems.
My husband, who teaches in one of the other high schools .
.
.
he's surprised that [we] are allowed to make decisions that
stick .
. . you know, about teacher time, teacher responsibil-
ity.
.
.
.
I feel that in this school we have more say than in the other
schools, 80 percent more.
For teachers, the sense of being responsible for unearthing and solving
problems was the most powerful form of empowerment that they encoun-
tered. This sense of influence and responsibility made it difficult for most
to merely teach classes and grade papers without contributing in other
ways to the school and students.
Peer r,-essure to Work
Life in the three schools was more demanding than in most schools
but worth it. As two Brigham teachers said,
The teachers [who] have left here and gone to other places in the
district .
.
. have said "Gosh, I miss it." They go to the room and
they work. And after school the bell rings, they hit the cars.
We have had meetings where we went through cooperative
learning until 5:30 .
.
. but at [school x], no one helped. .
.
And when I worked at [school y]
.
.
. each teacher was out for
themselves.
City Park teachers talked about being exhausted, feeling that the work of
curriculum development and active teaching had no end. But no teacher
n
c)...

----- Page 144 (native) -----
Cultivating Teacher Engagement
139
suggested that the effort made them want to leave. At Hillside, another
teacher commented, "I do a lot more work and spend a lot more hours
here, and I have to get along with a lot more people but I enjoy it more
and so it is worth it."
Why is pressure to work more engaging? Because it is tied to a sense
of doing work that addresses the vision of the school, and because it has
visible payoff in the impacts on students
those that are often viewed as
dull and uninterestcd in school. At Hillside, experienced teachers spoke
with amazement about the differences in working with students now com-
pared with previous years.
The kids we have as juniors this year were 9th graders when
[these changes] first started. They're better behaved, they're
more interested, and they're more willing to learn to do the
kinds of things that help them learn than kids have been before.
My biggest ego booster this year has been several teachers who
have come to me and said, "You know what? I've got some kids
in my class that took your program last year and they are better
prepared than the rest of the kids in the class." That has hap-
pened three or four times from three or four different teachers
and that really makes me feel good.
.
.
.
A lesson that we take away is that the demands that are put upon teachers
by their peers increase engagement because they provide valuable profes-
sional feedback from peers. Instead of being isolated in a classroom, and
depending only on students for feedback, teachers are able to work with
colleagues in ways that make their best work visible. The downside is that
their failures may also be visible, but other norms, especially teachers
helping one another, cushion the potentially negative impact of more ex-
posure.
Teacher Engagement and School Leadership
Having indicated several features of school culture that promote
teacher engagement, the challenge is to identify origins of this positive
culture that might be deliberately influenced. Teacher culture at both
Brigham and City Park was profoundly shaped by the fact that teachers
were hired specifically to work in new schools with a particular mission
and they had chosen to do so. This created a sense of being in a special
place and of working with a special team. At Hillside, on the other hand,
most teachers had worked there for more than a decade. Few experienced

----- Page 145 (native) -----
140
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
a sense of unique mission until recently, but in 1990 teacher engagement
at Hillside was nearly as high as at Brigham and City Park.
The factor that all the schools had in common, however, was a leader-
ship style that promotes engagement. The "leadership factor" was even
more important than we expected. There was consensus that a school with
an ineffective principal was unlikely to be exciting no matter how talented
the staff
and schools became exciting quite rapidly after the arrival of a
supportive principal. The role of the effective principal was described as
one that enables staff to develop the culture described above, while taking
responsibility for other actions as well. Five aspects of leadership seemed
particularly salient in these schools.
Buffering Teachers
Studies of conventional schools emphasize the role of the principal in
buffering the teachers from unwanted outside interventions by parents
(Rossmiller, 1988). In these three schools, however, we have already men-
tioned how the principals emphasize respectful relationships with their
communities regardless of parents' social position or history of support for
education. While parents and community were often invited in, two of
the principals worked hard at buffering their staffs from the demands of
district offices. At Brigham and City Park, located in district contexts that
were not always supportive of the schools' differences and autonomy, the
principals sought to protect their staffs from distracting external demands
and requirements. They recognized teachers' limited energies and strug-
gled to preserve them for students and teaching. Although this was only
partially effective in Brigham, teachers recognized the effort that went
into trying to create an alternative and more professional work life within
a highly centralized and authoritarian district. Simply having a principal
who cared so deeply about protecting teachers increased engagement for
many.
Spending Time on Daily Routines
Leadership in the three schools did not conform to the image of the
efficient executive who participates only in the highest level of policy and
leaves the daily work of the organization to others. Instead, these princi-
pals were visible and were available for spontaneous discussion or problem
solving. They spent time with students and tried to be present at all school
activities. They were in the lunchroom and around the halls, not to disci-
pline, but to gather information. At City Park and Brigham the principals
led student advisory groups. At Hillside we saw the principal personally

----- Page 146 (native) -----
Cultivating Teacher Engagement
141
praising individual students and teachers every day. This emphasis on
the normal routines of school constantly reminded them of their own
importance in the life of their school and students. Obviously, in a big
school like Hillside, the principal cannot know everything. But even there
faculty commented on her willingness to balance knowledge with empow-
erment.
She keeps the staff together
.
.
. she does facilitate wha 'f. we
want to do. Theie are so many things going on in this building
that even she admits that she no longer can keep up with what's
going on. But what's really neat about [our principal] is that she
trusts our professionalism so much that
.
. . even if she's not
aware of every small detail, it': okay.
Delegating and Empowering
Promoting conditions t".lat acknowledge the professional capabilities
and judgments of teachers was another quality these principals shared.
Principals who create healthy environments for teachers "make teachers
invent solutions to problems they aren't the only problem solver." The
effective principal "can leave the building without things falling apart or
hitting snags, and has staff empowered to respond to crises." At Hillside,
the following comment was typical:
She believes in shared decision making which is exactly what she
says! If the faculty votes on something, she does everything she
can, even if she disagrees with it, to put it through.
At City Park, the philosophical conviction was to empower the team
rather than the individual teacher. Communal decisions prevailed (even
when the administrators were not enthusiastic). It was up to the principal
and other individuals in leadership roles to implement collective reso-
lutions, with some autonomy and flexibility. Brigham was the slight
exception here, since teachers were well aware that the principal's abil-
ity' to support decisions made by faculty was limited by strong central
control.
These leaders also recognized risk-taking as part of problem solving,
and they encouraged teachers to take those risks. To stretch professionally,
teachers must take risks in the classroom. For example, they promoted no
single formula for maximizing student engagement. Classes that seek to
make learning meaningful, appropriate, and fun require new ideas; an
atmosphere of risk-taking allows teachers to try new approaches.

----- Page 147 (native) -----
142
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
Confronting Unengaged Teachers
A clear and direct way of promoting teacher engagement is to require
changes in teachers who do not invest themselves along the four dimen-
sions outlined at the beginning of this chapter. Teachers are inspired to
work hard by those around them, and over and over again the teachers in
these schools stressed the positive impact of a principal's personal willing-
ness to confront bad teaching. The schools provided a variety of supportive
strategies to help less effective teachers improve, including mentor teach-
ers, an environment that invited teachers to visit one another's classes
and help one another, and staff development opportunities. For example,
Brigham's principal worked with several teachers who had difficulty
changing to a teaching style that minimized lecturing and teacher-
centered instruction. This ultimately encouraged one teacher to leave,
but for others it created a process that enabled them to make significant
improvements. At City Park, some teachers experienced anxiety about
their success with the advisories, but the assistant principal put a great
deal of energy into sharing his knowledge about and experiences with
dealing with students more personally. Still, if it was clear that a teacher
was unable to develop supportive relationships with students, he or she
did not return the ne, year.
Providing Leadership About Values
Teachers agreed that the principal set the tone for developing a vision
and a clear value orientation for the school. It is important for the princi-
pal to understand and reflect the best in community ethical standards and
values, and to "make clear what is valued
don't keep faculty guessing
about what is important." Principals' articulation of strong values was
most visible in Brigham and City Park, where each principal also founded
the school based on a particular educational philosophy. In both cases,
that philosophy emphasized the dimensions of engagement we discussed
and was premised on eliminating teacher isolation through creating oppor-
tunities for collaborative work. In large and well-established Hillside, the
principal's influence on values was more subtle, but still acknowledged by
all teachers, particularly with regard to increasing parent involvement,
focusing on interdisciplinary curriculum development, and caring for stu-
dents.
Teacher Engagement and School Organization
These principals encouraged engagement in additional ways by help-
ing to initiate organizational changes that reinforced (or revived) the

----- Page 148 (native) -----
Cultivating Teacher Engagement
143
staff's commitments to teaching. Organizational changes attended not
simply to instructional issues. Instead, a variety of teachers' needs figured
heavily in administrative priorities.
Creating Structures to Promote Teacher Decision Making
The principals of these schools went beyond informal, open-door dis-
cussions and problem solving. They also built formal decision-making
structures. Although teachers valued informal opportunities to give opin-
ions or make suggestions, formal decision-making bodies were important
symbols of their professional status in the school. At Brigham a teacher
commented,
We have the opportunity to influence things that are going on,
such as electing the assistant principal. We have the opportunity
to come up with meaningful plans and implement them.
At City Park the faculty saw the entire school structure as being designed
for empowerment.
We are a decision-making school. We work as a whole school,
we work .
.
. within our team and .
. . within our classrooms
where even kids are allowed to make some decisions about how
things are to be done.
At Hillside, the steering-group structure worked well for teachers because
it was tied to the kinds of curriculum renewal that were at the heart of
their interests. Thus, it was the teacher-designed task forces that won
their real commitment of energy. Brigham teachers were empowered by a
formal Shared Governance Committee with authority to hire administra-
tors and teachers and set policy. In a district that gave the school limited
autonomy, they also valued the informal "Working It Out" committee,
which worked to solve smaller problems before they escalated creating,
in the process, a sense that they controlled the school.
Creating Structures to Promote Collaboration
In all three schools, teachers attributed high levels of engagement to
organizational structures that permitted them to spend more time with
each other. This not only strengthened personal bonds, but also infused
new enthusiasm about instruction. City Park's schedule provided teams
with a weekly two-hour meeting in which they developed curriculum,
teaching strategies, and student assignments. The schedule reflected the
A-^
.
::::k)

----- Page 149 (native) -----
144
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
value the school placed on teachers' own engagement with their academic
program.
In my other school, what I was good at, I stayed good at. What
I wasn't good at, I never improved at.
.
.
. I taught a self-
contained class, and believe me, self-contained really means
self-contained.
.
.
. I really could have been in the building all
by mysel:. There were never times when you could get together
and discuss issues with other teachers, and if your class was
quiet, you were left alone.
At Hillside collaboration usually revolved mound task force work. In Brig-
ham, due to lack of resources and the school's inability to change district
schedules, collaboration was more informal and typically involved smaller
numbers of teachers, except for the school's strong staff development work
with cooperative learning. Nevertheless, it was expected that teachers
would stay after school for collaborative development work.
The reduction in isolation was apparent in all settings. A Brigham
teacher said,
I have found .
.
. professional collegiality presented here that
my husband does not benefit from even though he's been at his
school for 20 years.
.
.
. I mean, I have teachers on their off pe-
riod come by and sit in my classroom who are not even in the
English department. .
.
. I don't know of that ever happening
[elsewhere] because in the other schools your room is your plo-
main ...... You don't enter my room without my permission"
type of thing.
.
.
.
A Hillside staff member pointed to the collaboraticnengagement link.
We work together on so many things (tJecause of the steering
committee). And one of the things that has opened up is that if I
want to do something within math, there are teachers here that I
know I can go to and they will help me teach that in my class-
room.
In City Park, the principal's work was based on a philosophy of the need
for collaboration, tying it to both teacher engagement and student engage-
ment.

----- Page 150 (native) -----
Cultivating Teacher Engagement
145
You must remove teachers from isolation and make learning ex-
citing. To make learning exciting for students, you must make
learning exciting for teachers, because when learning is exciting
for both teachers and students, kids can't get lost.
Creating Structures to Promote Professional Development
Collegiality boosts engagement in part because it increases interper-
sonal knowledge and the "family" feeling. More important, however, is
when collegiality is tied directly to the development of professional compe-
tence. At Brigham, where the district controlled staff development days
and the school had few resources of its own, the opportunities seemed, on
the surface, meager However, for most of the teachers, simply teaching
at Brigham was a learning experience. With few exceptions teachers had
not engaged in "open education" or used cooperative learning, and they
were called upon, as a group, to learn to do things differently. As they
began to work together on this task, they also realized that they needed
more collective reflection on these instructional issues.
It's been sort of a grope in the dark. But the last year or so we
have had cooperative learning workshops. When we got the
magnet school grant we were able to bring people in to the
workshop with us.
.
. . But we do need to set up some type of
program where we bring teachers together, where we have them
visit other classrooms right at the beginning of the year and do
some things over the summer.
At Hillside, with its enormous resources and new enthusiasm for change,
each day was viewed as an occasion to learn from others.
There is tremendous opportunity to develop your skills and
knowledge [in part] because of the collegiality that is so very
prevalent. I mean, if you want to do it, there are people in this
building that will do it with you. If you just want to sit back and
be an observer, they'll let you come in and observe.
Another remarked that
Probably the nicest thing about being here at this school is the
opportunity to use and/or develop skills and knowledge. And we
do a lot of inservice giving. I mean, a lot of our faculty members
give inservices to others.

----- Page 151 (native) -----
146
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
Both Hillside and City Park viewed their school-wide retreats as critical
structures for both individual and collective development. Yet, in none
of the schools were the days officially dedicated to staff development as
important as the provision of more ad hoc or semi-planned development
opportunities. The importance of continuing experimentation and skill
development to engagement was best summari7ed by a teacher from City
Park.
We're not always doing the same thing. There's always some-
thing new to be thinking about.
.
.
. It encourages you to think
about issues, to grapple with important questions.
Creating Structures to Improve Curriculum
At the beginning of this chapter we briefly described some unengaged
teachers and how, in ordinary schools, teachers can spend their energies
on curricula of questionable benefit to their students. In one case teachers
taught a traditional college preparatory curriculum to students who
lacked basic skills; in another teachers were so frustrated by declining
student engagement that they often taught nothing but basic skills.
Our study suggests that allowing and supporting teachers to write
curricula specifically for the students they work with can increase many
forms of engagement. Autonomy over curriculum was a feature in City
Park and Hillside; Brigham has only recently been released from rigid
district controls. Even at Brigham, however, teachers spoke of how they
worked hard to make [the curriculum] ours." For example, a group of
history and English teachers found that they could make district-assigned
curricula more exciting for themselves and their students by merging the
two departments into an interdisciplinary whole.
In most cases, teachers developed curricula, units, lesson plans, and
instructional designs in teams. Curriculum development and discussion of
instruction were the central purpose of City Park's weekly team meetings.
At Hillsiee, both department and c:oss-department curriculum develop-
ment teams
common. We have already described how collaborative
group experiences benefit teachers. Beyond that, curriculum writing in-
volved teachers in thinking about and discussing fundamental issues about
the structure of knowledge and its relation to learning. They calculated
what level of knowledge and what kind of instruction were best for the
specific students they taught. That process engaged teachers with their
students, with the academic program of the school, with the craft of
teaching, and with the subject they taught.

----- Page 152 (native) -----
Cultivating Teacher Engagement
1 47
CONCLUSIONS
At City Park a teacher told us of a visit to her class by a Shakespearean
actor: "This guy
.
. . transformed my class in a way I could never have
done. I was overawed by how good he was with my kids.
.
.
. He had one
of my kids standing on her head!" Perhaps all of us dream of schools full of
such people, but the prospect of transforming schools through exceptional
charisma is unrealistic. Such people are rare. As this teacher said, "You
would run out of them pretty quickly!" And even the most talented teach-
ers can burn out if they are dependent for support only on their individual
personal resources.
It is also a mistake to allow teachers to depend only on students as a
source of external support and feedback. Doing so puts thousands of teach-
ers in frustrating and lonely work environments, with dim prospects for
high teacher engagement. At City Park, Brigham, and Hillside we saw
teachers who energetically invest in the personal and academic progress of
their students, even though most will not go to college. A variety of colle-
gial, administrative, and structural supports help them remain engaged.
Taking these examples seriously, we can think about how to change other
schools to encourage teacher engagement.
Teachers' engagement with the school as a socnl unit or community
is intensified most profoundly when there is a collective sense of vision or
purpose about education and the specific students they serve. The impor-
tance of individual purpose and motivation shoul,.: rot be underestimated,
but the schools suggest that a supportive culture within the school can
compensate significantly for the lower demands from community and par-
ents that occurred in City Park, Brigham, and Hillside. Knowledgeable
leaders play a pivotal role in establishing such a vision, but a range of
planning and decision-making opportunities can quickly involve staff in
doing the same. Autonomy from district mandates and support ive district
relations can facilitate developing vision, but may not be essential. At
Brigham, staff often saw their district as a hindrance, but received enough
support from each other and their principal to sustain the aspirations they
held about how best to serve their students. The range of diversity within
a student body also affected how schools put together their guiding princi-
ples and values. At City Park and Brigham, it was important to unify the
whole school program around specific beliefs and practices about students
and teaching. At Hillside, where the student body (and the staff) was
much more diverse, teachers benefitted by being encouraged to develop a
slightly more diverse set of programs and structures so the varying needs
of students could be served.
157

----- Page 153 (native) -----
148
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
Engagement with student achievement is also nourished by opportu-
nities for teachers to collaborate both on school-wide decisions and on
curriculum and instruction. Too often, collaborative activities attend only
to the marginal necessities of school life, such as paperwork, purchasing,
or staff parties. At the three schools, teachers participated as a whole staff
and in smaller groups in decisions regarding the fundamental issues of the
school: the qualities of individuals to be hired as teachers, the abilities
and needs of the students, the nature of teacher-student relationships, the
content of the curriculum and the methods of instruction, and the setting
or abolishing of policies. Professional dialogue over these tasks builds own-
ership and empowerment of the classroom in ways that "zoning of deci-
sions" (Johnson, 1990)
in which teachers make individual decisions
about how they teach, but defer to administrators about policy matters
does not. Collaboration also contributes to teachers' engagement with
achievement because t provides opportunities for teachers to support and
give feedback, which they may not always get from their students. Fi-
nally, opportunities to develop curricuia and instructional plans specifi-
cally for the students they serve allow teachers to assess an appropriate
level of challe ge for their students, increasing the likelihood of student
engagement in the work.
Engagement with students as whole individuals is expedited by struc-
tures that allow teachers to interact with students more informally and in
smaller groups. Advisories that emphasized a special bond between each
student and at least one adult in the building were a feature of each of
these case study schools. At City Park, the block schedule reduced the
number of students with whom teachers worked with to around 60, thus
further supporting more personalized interaction. Hillside sought a similar
dynamic for some of its students through its own block programs. In
addition to structures, we also found a general ethic of care for students.
This cultural norm acknowledged the links between students' emotional
well-being and their readiness to learn, and emphasized respect and con-
cern for students' lives as a whole.
Engagement with subject matter took a somewhat different twist in
the three schools, as compared with more typical high schools. The adage
that "elementary teachers teach students, high school teachers teach sub-
jects" would not reflect the priorities of these schools. Many teachers
stayed current with developments in their field through participation in
local and national associations, yet it was clear that their engagement with
their specific subject was often subordinated to an interest in providing a
more interdisciplinary curriculum. Teachers also tried to keep their focus
on what worked best for their particular students, even if that meant
abandoning a personal passion to lecture on a favorite topic. Some teach-
153
a.

----- Page 154 (native) -----
Cultivating Teacher Engagement
149
ers, for example, concluded that students learned more by analyzing a
historical event in small groups than by having a teacher explain a major
theory. There is little doubt that making these changes required teachers
to give up some of their personal attachments to subject matter: One
teacher called it "lending your ego." But the improved opportunities to
see students learning made the trade-offs worthwhile.
The relationship between teacher engagement and organizational
leadership, culture, and structure is not simple. But the organizational
reforms accomplished by these schools demonstrate that schools serving
disadvantaged students can sustain levels of teacher engagement compara-
ble to those in schools with more favorable socioeconomic circumstances.
We acknowledge that the success of these three schools is not easy to
reproduce, and it depends in part on securing autonomy from district
mandates and on the skills and extraordinary energies of the schools' tal-
ented administrators and teachers. But we did find that schools serving
disadvantaged children can make changes that positively affect teacher
engagement. Although communities did not pressure these schools to per-
form, high demands for teacher performance and engagement were gener-
ated from within the schools. The schools we studied successfully freed
teachers from an involuntary dependence on students by providing a
richer array of feedback and rewards, but they also empowered teachers
to make voluntary investments in their personal success with students.
Teache .s in these schools gave themselves freely to the task of instruction
and student achievement
but had resources to turn to if classroom suc-
cess was not immediate or as profound as they hoped. This is, perhaps,
the foundation that any restructured school must build in order to break
the "iron law of social class."
NOTES
1. This proposition has received strong support in recent analyses. For exam-
ple, Bryk and Thum (1989) showed that schools in which teachers exhibit higher
levels of engagement and commitment were less likely to have high rates of student
absenteeism and dropouts. Wehlage, Rutter, Smith, Lesko, and Feriandez (1989)
provided case studies of programs staffed by engaged teachers who were successful
in retaining and improving the achievement of students who are at risk. The
"effective schools" research also suggests strong relationships between schoolwide
teacher engagement with students and student achievement (Brookover, Beady,
Flood, Schweitzer, dz Wisenbaker, 1979; Wilson & Corcoran, 1988),
2. For qualitative studies, see Firestone and Rosenblum (1988) and Metz
(1990). Quantitative analyses include Brookover, Beady, Flood, Schweitzer, and
Wisenbaker (1979); Bryk, Lee, and Smith (1990); L workin (1987); and Purkey,
153

----- Page 155 (native) -----
150
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
Rutter, and Newmann (1986-87). See Hurn (1985) for a review of earlier empiri-
cal literature.
3. This is hardly a novel idea in the literature on organizational manage-
ment. In his 1938 classic, The Functions of the Executive, Chester Barnard coun-
seled top administrators to avoid simplistic ideas about the importance of wages
as a motivator and to be aware of the need to create conditions that maximized
other incentives, such as the desire for meaningful work, the importance of valued
social relationships on the job, and the need for participation. Yet, in education
these ideas have rarely been applied to teachers' work and the problems of educa-
tional performance.
4. In giving estimates, principals were asked to take into consideration not
only the usual indicators of eligibility for free lunch or other services, but also
other information such as home visits, awareness of parents' employment status,
and so forth. Most of the principals maintained that the official statistics underesti-
mated poverty among the students, because many families, particularly immi-
grants, were unwilling to divulge relevant information.
5. Case accounts were completed in all three schools. City Park Secondary
School was prepared by Sheila Rosenblum and Bets Ann Smith. Brigham High School
was prepared by Stewart Purkey and Karen Seashore Louis. Hillside High School
was prepared by Dick Rossmiller and Sheila Rosenblum.
6. Elsewhere (Louis, 1991), we explain procedures for estimating levels of
teacher engagement in schools.
7. See Louis and Smith (1990) for more details on the framework.
8. This is almost a classic case of the sociological observation that groups
under attack from the outside often show higher levels of internal solidarity.
However, as we will go on to point out, simply being attacked is not enough
leadership, cultural cohesiveness, and other structural supports are necessary.
REFERENCES
Brookover, W. B., Beady, C., Flood, P., Schweitzer, J., & Wisenbaker, J. (1979).
School social systems and student achievement: Schools can make a differ-
ence. New York: Praeger.
Bryk, A. S., & Driscoll, M. E. (1988). The high school as community: Contextual
influences and consequences for students and teachers. Madison: National
Center on Effective Secondary Schools, University of Wisconsin.
Bryk, A. S., Lee, V. E., & Smith, J. B. (1990). High school organization and its
effects on teachers and students: An interpretive summary of the research. In
W. H. Clune & J. F. Witte (Eds.), Choice and control in American educa-
tion: Vol. 1. The theory of choice and control in American education (pp.
135-226). Philadelphia: Falmer Press.
Bryk, A. S., & Thum, Y. M. (1989). The effects of high school organization on
dropping out: An exploratory investigation. New Brunswick: Center for Pol-
icy Research in Education, Rutgers, State University of New Jersey.
I C

----- Page 156 (native) -----
Cultivating Teacher Engagement
151
Carmgie Forum on Education and the Economy. (1986). A nation prepared:
Teachers for the 21st century. New York: Carnegie Forum.
Cohen, D. K. (1988). Teaching practice: Plus ca change
.
.
. (No. 88-3). East
Lansing, MI: National Center for Research on Teacher Education, Michigan
State University.
Corcoran, T. B., Walker, L. J., & White, J. L. (1988). Working in urban schools.
Washington, DC: Institute for Educational Leadership.
Dworkin, A. (1987). Teacher burnout in the public schools. Albany: SUNY Press.
Farrar, E. (1988). Environmental contexts and the implementation of teacher
and school-based reforms: Competing interests. Paper presented at the an-
nual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New Or-
leans.
Firestone, W., & Rosenblum, S. (1988). The alienation and commitment of stu-
dents and teachers in urban high schools: A conceptual framework. Educa-
tional Evaluation and Policy Quarterly, 10, 285-300,
Freedman, S. (1990). Small victories: The real world of a teacher, her students,
and their school. New York: Harper & Row.
Hallinger, P., & Murphy, J. F. (1986). The social context of effective schools.
American Journal of Education, 3, 328-355.
Holmes Group. (1986). Tomorrow's teachers. East Lansing, MI: Author.
Hum, C. (1985). The limits and possibilities of schooling. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Johnson, S. M. (1990). Teachers, power and school change. In W. H. Clune &
J. F. Witte (Eds.), Choice and control in American education: Vol. 2. The
practice of choice, decentralization and school restructuring (pp. 343-370).
Philadelphia: Falmer Press.
Kidder, T. (1989). Among school children. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Louis, K. S. (1939). School district policy for school improvement. In M. Holmes,
K. Lriyheoof, & D. Musella (Eds.), Educational policy for effective schools
(pp. 145-167). New York: Teachers College Press.
Louis, K. S. (1991, April). The effects of teacher quality of worklife in secondary
schools on engagement and sense of efficacy. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL.
Louis, K. S., & Miles, M. B. (1990). Improving the urban high school: What
works and why. New York: Teachers College Press.
Louis, K. S., Purkey, S., Rosenblum, S., Rossmiller, R., & Smith, B. A. (1991,
March). Alternative school structures and the quality of teachers' work lives.
In National Center on Effective Secondary Schools Final Report (pp. 61-69).
Madison, WI: National Center on Effective Secondary Schools.
Louis, K. S., & Smith, B. A. (1990). Teacher working conditions. In P. Reyes
(Ed.), Teachers and their workplace: Commitment, performance and pro-
ductivity (pp. 23-47). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Metz, M. H. (1988). Teachers' ultimate dependence on their students: Implica-
tions for teachers' response to student bodies of differing social class. Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Asso-
ciation, New Orleans.
Metz, M. H. (1990). How social class differences shape the context of teachers'

----- Page 157 (native) -----
152
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
work. In M. McLaughlin & J. Talbert (Eds.), The secondary school as a
workplace (pp. 40-107). New York: Teachers,College Press.
Metz, M. H., & Colleagues. (1988). Final report. Field study on teachers' engage-
ment project on the effects of the school as a workplace on teachers' engage-
ment Phase one National Center on Effective Secondary Schools. Madison,
WI: National Center on Effective Secondary Schools.
National Education Association. (1987). Status of the American public school
teacher: 1985-86. West Haven, CT: NEA Professional Library.
Newmann, F. M., Rutter, R. A., & Smith, M. S. (1989, October). Organizational
factors that affect school sense of efficacy, community, and expectations.
Sociology of Education, 62, 221-238.
Purkey, S. C., Rutter, R. A., & Newmann, F. M. (1986-87). United States high
school improvement programs: A profile from the high school and beyond
supplemental survey. Metropolitan Education, 3, 59-91.
Powell, A. G., Farrar, E., & Cohen, D. K. (1985). The shopping mall high
school: Winners and losers in the educational marketplace. Boston: Hough-
ton Mifflin.
Rossmiller, R. A. (1988, November). Project on the effects of the school as work-
place on teachers' engagement: Field study on principa/s' management of
schools to affect teacher engagement (Final Report). Madison: National Cen-
ter on Effective Secondary Schools, University of Wisconsin.
Wehlage, G. G., Rutter, R. A., Smith, G. A., Lesko, N. L., & Fernandez, R. R.
(1989). Reducing the risk: Schools as communities of support. Philadelphia:
Falmer Press.
Wilson, B., & Corcoran, T. (1988). Successful secondary schools: Visions of excel-
lence in American public schools. Philadelphia: Falmer Press.
1 C.,

----- Page 158 (native) -----
CHAPTER 6
Putting School in Perspective:
The Influence of Family, Peers,
Extracurricular Participation,
and Part-Time Work on
Academic Engagement
Susie D. Lamborn, B. Bradford Brown, Nina S. Mounts,
and Laurence Steinberg
There is more to adolescence than schooling, and noninstructional influ-
ences can play an important role in academic engagement. Parents who
actively participate in school activities and who support learning as an
end in itself instill in adolescents an intrinsic interest in education and a
willingr ess to persist at academic endeavors. Studying with a group of
friends Eor an important exam provides a socially meaningful structure to
support the discipline required to learn complex materials. Publishing a
weeldy column in the school newspaper involves personal responsibilities
and satisfactions that bring lessons of English class to life. Meeting dead-
lines with an energetic boss who provides enriching work experiences high-
lights the connection between current s a-ool achievement and future ca-
reer possibilities, a connection that is ot readily apparent to many young
people.
Of course, each of these areas of influence can also have negative
effects on school performance. Teachers and other professionals who work
with adolescents often feel powerless to promote academic excellence
when experiences in the family, peer groups, extracurricular activities,
and work obligations seem to undermine academic engagement. By under-
standing how each of these domains influences adolescents' involvement
in school, educators will be better prepared to react to and, in some ways,
to shape or make use of outside influences to promote student engagement
and achievement.
153
t*.

----- Page 159 (native) -----
154
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
We begin by introducing two engaged students, referred to through-
out the chapter. After describing the design of the study, we report sepa-
rately on the impact of families, peers, extracurricular participation, and
employment.
TWO ENGAGED STUDENTS
Julius at Metro South
Julius, a sophomore at Metro South, a large urban high school with a
diverse student body, explains what he likes about school: "Some classes I
kind of get a thrill out of, you know, a challenge. I don't like 2 plus 2
classes and 'See john' and stuff like that. The hard stuff really gets me, I
don't know, that's just the way I am."
With a 2.8 grade-point average, Julius is satisfied with his school
performance. He explains, "I usually spend at least two hours on home-
work a night, including studying for tests and stuff. That's a lot more than
I used to do; I used to just do my homework and just go out [with friends]
and not care if I got it right or wrong," Julius plans to attend college and
become an architect. He anticipates completing six years of education past
high school to accomplish this goal.
Julius lives with his mother, her new husband, and his brother. He
elaborates, "He's [my brother] younger. I'm the oldest one and then
have my father and his new wife, and they have two new kids, both
younger .
.
. they're just about five blocks away." He describes a warm
positive relationship with both parents, although he sees his father less
frequently because of work. Without reservation, he quickly responds that
he can count on them 100 percent, even though they bicker over day-to-
day problems, "like I'll be home late or I'll forget to do something.
.
.
.
It'll get on her nerves if she's in a bad mood
.
.
. but nothing big, 10
minutes of hassling at the most."
When asked if anything got in his way of doing better at school, he is
quick to respond, "Probably my need to be with my friends, that's why I
do my homework so quick. I come home, just scribble my homework, and
just go out .
. . most of them, the ones I hang around with at school, all
live no more than two blocks away, so it's really easy [to go out together]."
Kevin at Rolling Prairie
In a pastoral environment remote from the urban sprawl surrounding
Metro South, Kevin is a sophomore at a high school nestled in a small
community surrounded by farmland. A straight-A student, Kevin de-
1 C

----- Page 160 (native) -----
Putting School in Perspective
155
scribes his favorite part of school life: "Taking a lot of courses to be chal-
lenged. I don't mind going to school. I like participating and involvement
in a couple of clubs. I like both. The challenge of courses as far as being
able to expand, and get a good feeling like you've done well. And as far as
participation, I like to be known as someone who is always active."
Like Julius, Kevin attributes his academic success to hard work.
"Well, I spent a lot of time on homework. I'd go home and even though I
was in three sports a year I'd come home and do it and go to sports, then
come home and do some more. I spent a lot of time on my homework,
concentrating on my studies. I paid a lot of attention in class and tried
to get a handle on the material." Although he has not defined a spe-
cific career, he knows that he will get a college degree in science or medi-
cine.
Kevin resides with his mother and father and two younger brothers.
He describes his relationship with them as open and warm. "My parents
are one of the first people to pat me on the back if I do something good.
And they care about what I do.
.
.
. I think we get along good because I
can talk about things openly with my parents .
.
. about drugs, sex, and
things like that. And if I have a question about anything my parents would
be the first to answer these." As in most families with teenagers, even
Kevin's predominantly positive relationship with his parents is not con-
flict-free. "My mom's always on me about my room, for cleaning my
room. It's always dirty. I used to always tell my mom I don't have time.
They don't really get mad, they just kind of give you the eye and tell you
to try harder because you're not doing as well as you should. If I screw up
or something they're very supportive."
When asked whether anything makes it difficult to do well in school,
Kevin commented, "Sometimes you see people coming home and they'd
always be telling me how much fun they had and you shouldn't study.
You wonder what the purpose is. You wonder why I'm trying so hard
all the time when other people can just sit back and have fun in high
school, and I'm trying really hard. I guess in the iong run it all pays off,
SO.
Julius and Kevin have a lot in common, even though they come from
different environments, one urban and the other rural. They both thrive
in academically challenging situations; they invest effort in doing well in
school; they describe positive family and peer relationships; they have
defined a direction for their future. At the same time, there are differences
in what they say about their families, peers, participation in extracurricu-
lar activities, and part-time work. For Kevin, influences from these four
areas consistently direct him toward academic involvement. For Julius,
howevra, these areas outside school have a mixed impact on his school
performance, sometimes pulling him away from his studies.
165

----- Page 161 (native) -----
156
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
OVERVIEW OF THE STUDY
Previous research has studied noninstructional influences on school
performance and academic aspirations but has had very little to say about
how family, peers, extracurricular participation, and employment affect
student engagement
the psychological investment in learning that takes
place at school (see Steinberg, Brown, Cider, Kaczmarek, & Lazzaro,
1988 for a review). Instead the-focus has been on the role of community
and societal influences as primary contributors to disengagement from
academic learning (Csikszentmihalyi & Larson, 1984; Cusick, 1973; Ford-
ham & Ogbu, 1986; Wehlage, Rutter, Smith, Lesko, & Fernandez, 1989;
Willis, 1977).
This study focuses on student engagement. Students from nine public,
four-year high schools in Wisconsin and California described how they
were influenced academically by four key arenas of adolescent life: family,
peers, extracurricular participation, and part-time work. The schools they
attended varied dramatically in size (from 400 to 2,400 students), socio-
economic characteristics, ethnic composition (from 40 percent to 98 per-
cent Anglo), and location (rural, suburban, innercity). In each school,
self-report surveys were administered to the entire student body. We also
invited a sample of students and their parents to discuss selected issues in
more detail in individual interviews. General findings from the survey
data were enriched by the students' own comments on their lives.
The survey measured engagement by asking students about their lev-
els of effort, concentration, and attention in the four main subject areas of
English, math, social studies, and science. Data were also collected on
other forms of academic involvement: time spent on homework, academic
expectations, and school misconduct. School achievement was measured
by grade-point average (GPA).
Overall, students reported that they were engaged fairly often in
classroom instruction. In general, girls were more engaged than boys,
students from middle-class homes reported higher engagement than those
from working-class homes, and 12th graders tended to be more engaged
than 9th graders. Of the four major ethnic groups, Asian-Americans re-
ported the highest engagement while non-Hispanic white students re-
ported the lowest. Hispanic-American and African-American students fell
between these two groups in their level of engagement.
How does student engagement relate to the other aspects of academic
involvement? Students who were more engaged had somewhat higher
grades (r = .27), spent more time on homework (r = .32), and had
higher educational aspirations (r = .21) than their less engaged peers.
Engagement in academic learning was also positively associated with
lower frequencies of school deviance, such as cutting class, cheating on

----- Page 162 (native) -----
Putting School in Perspective
157
exams, and skipping school (r =
.35). None of these relations was dra-
matic, but the picture was consistent: Engagement is associated with
higher academic performance, lower frequencies of school deviance, and
higher educational aspirations.
FAMILY INFLUENCES ON ENGAGEMENT
One of the first places a child acquires an interest in learning and the
belief that education is important is in the home. As might be expected,
parents can nurture student engagement by emphasizing the value of
learning and by becoming involved in the student's school activities. But,
consistent with other studies, we also found that a certain general style of
parenting, "authoritative" parenting, is beneficial.
Authoritative Parenting
Mrs. Hanson comments on her relationship with her adolescent chil-
dren.
They have many more privileges than other kids, but yet they
have to, be in at a certain time. They can only go out so many
times a week. They know that if they tell me they are going to A
and they change their minds and go to B, they call and tell me.
I feel we're close. It's difficult to know a teenager. He talks to me
about a lot of things. He's not embarrassed to tell me a dirty joke
an:: explain it when I don't understand. I feel that he can talk to
me about a lot of different things.
.
.
. They feel they can dis-
cuss everything with me whether I understand or not. My kids
don't have an off button. They were talking before they were
born and they haven't stopped yet.
We don't have a democracy in our house. However, I feel that
I'm a benevolent despot, if you will. So I take a lot of input in
what's going on and make some decisions and explain why I
made the decision.
.
. . Sometimes if he can show me that his
point is a better one and why
.
. . my mind can definitely be
changed.
.
.
. I don't feel that my kids feel put upon or that they
don't have privileges that other kids have.
Mrs. Hanson wields a lot of authority in the household and feels
comfortable in this role. She has clear expectations for her children and
discusses them openly with the children. There are rules and guidelines to

----- Page 163 (native) -----
158
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
be followed and specific repercussions when they are broken. She knows
where her children are and whom they are with.
At the same time she is aware of her son's interests and school activi-
ties. They talk openly and regularly. He often seeks her out to share daily
events and experiences. Although the parents have the final say on family
decisions, they explain why they make decisions, accept input from the
children, and are flexible when they encounter a reasonable counterargu-
ment.
This mother is typical of the authoritative parent in that she combines
high levels of warmth with high levels of demandingness. Authoritative
parents also grant psychological autonomy through joint decision making
with their adolescent (Baumrind, 1991; Steinberg, Elmen, & Mounts,
1989; Steinberg, Mounts, Lamborn, & Dornbusch, 1991).
Authoritative parenting is associated with numerous facets of social
and academic competence (Baumrind, 1978; Baumrind, 1991; Maccoby
& Martin, 1983). Originally, authoritative parenting was studied in white
middle-class families with young children. More recent studies illustrate
how adolescents respond to authoritative parenting in ways that are con-
sistent with the responses of younger children. Authoritatively raised
youth consistently outperform their peers from authoritarian (low on
warmth but high on demandingness) and permissive families (high on
warmth but low on demandingness) on various measures of competence.
Conversely, various problem behaviors, such as delinquency, drug and
alcohol abuse, and conformity to antisocial peer pressure, aie lower
among authoritatively reared youth (Dornbusch et al., 1985; Dornbusch,
Ritter, Leiderman, Roberts, & Fraleigh, 1987; Lamborn, Mounts, Stein-
berg, & Dornbusch, 1991; Steinberg, Elmen, & Mounts, 1989).
In our study, only 16 percent of the students described their parents
as having these qualities. But as shown in Table 6.1, students from author-
itative families were more engaged in school, had higher educational ex-
pectations, received higher grades, spent more time on homework, and
were less likely to become involved in school misconduct than students
from nonauthoritative homes.'
Authoritative parenting has been criticized as a middle-class phenom-
enon that is not a reasonable alternative for minority, poorer, or nonintact
families. Authoritative parenting is somewhat more common in white,
intact, middle-class families, the sample on which the construct was origi-
nally tested and developed. And the positive influences of authoritative
parenting on adolescent development are more visible in these types of
families. Nevertheless, the positive impact of authoritative pl,renting
crosses ethnic and social class boundaries (Clark, 1983; Dornbusch, Ritter,
Leiderman, Roberts, & Fraleigh, 1987; Steinberg, Mounts, Lamborn, &
.1"

----- Page 164 (native) -----
Table 6.1
Group Differences on Academic Behaviors for Students Accordimg to Parenting Style and Parental
involvement in Education
Academic
Homework
Educational
School
Engagement
GPA
Time
Expectations
Deviance
Parenting Style:
Authoritative
3.59
3.08
4.05
5.00
2.22
Nonauthoritative
3.41
2.79
3.72
4.69
2.40
School Involvement:
High
3.45
2.95
3.95
4.93
2.36
Low
3.27
2.70
3.58
4.52
2.38
NOTE:
Units of measurement are described in Note 1.
G j

----- Page 165 (native) -----
160
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
Dornbusch, 1991). Across a broad array of social environments, adoles-
cents reared in an authoritative manner excel socially and academically.
Parental Involvement in Schooling
While almost all parents feel that it is important for their children to
receive a good education, they vary in the degree to which they support
this commitment through specific actions aimed toward the children's
education. Mrs. Bradshaw describes her involvement.
They have to do their best. If they come home with C's and D's,
I want to know why. I ask if they have homework assignments
and if they say yes, then they usually come right home and get it
done. There's no problem with that. That was instilled in them
very early.
They always come to me at night and we sit for a while and talk
about things that went on in class.
He has understood that we tell him to take as r uch of these aca-
demic classes in high school so you will have more time to apply
yourself.
.
. . Starting in 7th Grade, that's when we started talk-
ing about college and what he's going to need so it will be easier
when he gets there.
I go to gymnastic meets. I have an active interest in his extracur-
ricular activities. He's in video club. He tells me all the technical
details and problems.
Like Mrs. Bradshaw, parents can become involved by helping with
homework when asked, going to school programs, watching their adoles-
cents in sports or activities, knowing how well they are doing in school,
and helping to choose courses. Consistent with other studies showing that
parental involvement in schooling improves academic achievement (Baker
& Stevenson, 1986; Epstein, in press; Stevenson & Baker, 1987), we found
that students whose parents are highly involved in schooling, compared
with students whose parents are only modestly involved, have higher
scores on all the positive academic outcomes (school misconduct is unre-
lated to parental involvement). The positive effects of parental involve-
ment are stronger among middle-class than working-class students.
Julius and Kevin both describe strong family relationships. According
to Julius, "Well, for some reasons like major problems, like drinking or sex
or something, I'll go to my dad, but for just going out and hanging out, I
talk to my mom cause she lives with me and that's kind of like, I don't
3

----- Page 166 (native) -----
Putting School in Perspective
161
know, it's really not that important so we'll decide on curfew together for
that night and I'll tell her what I'm doing, where I'm going, who I'll be
with." This comment indicates a warm open relationship but also one in
which the parents have set clear limits. The impression is of a relatively
flexible family in which the student participates in family decision making
although the parents maintain final control.
Julius's and Kevin's descriptions of their relations with their parents
fit the authoritative pattern. However, their families differ dramatically
on parental involvement in school. According to Julius, "My mom doesn't
worry if I was in school the whole day or if I Was skipping or something,
but she usually comes to conferences and she doesn't check up on home-
work 'cause she usually knows that I'm doing it and she just usually, as far
as she'll go is conference, that's about it." Compare this modest level of
involvement with the high involvement of Kevin's parents.
I say my parents are almost completely involved. They're very
concerned about how well I'm doing, what I'm involved with.
And before I'm about to try something else new they're always
questioning what's this gonna involve, what effect will it have
on you. And I looked to them first thing when I decided to
choose my courses. I look to them for help. And they say do
what you want but you want to challenge yourself to be the best.
Kevin and Julius both report high engagement in school, but Kevin
has superior grades. According to our survey results, a contributing factor
to Kevin's superior academic performance is the combined positive influ-
ence of having authoritative parents who are also highly involved in his
schooling. For most of the dimensions of school performance (grade-point
average, homework time, and educational expectations), parenting style
and parental involvement had additive, positive eFects. That is, the stu-
dents with the most positive outcomes were, like Kevin, from authoritative
homes with high parental involvement. Outcomes were least positive for
students in nonauthoritative families that were not involved in their chil-
dren's schooling.
However, for student engagement, the association between authorita-
tive parenting and parental school involvement was different. Engage-
ment was relatively high in authoritative families regardless of the level of
parental involvement in schooling. In contrast, for students from nonau-
thoritative families, engagement was higher when parental involvement
was high.
In sum, the general child-rearing practice of authoritative parenting
and the more specifically education-oriented dimension of parental

----- Page 167 (native) -----
162
Student Engauement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
involvement in schooling were positively related to academic engagement
as well as other academic outcomes. Parental involvement tended to be
the stronger of the two predictors of academic outcomes.
PEER INFLUENCES ON ACADEMIC ENGAGEMENT
They call me a mix of everything. I'm a partyer, I love to joke
around, you know, I love to get laughs. I get good grades, so
they'll call me a semi-nerd. Then they'll call me semi-toughie
they generally view Hispanics as tough gangster fighters. And
because I'm a mix of everything, I get along with everybody else.
So, I hang around the shy people who don't have any friends. I
hang around with popular people who have so many friends
they don't have to count them. I'll hang around with moderate
people. I hang around with trash or skateboarders. I hang
around with people who supposedly have connections with
gangs. I'll hang around mirrors. I'll hang around with basically
anybody. So, I have connections with everybody. It's a motley
crew. (Marcos, Metro South)
Peers play a central role in the social lives of adolescents. Over the
years, adolescents spend increasing amounts of time with peers in activities
that are unsupervised by adults (Csikszentmihalyi & Larson, 1984). Teen-
agers are particularly susceptible to the influence of their peers during
middle adolescence (Berndt, 1979). As individuals move from childhood
into adolescence they move into a more complex and differentiated social
system in which peers are partitioned into a set of peer groups, or
"crowds," that vary considerably in normative values, orientations, and
behaviors (Brown, 1990). Peer influences are filtered through adolescents'
membership in one of these crowds (Brown & Clasen, 1986; Mosbach &
Leventhal, 1988), and becoming involved with a crowd is one of the major
social mandates of early adolescence (Brown, Eicher, & Petrie, 1986;
Newman & Newman, 1976).
Crowds are the large groups of students, familiar to most of us, that
define the broad social organization of most high schools: jocks, preppies,
druggies, brains, and so forth. Crowds are groups of individuals, larger
than cliques, who share the same stereotypical behavior patterns. Mem-
bership in a crowd is established more by one's reputation than by specific
behaviors, and the crowd structure of high schools makes it difficult to
discard the reputation one garners from membership in a particular

----- Page 168 (native) -----
Putting School in Perspective
163
group. Since membership is determined or denied as much by peer agree-
ment as by a student's voluntary choice, it is difficult for students to leave
a crowd or gain entry into another one.
We examined relations between adolescent crowd membership and
academic outcomes for five major crowds that exist in most high schools:
brains, jocks/populars, averages, loners/nerds, and druggies. Adolescents
who were identified by classmates as leading members of the major crowds
in their school were interviewed and asked to share their perceptions of
classmates' crowd membership. Peer nominations of crowd membership
were integrated with other information collected from self-report surveys.2
The crowds differed in their academic behaviors and values in ways
that we had anticipated, based on previous studies and on students' gen-
eral descriptions of crowds. Mean scores for each crowd are presented in
Table 6.2. As expected, brains were the most academically oriented.
One of my friends and I have a competition going on to see who
can get the best grades. .
. . Last year we had one report due
and I would have blown it off, but we put a $5.00 bet on it so I
tried to do really good on it. Because of that there's real competi-
tion, like every time we get our papers back we stick them in
each other's faces. (Aaron, Metro South)
I've probably been in the same group so everyone kind of expects
me to get good grades and stuff. I guess that's how it's affected
me. (Sharon, Ambassador Hills)
See, my friends, they like to go out and have a good time but at
the same time they also value education, and so really, although
they don't tell me these things, they silently kind of influence me
to do the best I can academically.
.
. . They frequently talk to
me and ease the pressure a bit .
. . big test or something, talk at
the lunch table, lighten things up a little bit. (Ian, Rolling
Prairie)
At the other extreme, druggies were the least invested in school. Stu-
dents who identified themselves as members of the druggie crowd had this
to say about their peer group.
You don't get straight A's. After school you go out and have fun
instead of staying home and reading a book or something.
Around here it's considered druggies but it's not really druggies
because I don't do drugs. Yeah, we smoke. But I guess most of
them do drugs. (Cindy, Rolling Prairie)

----- Page 169 (native) -----
Table 6.2
Group Differences on Academic Behaviors According to Peer Crowd Membership
Academic
Homework
Educational
School
Crowd
Engagement
GPA
Time
Expectations
Deviance
Brain
3.46
3.85
4.12
5.41
2.75
Jock/Popular
3.36
2.92
3.76
5.02
3.48
Average
3.34
2.93
3.73
4.71
3.34
Loners/nerds
3.48
2.77
3.70
4.47
3.36
Druggie
2.75
2.02
2.84
3.66
3.46
NOTE:
Units r
measurement are described in Note 1.

----- Page 170 (native) -----
Putting School in Perspective
165
They just don't care. They get D's and F's. It's like homework,
throw it in your locker and forget about it. My advice to fresh-
men, don't be like us and fail. (Stan, Ambassador Hills)
The averages, loners/nerds, and jocks/populars fell between these two
extremes. Surprisingly, the jocks/populars were not very different from
the other two groups: the loners/nerds and averages. Given the prestige of
the jocks/populars, we expected them to most closely resemble the brains.
In general, regardless of crowd membership, the more time spent
with peers, the lower were the academic outcomes. Adolescents who spend
more time partying and hanging out with peers are less engaged in their
schoolwork. More time partying with friends was also associated with
more frequent school misconduct. Druggies spent more time hanging out
and partying with their friends than adolescents in the other crowds, and
this tendency accounted for some of their impoverished school perfor-
mance relative to students in other crowds. The association between time
spent with friends and poorer grades was apparent when we asked stu-
dents if anything interfered with their school performance.
Your friends like out of school, you know, friends on the street,
some keep you from doing homework. .
.
. Like if your friends
invite you somewhere and you got homework, you still go and
don't do your homework sometimes. just walk around, go to the
movies, go to the mall, shop, stuff like that. (Anthony, Metro
South)
I think it was the people I was hanging out with. Because I was
never in school. I was always skipping out you know. And just
my attitude about things. Going out for breakfast every morning
instead of going to class. And I don't know. It wasn't anything,
just as long as we weren't in school, we were having a good time.
(Kim, Rolling Prairie)
They like to go to parties and stuff and they used to call me up
and I just go with them. And I'll leave stuff behind that I should
do. Well, during school they're kind of crazy, they go in the halls
and act crazy. They yell and stuff and I'm usually with them.
I'm not yelling or anything, but all of them get in trouble for
something that one person did. (David, Metro South)
A dramatic exception to this profile of negative peer influences oc-
rurred among the brains. For students in the brain crowd, time with peers
was associated with several aspects of positive school performance. Time

----- Page 171 (native) -----
166
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
spent hanging out with friends was related to higher engagement and
grade-point averages. For brains, part of the time hanging out with
friends included such academic activities as helping each other with home-
work and studying. Even adolescents in the brain crowd who spent more
time partying with their friends were more engaged in their classwork
and had higher academic aspirations. When asked how their friends influ-
enced them, students belonging to the brain crowd frequently mentioned
studying together and completing assignments before socializing.
It makes me try harder to keep up with them. Sometimes we get
together and have a study session together. They help each other
on problems. At someone's house, whenever we want, like once
a week. (Amy, Ambassador Hills)
What do Julius and Kevin have to say about their peers? Julius be-
longs to the average crowd, a group of students defined by their moderate
standing along numerous dimensions. They do well in school but do not
excel. They party and socialize in moderation and frequently participate
in sports but are not as serious as the jocks. Julius mentions that he and his
friends study together occasionally. At the same time, he explains the
pressure to skip class within his group of friends:
.
.
. there are a few
that skip a lot, don't do their homework. They're smart kids, they just
don't use their heads, they're more or less good
Number one, I'm not
sly enough to go skipping away from school 'cause somebody's going to
find out and I'll just get in trouble for it, so I usually, I myself stay in
school." Later, he comments on his struggles not to conform.
Well, sometimes when the ones that want to leave ask me to
leave, then I have to say no and I always feel bad because I don't
want them to think I'm not cool or whatever. .
. . See, mostly
for me [school] is social, I do my work and I do it well, but when
it comes time to being social, I am heavily social, that's the way
I have to be, I could not be myself, I am very insecure.
On the other hand, Kevin belongs to the popular-nice group. Within
his peer network, academic study is a high-priority enterprise. Rather
than viewing socializing and academics as competing demands, Kevin and
his friends have been more successful at integrating academics into their
social life.
If we decide to do something together on a Tuesday or Wednes-
day night and we know that we have schoolwork, we'll say hold
1 7 (

----- Page 172 (native) -----
Putting School in Pei spective
167
on, we have work to do. We always put that first. I think school
is very important. And we're real supportive of each other. So as
far as encouraging each other, we do that a lot. Since they're in a
lot of my classes we feel almost like a family.
.
. . Competition
for one thing, because we all do pretty good. So we ask each
other what we got on some test. It just adds an element of chal-
lenge.
Both students describe positive relationships with their peers. How-
ever, Julius's friends have a mixed influence on him, pulling him both
toward and away from his studies, while Kevin's friends have a consistent
effect of investing in school studies.
To summarize, adolescent crowd membership was associated with
differences in academic outcomes, although we do not know the extent to
which these academic outcome differences predated crowd membership.
Especially for adolescents in the druggie crowd, time spent partying and
hanging out with friends predicts the lower levels of academic achieve-
ment that distinguishes this crowd from the others. It has sometimes been
assumed by researchers, practitioners, and the public that peers have an
overall negative effect on adolescents' academic achievement (e.g., Cole-
man, 1961), but in fact peer influences are quite variable (Clasen &
Brown, 1985; Steinberg, Brown, Cider, Kaczmarek, & Lazzaro, 1988).
In this study, time spent with peers had uniformly negative outcomes in
the druggie crowd and primadly positive ones for the brains, whose
friends provide a network that supports academic endeavors.
ENGAGEMENT AND EXTRACURRICULAR PARTICIPATION
In wrestling you have to keep trying at something, you can't give
up. It helps you mentally to get ready for stuff. But it takes time
away from studying and stuff like that. (Phil, Ambassador Hills)
It is difficult to predict the effects of extracurricular participation on
engagement and academic achievement. On the one hand, extracurricular
activities could support academic accomplishment in a number of ways.
They might give students a sense of bonding to the school that indirectly
increases their commitment to academics. The close contact with teachers
who serve as coaches or advisors also could help forge relationships that
create more positive academic orientations among participants ("I don't
want to let the coach down by doing poorly in her class"). Extracurricular
participation may expose students t.) more academically oriented peer

----- Page 173 (native) -----
,
168
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
groups who encourage engagement and achievement (Clasen & Brown,
1985). Finally, certain activities
the debate team or academic clubs, for
example develop skills and knowledge that build directly on learning
strategies and subject matter that students are asked to master in classes.
On the other hand, extracurricular activities offer alternative avenues
for the development of competence, discussed in Chapter 1 as the univer-
sal foundation for engagement in learning. Gaining competence in extra-
curricular pursuits may obviate the need to work hard on academic mate-
rial. A student who develops a reputation as a great actor may feel little
need to excel in the classroom. Furthermore, the time demands and perfor-
rnance pressures associated with some extracurricular activities may leave
participants too preoccupied Or too fatigued to concentrate on their school-
work.
We have an incomplete picture of the broad range of extracurricular
activities that exist in most high schools because, until recently, researchers
focused almost exclusively on sports participation, primarily among boys
in their senior year (Steinberg, Brown, Cider, Kaczmarek, & Lazzaro,
1988). Most researchers report that extracurricular participants do better
in school than nonparticipants, but most of the difference seems to be a
function of academic talent and motivation that predate participation
(Holland & Andre, 1987). That is, students who go out for activities tend
to be more academically prepared and motivated than those who do not.
Researchers have not determined whether students' academic progress in
school is affected by some activities more than others or by the number or
diversity of activities in which students participate.
Julius and Kevin are both involved in extracurricular activities. Julius
is a member of the baseball team and the architecture club. Kevin partid-
pates in a broader range of activities. "I'm involved in boys' volleyball,
basketball, and track. And I'm also involved in clubs the Key Club, I
just joined the Alpha Theta, which is the math club. You have to have a
3.25. And then I'm also in student council." Nearly two thirds of the
students in the study were involved in one or more extracurricular activi-
ties. Most, like Julius, participated in only one or two activities, but 10
percent, like Kevin, reported involvement in five or more activities during
the year. Gender differences were negligible, but participation rates
climbed modestly across grade levels and differed substantially among the
nine schools in our study. On average, participants devoted approximately
7.5 hours per week to extracurricular activities, although 5 percent logged
as many as 20 hours a week or more.
As expected, extracurricular participants fared well academically.
Compared with nonparticipants, they had higher grade-point averages
(by over one fourth of a grade point) and spent more time on homework
(about an hour more per week). They expected to go farther in school and
.4

----- Page 174 (native) -----
Putting School in Perspective
169
had slightly higher levels of school engagement. Mean scores for each of
these factors are shown in Table 6.3. As Kevin says, "You learn to budget
your time a little better, which makes you more efficient at studying .
.
.
it helps you deal with people and just to be involved and using good sense.
It's good to be doing something in school other than being just involved in
academics."
The advantage, however, seemed to be more pronounced for students
in leadership activities and clubs or interest groups than those out for
sports or performing activities. In fact, sports participants actually had
higher levels of school deviance than nonparticipants.
The more activities students were involved in, the better their scores
were on our positive outcome measures (except for school deviance). Fur-
thermore, students involved in two or more different types of activities
did better than the "specialists" who went out for just one type of activity.
In
t, academic effort and achievement tended to increase as hours spent
on extracurricular activities increased.'
Ultimately, the effects of extracurrif ular participation probably de-
pend on the environment that students encounter in the activities. Do
coaches, advisors, and peers emphasize the need to achieve in the class-
room as well as in the activity, or do they value students strictly on the
basis of their accomplishments in the activity? Does the activity offer
opportunities to apply classroom knowledge, or do the time and energy
demands of the activity distract students from their studies?
For each student's favorite activity, we collected information on four
specific processes that would seem to influence academic engagement and
achievement.
Advisor's support examined how often the adult advisor would allow
the student to miss practice in order to study, how often the advisor spoke
to the student about college, and whether the advisor cared more about
how the student did in school classes than in the activity. The degree to
which the activity advisor encouraged or discouraged achievement had
little effect on levds of achievement and education values.
Peers' support inquired about the frequency of receiving advice about
classes from fellow participants, whether these peers cared more about
studying than partying, and whether the other p:trticipants planned to go
to college. Peer support, highest among students involved in leadership
activities and lowest for those participating in a glory sport, was associated
with students' level of engagement, grade-point average, and time devoted
to homework. Karen, a member of the student council at Ambwador
Hills, says about her fellow council members, "They're pretty smart and
they do pretty good in school. Yeah, it helps. 'Cause you want to kind of
get good grades like them."
Personal resources refers to how much participa tion contributed to

----- Page 175 (native) -----
Table 0.3
Group Differences Among Extracurricular Participants and Nonparticipants on Academic Behaviors
Academic
Engagement
GPA
Mean
Mean
Homework
Time
Mean
Educational
Expectations
Mean
School
Deviance
Mean
Participants
3.50
3.00
4.31
5.04
2.36
Nonparticipants
3.41
2.72
3.40
4.66
2.38
Participants in Different Activities
Favorite Activity:
Glory sports
3.48
2.95
4.21
3.10
2.47
Other sports
3.52
3.10
4.43
3.23
2.39
Leadership
activities
3.59
3.28
4.73
3.30
2.35
Clubs and
interest groups
3.56
3.26
4.97
3.32
2.24
Performing
activities
3.44
3.07
4.32
3.18
2.29
NOTE:
Units of measurement are described in Note 1.

----- Page 176 (native) -----
.:%
Putting School in Perspective
171
planning homework time better or contributed to the development of
confidence about doing well in school. Students who felt their favorite
activity enhanced personal resources were substantially more engaged in
school, spent more time on homework, and participated in deviant activi-
ties less often. One sophomore explained that after exercising in sports, he
felt much more relaxed about studying. Another student told us that some
of the techniques of concentration and close observation he learned in
tennis were helpful in developing more precision with language skills.
Finally, the degree of distraction indicated how much participation
undermined achievement by making students too tired to study or too
nervous or excited to concentrate in class. Students who felt distracted
from schoolwork by their favorite activity reported modestly lower levels
of engagement and substantially more school deviance. Distraction was
least common for students in leadership activities and most common for
those in a glory sport.
I'm in basketball and it hurts my schoolwork. We have practice
every single day from 3:00 to 5:15. You get out at 5:15, run al-
most the whole time and then you get home you be so tired you
want to go to sleep, but you still have around six or seven classes
. c homework to do. (Melanie, Metro South)
To summarize, participants in extracurricular activities were more
engaged in school, put more effort into their studies, got better grades,
and expected to go farther in school than nonparticipants even after
accounting for differences between participants and nonparticipants in
background factors. Levels of engagement and achievement varied ac-
cording to the type of extracurricular activity, however. Generally, stu-
dents who concentrated on glory sports did less well on academic outcomes
than those involved in clubs or leadership activities. in part, these differ-
ences could be traced to experiences in the different activities how much
the demands of the activity distracted them from studying, how much the
activity bolstered personal resources (time management skills, confidence
in their ability to do well academically, etc.), and whether coparticipants
encouraged or discouraged academic pursuits.
SCHOOL ENGAGEMENT AND STCIDENT EMPLOYMENT
During the last decade, re,searchers, educators, and policy makers
interested in adolescent development have directed increasing attention to
the widespread employment of high school students during the school year
(see Charner Sc Fraser, 1987, for a review). Uncommon in this country
6

----- Page 177 (native) -----
172
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
prior to 1950, and still rare in other industrialized countries, student em-
ployment in the United States grew steadily between 1950 and 1980 and
has remained at a high level during the last 10 years. According to recent
estimates, for example, between one half and two thirds of all high school
juniors hold jobs in the formal part-time labor force at any specific time
during the school year, and the vast majority of students will have had
some school-year work experience prior to graduation (Greenberger &
Steinberg, 1986). For many students, participation in the labor force is
time-consuming: According to one national survey, over half of ail em-
ployed high school seniors and nearly one fourth of all employed sopho-
mores work more than 20 hours per week (Lewin-Epstein, 1981).
The emerging consensus among researchers is that negative effects of
employment are linked to how much, not whether, a student works (e.g.,
Bachman, Bare, & Frankie, 1986; Damico, 1984; Mortimer & Finch,
1986; Schill, McCartin, & Meyer, 1985; Wirtz, Rohrbeck, Charner, &
Fra-er, 1987). Studies that examine weekly hours of employment generally
find an important drop in school performance at around 20 hours per
week. Some students talked about this.
[Does having a job help or hurt your schoolwork?] It hurts
greatly.
.
. . You have to work to get the money, the more you
work the more you get, so I L,:y to work as much as I can without
killing my schoolwork totally, but sometimes it just doesn't work
ot t that way. .
.
. I work at a fast food restaurant and I clean
up tables, wash dishes, make the food. I work 3-4 school night,
15-20 hours, then I work every weekend, which is another 13
hours. (Rob, Ambassador Hills)
I liked [working as a cashier] a lot. But when you get home at
night you're tired and you don't want to do homework when you
get home. (Camille, Metro South)
Like if I had to work at night, I didn't get anything done 'cause I
worked from 4:30 to 10:30, sometimes past midnight. [So that
got in your way?] Yeah and I was sleeping during class. (Mi-
chelle, Rolling Prairie)
Studies that focus solely on differences in school performance, with-
out examining other aspects of youngsters' involvement in school, may
underestimate the impact of working on schooling, because there are con-
straints on the range of youngsters' grades and on the amount of time they
are expected to devote to homework (Greenberger & Steinberg, 1986).
For example, because the national average for time spent on homework is

----- Page 178 (native) -----
Putting School in Perspective
173
less than four hours per week (Greenberger & Steinberg, 1986), it is un-
likely that employment, in whatever amount, will markedly diminish
youngsters' already very modest involvement in homework. Similarly, be-
cause teachers adjust grading practices and class requirements, and pupils
select easier courses in order to accommodate job demands (McNeil, 1984),
the ultimate impact of employment on school performance may be attenu-
ated. Studies that examine more affective and attitudinal components of
schooling how engaged students are ;n their education
may uncover
stronger effects of extensive employment than studies of school perfor-
mance alone. Anecdotal evidence from teachers (e.g., Kotlowitz, 1986)
and ethnographies of high schools (e.g., Powell, Farrar, & Cohen, 1985)
suggest that extensive commitment to a part-time job takes a toll on stu-
dents' investment in school in ways that may not be evident when only
"objective" indicators are studied.
In our study, longer hours of work during the school year were clearly
associated with diminished school performance and lowered school en-
gagement. Students who worked more hours each week earned lower
grades, spent less time on homework, paid attention in class less often,
exerted less effort in school, were less involved in extracurricular activities,
and reported higher levels of mind-wandering in class, more school mis-
conduct, and more frequent class-cutting.
It has been suggested that the negative association between work
hours and school performance is due not to the fact that working interferes
with achievement, but to the fact that students who choose to work longer
hours are initially those students most disaffected with school. Some survey
items assessed students' general pos..dve or negative orientations toward
school. When school orientation was statistically controlled, the associa-
tion between work hours and academic outcomes remained the same. The
lower performance and engagement of students who work a lot cannot,
therefore, be attributed to initial alienation from school.
When asked about part-time worx, Kevin responds, "My mom and
dad said during summer they wouldn't mind me having a job. But during
school they want me to concentrate on my studies and stuff rather than
having a job." Julius, who does have a job, describes his work situation.
I'm a utility clerk at Pick-N-Save and I basically push the carts in
and out of the parking lot and I'll sweep or mop or whatever,
that's mostly what I do. I work approximately two days during
the week and then I work Saturday and Sunday for six hours so
that's abr,it 25 hours a week.
In response to an inquiry about how the job affected his schoolwork, Julius
said, "It hurt because I had to work at 5:00 so I didn't have any time to

----- Page 179 (native) -----
174
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
concentrate on my homework and get it done right 'cause I'd have to leave
by 4:30 to drive to work."
In contrast to students who worked about as much as Julius did (20
hours or more), students whose work hours were more moderate (10 hours
or less) had grade-point averages about one third of a letter grade higher,
spent approximately one third more time each week on homework, and
cut class about 25 percent less often. It may be suggested that older stu-
dents are better able to combine heavy work responsibilities with serious
academic investment. We found, however, that effects of working on
school performance or engagement were similar for older students and
younger students (and for middle-class and working-class students).
Taken together, these findings suggest that students' involvement in
paid work outside school may affect their performance and engagement
in school in at least three important ways. First, working long hours is
associated with lower grades and less time spent on homework. Second,
working takes its toll on student engagement in the classroom, with stu-
dents who work longer hours reporting more mind-wandering and exert-
ing less effort in school. Finally, student workers compensate for their job
commitments through cheating, copying assignments, and cutting classes
when convenient. As has been speculated elsewhere (Greenberger & Stein-
berg. 1986; McNeil, 1984), these behaviors may permit siudent workers to
reduce the deleterious effects of working on their school grades.
These results, like those from earlier studies, suggest that debates over
the employment of high school students should focus on the number of
hours students work. Generally our analyses did not reveal clear hour
thresholds beyond which the correlates of employment became dramati-
cally more negative. The most prudent interpretation of these data, there-
fore, is simply that the potential risks of employment during the school
year increase with increasing time commitment to a job.
IMPLICATIONS
In this study we tried to put school in perspective by studying the
impact on engagement and school achievement of students' noninstruc-
tional experiences. Realizing that we did not examine the complex cultural
settings in which youth develop, or their experiences with other potentially
significant influences (media; social service agencies; political, ethnic, and
religious groups; extended family and other adults), we now consider what
the study suggests for how to enhance student engagement and school
achievement. In what ways might schools themselves exert constructive
influences on parenting, pee: relations, extracurricular participation, and
s,
I

----- Page 180 (native) -----
Putting School in Perspective
175
part-time work? What are the implications for parents, employers, or
youth-serving agencies beyond school?
We found that effective parenting for school success includes monitor-
ing children's activities and setting limits-, showing affection openly and
becoming involved in their lives, and allowing students to state their own
point of view and to share in family decisions. This combination of de-
mandingness, warmth, and granting psychological autonomy enhances
the development of competence in adolescence. Monitoring without
warmth, or affection without limit setting, is much less effective. Parents
can also improve school achievement and engagement by attending school
activities and helping with homework and choice of classes. The combina-
tion of authoritative parenting and involvement in schooling maximizes
the chances of improving adolescent engagement and achievement.
These parenting practices are easier to achieve in emotionally and
economically stable family environments in which at least two adults share
the responsibilities of caretaking. Increasingly, however, American fami-
lies deviate from this description. Furthermore, increasing numbers of
families in the United States identify with social and cultural roots that
vary from white middle-class norms. The challenge is to encourage parent-
ing practices that facilitate achievement while respecting cultural diver-
sity. Educators may be especially successful in trying to raise the level of
parental involvement in schooling. Most parents want their children to
succeed in school. When they refrain from active participation, schools
need to reach out.'
Turning to peer influences, we presented two main findings: Crowd
membership is associated with schooi outcomes, and regardless of crowd
membership excessive partying hurts engagement and achievement.
Crowd structures and individual membership are difficult to change. Be-
cause cliques are frequently embedded within crowds, and friendships
tend to be embedded within cliques, a transition from one crowd to an-
other often entails a major disruption in the adolescent's social world.
Academically and socially at-risk students like the druggies or loners face
many obstacles in joining a different crowd, even when they are willing
to make the move. Entry to a crowd more in the mainstream of school life
demands not only the student's desire to belong, but also possession of the
qualifications (e.g., nice clothes, good looks, athletic prowess, intellect)
required for acceptance by its members. These students may face strong
and unyielding perceptions that they belong in their original crowd.
Rather than risking potential rejection by attempting to join another
crowd, students may decide it is less stressful to stay put. If adults become
familiar with norms in the different crowds, they can assist in crowd
transitions by empathizing with the student's difficulties, and by encour-
'

----- Page 181 (native) -----
176
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
aging the development of skills and participation in activities that are
prerequisites for entry into the new crowd.
Across all crowds, time spent partying with friends was associated
with higher levels of deviant behavior in school, such as cheating on ex-
ams, skipping classes, and so forth. Students may need help scheduling
their socializing so that it does not interfere with either study time or rest.
Adults' efforts to limit students' partying time can conflict, of course, with
students' desire to be more autonomous and to take responsibility for their
own actions. Our findings indicate, however, that showing concern for
and awarEness of students' activities, and setting reasonable limits within
a context of support, will pay off.
Our findings support the common belief that extracurricular activities
bolster teenagers' academic interests and performance. But academic ben-
efits of participation are not equivalent in all types of extracurricular
activities. Much depends on the extent to which the specific activity sup-
ports rather than distracts from academic pursuits. In some activities, long
practice hours and high performance expectations can make students too
tired or too nervous to concentrate on classwork. Many clubs, interest
groups, and leadership activities, for example, offer environments more
supportive of classwork than glory sports do.
If academic engagement and achievement are to be high priorities,
these findings suggest the need for incentives for participation in the more
supportive activities. But rather than relying on disciplinary 3.nd screening
policies such as "no passno play" rules, educators would do well to at-
tempt to reshape the peer norms and distracting demands and pressures
common in glory sports.
The common image of the advisor or coach serving as a mentor who
reaffirms the importance of school achievement was not borne out in this
study. Why? Perhaps coaches fail to establish close relationships with most
participants. Perhaps they get too caught up in the performance demands
of the activity (the need to maintain a winning record at all costs). Perhaps
the fact that many extracurricular advisors or coaches these days are com-
munity volunteers rather than school staff members weakens their role as
academic mentors. Further study is needed to clarify these questions.
Our findings contradict the popular assumption that working during
adolescence is beneficial to young people's development. In all ethnic and
socioeconomic groups, working long hours is detrimental. Long work
hours are associated with lower grades, less time on homework, and di-
minished engagement. At the same time, students who work more are
more likely to cheat, copy assignments, and skip classes. This study, like
earlier ones, suggests that debates over the employment of liigh school
students should focus specifically on the consequences of long work hours.

----- Page 182 (native) -----
Putting School in Perspective
177
Parents, educational practitioners, and policy makers should consider lim-
iting teenagers' employment to a maximum of 20 hours a week during the
school year.
The monitoring of student employment can be carried out by parents,
schools, government agencies, employers, or preferably a combination of
all four (Steinberg, 1990). In states in which parental or school permission
is necessary for a student to obtain a work permit, limits may be imposed
on an individual student's work hours by adults who are in a position to
monitor the youngster'.; school performance, such as parents or guidance
counselors. States in which prevailing child labor laws permit extensive
school-year employment should reexamine such policies and consider re-
stricting student employment to fewer than 20 hours weekly during the
academic calendar. And major employers of teenagers need to recognize
that overworking students, despite the short-term advantages to the em-
ployer, may have negative long-term consequences for the development of
a competent adult labor force, since too much time at work may detract
from students' engagement in school.
It is important for teachers to enhance student engagement and
achievement by attending to the issues of membership and authentic work
in instructional activities. By examining influences of noninstructional ex-
periences, we have shown that teachers need help from others. Parents
can make major contributions by becoming involved in school activities,
by helping students face negative peer pressures, by encouraging partici-
pation in extracurricular activities that support academic work, and by
setting limits on work hours. Schools can reach out to parents, can im-
prove ways in which extracurricular activity supports academic engage-
ment, and can work with public agencies and private employers to limit
student work hours.
NOTES
We would like to express our gratitude to Don Albright, Ted Carlsen, Bob
Jasna, Priscilla Kuehn, Diane Kocs, Steve McNeal, and dear Mary Truitt for their
tremendous support during the data collection for this study. We also are indebted
to the many students, faculty, and staff of the participating high schools for time
and energy contributed to this study.
1. CPA was derived from an eight-point scale including response categories
of "Mostly A's" (4), "About half A's and half B's" (3.5), "Mostly B's" (3), "About
half B's and C's" (2.5), "Mostly C's" (2), "About half C's and D's" (1.5), "Mostly
D's" (1), "Mostly below D's" (.5). Students also had the option of choosing "I am
not sure." This information formed a scale similar to that used in many high

----- Page 183 (native) -----
178
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
schools in which a 4.0 represents straight A's. Homework time per week was based
on a six-point scale ranging from "None" (1), "About 15 minutes" (2), "About 30
minutes" (3), "About an hour" (4), "About 2 or 3 hours" (5), "About 4 hours or
more" (6). School deviance items included the four response categories of "Never"
(1), "Once or twice" (2), "Several times" (3), "Often" (4). For educational expecta-
tions students chose one of six options: "Leave school as soon as possible" (1),
"Finish some high school" (2), "Get some vocational or college training" (3), "Fin-
ish a two-year community college degree" (4), "Finish college with a four-year
college degree" (5), "Finish college and take further training (medical, law, gradu-
ate school, etc.)" (6).
2. Although girls and boys were nearly evenly distributed among the jock/
populars, there were large differences in gender in each of the other crowds. Girls
were overrepresented in both the brain and average crowds (60 and 62 percent),
while the druggie and loners/nerds were disproportionately composed of boys (58
and 68 percent).
Adolescents are more likely to be perceived as part of some crowd in the
10th or 1 lth Grades. Subsequently, there is a slight drop for 12th graders in the
proportion of students assigned to each crowd. The small proportion of adolescents
assigned to each crowd in the freshman year is due, in part, to the large number
of new peers that adolescents come into contact with when beginning high school.
They may know only a few people well enough to determine crowd membership.
In contrast, sophomores and juniors are familiar with many more of their class-
mates, resulting in a higher proportion of crowd assignments. The drop in propor-
tion of crowd assignments during the senior year is not surprising as adolescents
begin to form heterosexual couples (Dunphey, 1963) and to assert individuality in
ways that frequently take them away from participation in crowd activities
(Brown, Eicher, & Petrie, 1986).
3. Grades seemed to suffer for students who devoted 20 hours or more per
week to these activities, but few students logged this many hours in extracurricular
activity.
4. Our study did not focus on specific school strategies most successful for
enhancing parental involvement. For more information on this, see Chrispeels,
Boruta, and Daugherty (1988), Epstein and Herrick (1991a, 1991b), and Phi Delta
Kappan (1991).
REFERENCES
Bachman, J. G., Bare, D. E., & Frankie, E. I. (1986). Correlates of employment
among high school seniors (Monitoring the Future Occasional Paper No. 20).
Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research.
Baker, D., & Stevenson, D. (1986). Mothers' strategies for children's achievement:
Managing the transition to high school. Sociology of Education, 59, 156-
166.
s

----- Page 184 (native) -----
Puttino School in Perspeztive
179
Baumrind, D. (1978). Parental disciplinary patterns and social competence in
children. Youth and Society, 9, 239-276.
Baumrind, D. (1991). Parenting styles and adolescent development. In R. Lerner,
A. C. Petersen, & J. Brooks-Gunn (Eds.), The encyclopedia of adolescence
(pp. 746-758). New York: Garland.
Berndt, T. (1979). Developmental changes in conformity to peers and parents.
Developmental Psychology, 15, 606-616.
Brown, B. B. (1990). Peer groups and peer cultures. In S. Feldman & G. Elliot
(Eds.), At the threshold: The developing adolescent (pp. 171-196). Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Brown, B. B., & Clasen, D. R. i986). Developmental changes in adolescents'
conceptions of peer groups. Paper presented at the biennial meeting of the
Society for Research in Adolescence, Madison, WI.
Brown, B. B., Eicher, S. A., & Petrie, S. (1986). The importance of peer group
("crowd") affiliation in adolescence. Journal of Adolescence, 9, 73-96.
Charner, I., & Fraser, B. (1987). Youth and work. Washington, DC: William T.
Grant Foundation Commission on Work, Family, and Citizenship.
Chrispeels, J., Boruta, M., & Daugherty, M. (1988). Communicating with par-
ents. San Diego, CA. San Diego County Office of Education.
Clark, R. (1983). Family life and school achievement: Why poor black children
succeed or fail. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Clasen, D. R., & Brown, B. B. (1985). The multidimensionality of peer pressure
in adolescence. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 14, 451-468,
Coleman, J. S. (1961). The adolescent society. New York: Free Press.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Larson, R. (1984). Being adolescent: Conflict and
growth in the teenage years. New York: Basic Books.
Cusick, P. A. (1973). Inside high school; the students' world. New York: Holt,
Rinehart & Winston.
Damico, R. (1984). Does working in high school impair academic progress? Sociol-
ogy of Education, 57, 157-164,
Dornbusch, S. M., Carlsmith, J. M., Bushwall, P. L., Ritter, P. L., Leiderman,
H., Hastorf, A. H., & Gross, R. T. (1985). Single parents, extended house-
holds, and the pontrol of adolescunts. Child Development, 56, 326-341.
Dornbusch, S. M., Ritter, P. L., Leiderman, P., Roberts, D., & Fraleigh, M.
(1987). The relation of parenting style to adolescent school performance.
Child Development, 58, 1244-1257.
Dunphey, D. (1963). The social structure of urban adolescent peer groups. Soci.
ometry, 26, 230-246.
Epstein, J. L. (in press). Effects of parent involvement on change in student
achievement in reading and math. In S. Silvern (Ed.), Literacy through
family, community, and school interaction. Greenwich, CT: JAI.
Epstein, J. L., & Herrick, S. C. (1991a). Implementation and effects ofsummer
home learning packets in middle grade students. Baltimore: johns Hopkins
University.
Epstein, J. L., & Herrick, S. C. (1991b). Implementing school and familypartner-

----- Page 185 (native) -----
180
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
ship in the middle grades (CDS Report No. 20). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University.
Fordham, S., & Ogbu, J. U. (1986). Black students' school success: Coping with
the burden of "acting white." Urban Review, 18, 176-206.
Greenberger, E., & Steinberg, L. (1986). When teenagers work: The psychologi-
cal and social costs of adolescent employment. New York: Basic Books.
Holland, A., & Andre, T. (1987). Participation in extracurricular activities in
secondary school. What is known, what needs to be known? Review of Edu-
cational Research, 57, 437-466.
Kotlowitz, A. (1986, May 27). The fruits of teen labor: Bad grades, profligacy
and a jaded view of working? The Wall Street Journal, p. 29.
Lamborn, S., Mounts, N., Steinberg, L., & Dornbusch, S. (1991). Patterns of com-
petence and adjustment among adolescents from authoritative, authoritar-
ian, indulgent, and neglectful families. Child Development, 62(5), 1049-
1065.
Lewin-Epstein, N. (1981). Youth employment during high school. Washington,
DC: National Center for Education Statistics.
Maccoby, E., & Martin, J. (1983). Socialization in the contex: of the family:
Parent-child interaction. In E. M. Hetherington (Ed.), Handbook of child
psychology: Vol. 4. Socialization, personality, and social development (pp.
1-101). New York: Wiley.
McNeil, L. (1984). Lowering expectations: The impact of student employment on
classroom knowledge. Madison: Wisconsin Center for Educational Research,
University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Mortimer, J. T., & Finch, M. D. (1986). The effects of part-time work on adoles-
cents' self-concept and achievement. In K. Borman & J. Reisman (Eds.),
Becoming a Worker (pp. 66-89). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Mosbach, P., & Leventhal, H. (1988). Peer group identification and smoking:
Implications for intervention. The Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 97, 238-
245.
Newman, P. R., & Newman, B. M. (1976). Early adolescence and its conflict:
Group identity versus alienation. Adolescence, 11, 261-274.
Phi Delta Kappan. (1991). 72(5). [Several articles on parental involvement].
Powell, A. G., Farrar, E., & Cohen, D. K. (1985). The shopping mall high
school: Winners and losers in the educational marketplace. Boston: Hough-
ton Mifflin.
Schill, W., McCartin, R., & Meyer, K. (1985). Youth employment: Its relation-
ship to academic and family variables. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 26,
155-163.
Steinberg, L. (1990, October). Invited testimony before the National Commission
on Children, Minneapolis-St. Paul.
Steinberg, L., Brown, B. B., Cider, M., Kaczmarek, N., & Lazzaro, C. (1988).
Nontnstructional influences on high school student achievement: Contribu-
tions of parents, peers, extracurricular activities, and part-time work. Na-
tional Center for Effective Secondary Schools, Madison, WI.
Steinberg, L., Elmen, J. D., & Mounts, N. S. (1989). Authoritative parenting,
M"

----- Page 186 (native) -----
Putting School in Perspective
181
psychosocial maturity, and academic success among adolescents. Child De-
velopment, 60, 1424-4436.
Steinberg, L., Mounts, N., Lamborn, S., & Dornbusch, S. (1991). Authoritative
parenting and adolescent adjustment across varied ecological niches. Journal
of Research on Adolescence, 1(1), 19-36.
Stevenson, D. L., & Baker, D. P. (1987). The family-school relation and the
child's school performance. Child Development, 58, 1348-1357.
Wehlage, G. G., Rutter, R. A., Smith, G. A., Lesko, N. L., & Fernandez, R. R
(1989). Reducing the risk: Schools as communities of support. Philadelphia.
Fa inlet Press.
Willis, P. (1977). Learning to labor. Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath.
Wirtz, P., Rohrbeck, C., Charner, I., & Fraser, B. (1987). Intense employment
while in high school: Are teachers, guidance counselors, and parents misguid-
ing academically-oriented adolescents? Washington, DC: George Washing-
ton University Graduate Institute for Policy Education and Research.

----- Page 187 (native) -----
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
Fred M. Newmann
What have we learned about how to enhance student engagement and
achievement in American secondary schools? I will first integrate the find-
ings of separate projects into an interpretive framework, then illustrate
some of the findings through events in a single school, and finally consider
the implications of this perspective for improving secondary schools in the
future.
STUDENT ENGAGEMENT AND ACHIEVEMENT IN
SECONDARY SCHOOLS: AN INTERPRETIVE SUMMARY
The studies reported on diverse aspects of school life, and the research
findings can be synthesized into four topics: school culture, curriculum/
instruction, organizational structures, and change processes. The bulk 6f
our res;:arch concentrated on conditions of engagement and achievement
in individual schools, not on how to change conditions throughout a dis-
trict or state.
School Culture
Secondary school students' engagement and achievement are affected
profoundly by experiences that cannot be identified simply by listing what
is prescribed in the formal curriculum, what students do in their classes,
and what is tested. Instead, the effects of any specific school activity are
best understood as cultural phenomena; that is, as outcomes that evolve
through complex webs of institutionally sanctioned meanings, values, and
incentives or disincentives for particular kinds of behavior. Educators tend
to agree that students are influenced by a variety of conditions in their
lives, but debate continues on which parts of school culture have the most
182

----- Page 188 (native) -----
Conclusion
183
impact on engagement and achievement and which can be most easily
influenced through deliberate action by school professionals, policy mak-
ers, or parents.
From the students' point of view, a basic cultural requirement for
engagement is sense of school membership. We learned from the more
successful schools that achieving this quality requires that schools commu-
nicate clear, noncontradictory purposes as the goals of education; that
they treat students fairly; that they offer reliable personal support to help
students undertake the hard and risky work of school; that they communi-
cate high expectations and demonstrate accountability for the success of
all students; and that these responsibilities be discharged in a climate
of care that shows respect for all, regardless of the level of individuals'
performance.
These different dimensions of membership may imply the need for
attention to distinct norms, behaviors, policies, and practices, but it is
important not to lose sight of the underlying principle of inclusion as the
basis of membership. This means listening to students, trying to compre-
hend their own meanings, and responding b ways that incorporate their
perspectives, concerns, and interests
many of which originate from and
concentrate on experiences beyond the formal tasks of classroom instruc-
tion.
The membership principle has multiple implications for school prac-
tice These call include curriculum revision to study cultural groups pre-
viously omitted from history courses; having teachers consider how to
elicit ideas from students that might help the teachers understand a work
of literature; teaching teachers how to give students rigorous criticism in
ways that maximize students' sense of competence and success; establish-
ing mentor or advisory programs that ensure each student long-term sup-
port from a single adult; sponsoring student recognition programs that
reward students for participation and suc,ess in diverse activities; building
systems of governance that give students a more meaningful voice in mat-
ters of policy and rule enforcement; and developing alternatives to ability
grouping to enhance membership for low-achieving students.
Building a culture of inclusion also requires initiatives to affect stu-
dents' noninstructional experiences. These can include programs to in-
crease parents' sense of membership by encouraging their involvement in
school activities and by assisting them with parenting styles that support
student engagement; policies to increase participation of marginal student
groups ("outcasts," "druggies," "loners") in extracurricular activities; pro-
grams to help athletic activities reinforce norms for academic achieve-
inent; counseling and support groups to help students resist peer pressure
destructive to academic engagement and to help them change crowd

----- Page 189 (native) -----
184
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
membership; rules, incentives, and advising to put reasonable limits on
the time students spend in part-time work and partying so they can give
more attention to school.
It is not enough to examine school culture from the student's point of
view. Since teachers are the most important people in schools for boosting
student engagement and achievement, a critical task for school culture is
to nurture teachers' commitment and competence to teach all students.
Syntheses of research attest to the benefits of a communal culture for both
students and teachers (Bryk & Driscoll, 1988; Bryk, Lee, & Smith, 1990).
Consistent with and extending this finding, our studies found that success-
ful schools were characterized by collegial faculty culture. Teachers in
these schools showed consensus on the school's mission, with high expecta-
tions for all students; collegial help that focused on professional issues;
respect and caring for students; demands among teachers for active prob-
lem solvhg, experimentation, and entrepreneurship to develop new pro-
grams; and peer pressure among teachers to work hard for students and
the school. Thus, just as a culture of school membership builds student
engagement, so does a culture of collegial professionalism nurture the will
and skill of teachers to teach effectively.
How can the norms of student membership and collegial professional-
ism be developed in secondary schools? Conclusions on organizational
structures and the process of change described below offer some guide-
lines, but first I will consider how the core of schooling what is taught
and how it is taught
affects student engagement and achievement.
Curriculum and Instruction
Rather than specifying content and methods appropriate for subjects
of study, the Cente-'s research sought criteria for the design of curriculum
and instruction that would increase student engagement and achievement
in all subjects. To maximize the power of this inquiry, we examined quali-
ties of work both in and out of school that tend to generate human interest
and investment in doing one's best. We explained the importance of de-
signing instructional tasks that provide, to the extent possible, extrinsic
rewards, intrinsic interest, sense of ownership, connection to the "real
world," and fun.
These c.riteria reflect several other recommendations for the reform of
curriculum and instruction. For example, recommendations for higher-
o'rder thinking emphasize students as active interpreters who reason about
the meaning of information, rather than simply as reproducers of knowl-
edge fragments. This recognizes the importance of student ownership of
the content. The principle
iepth over coverage" is also consistent with

----- Page 190 (native) -----
. #
Conclusion
185
our criteria: Studying topics in depth offers the opportunity to see relation-
ships and is, therefore, likely to be intrinsically more interesting than
racing through expository material to cover a wide variety of unconnected
topics. Our studies indicated that students were more engaged when they
were expected to be active interpreters of knowledge, rather than docile
recipients, and when they were involved in in-depth study rather than
superficial coverage of information. All of this is consistent with a major
body of research that shows t' at students learn not by passively absorbing
information, but instead by constructing and reconstructing meanings
by trying to make sense of information thrown at them (Resnick, 1987). If
there is no opportunity to make sense of it, the knowledge that is "taught"
will not be learned.
Unfortunately, authentic instruction rarely occurs. In a study of 9th
Grade literature instruction, less than a third of the teachers' questions
built on what students had to say, and less than a quarter of a minute per
class was devoted to discussion that involved free exchange of information
lasting longer than 30 seconds. In a study of social studies in Grades 9-12,
less than a quarter of the lessons clearly emphasized depth, less than a
third showed students giving reasons and explanations, and in only 15
percent of the lessons did teachers carefully consider the reasons and expla-
nations that students gave. This was particularly disturbing, because Keat-
ing's (1988) synthesis of research on adolescents' ability to engage in criti-
cal thinking refuted the ,,,pinion we heard from many teachers that
adolescents are incapable of complex, abstract thought. This research re-
view, plus the many instances we observed where students of all socioeco-
nomic groups were being challenged to think, convinces us that high
school expectations for students using their minds are far too low.
We found that well-intentioned efforts to build a culture of school
membership could lead to unanticipated negative results for curriculum.
In their effort to reach out to low-achieving students and to incorporate
student interests in the curriculum, many teachers have virtually aban-
doned the teaching of complex content in the main subjects of mathemat-
ics, science, English, and social studies. To feel included, students need
support, success, caring, and incorporation of their ideas into academic
study. But students' prior experiences and viewpoints must not be confused
with the formal knowledge that educators are obligated to provide. The
point is not to build curriculum on student personal experience instead of
disciplined knowledge, but to show how disciplined knowledge can em-
power students by expanding and offering new tools with which to inter-
pret personal experience.'
It is possible that we have arrived at a critical moment in thinking
about curriculum and instruction. On the one hand, we have learned

----- Page 191 (native) -----
186
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
from research on student cognition and student engagement that students'
perspectives must be taken more seriously in the design of curriculum
and in the practice of teaching. This tends to suggest a student-certered
approach. We have also learned that students are more capable of complex
thought than previously assumed, but that they are rarely challenged to
understand academic content in depth. So, on the other hand, we find
many voices urging curriculum reform in the direction of challenging,
subject-centered content.' These raised expectations for student under-
standing of disciplined knowledge suggest the need for more rigorous,
subject-centered standards.
What are the alternatives to instruction through expository texts,
teacher lectures, and the recitations typically demanded in worksheets
and class discussions? The "new pedagogy" would restructure traditional
classrooms by connecting students to computers and electronic media, by
emphasizing cooperative small-group work and individually paced study,
and by replacing worksheets with projects. The problem is that these new
techniques and processes do not define what should be taught or the de-
gree of depth desired. Nor do they communicate a sense of what outstand-
ing teachers do or how they talk with students about the subjects of study
in these new circumstances.
We have seen numerous examples of teachers and students engaged
in the "new" pedagogy: interesting, hands-on science projects; students
working cooperatively to solve applied mathematics problems; intense de-
bates where students analyze historical episodes to clarify their reasoning
on persisting public issues; creative writing that uses literature to illumi-
nate a personal experience. These provide glimpses of an alternative cur-
riculum model. But the isolated examples have not yet been synthesized
into total school programs. Only a few teachers, students, and parents
have experienced them. Educational literature describes them briefly, but
has not shown in compelling detail how such teaching, over a sustained
period of time, actually provides students with the information, the intel-
lectual skills, and the dispositions they need io understand and to use
insights from the major subjects of mathematics, science, history, and
literature. In short, this emergent vision of educadon has not been devel-
oped in enough detail nor has it been experienced even occasionally by
enough people to compete with traditional forms and to inspire the recon-
struction of curriculum and instruction.
To successfully
integrate the challenging-content and student-
centered perspectives, we need new substantive rationales for particular
secondary school subjects. Years ago progressive educational philosophy
offered a foundation for the development of an alternative model of edu-
cation. Since then, however, academic discussions, revisions of instruc-

----- Page 192 (native) -----
Conclusion
187
tonal materials, and case studies of successful teachers have not paid
enough attention to (1) defining the kind of content appropriate for educa-
tion in a modern, multicultural society with vast disparities in the social
capital its students bring to school, and (2) showing how teachers, by
drawing on student experiences, can use challenging content to engage
students in deeper levels of understanding. A number of projects are begin-
ning to work on this problem (e.g., the Coalition of Essential Schools, the
Paideia Project, and Project 2061), but none have produced replicable
models of classroom discourse clear and strong enough to replace the cov-
erage principle, expository text, teacher lecturing, and student reproduc-
tion of transmitted knowledge as the currency of curriculum and instruc-
tion. Projects that have focused on building more authentic curriculum
have encountered a number of organizational obstacles that indicate the
need for new organizational structures in secondary schools.
Organizational Structure
Our examination of organizational structure focused mainly on the
lives of students and teachers within individual schools, and less on the
schools' relationships to external bodies such as districts, states, or national
reform initiatives mounted by different organizations. Our theory of stu-
dent engagement and empirical results indicates the need for change in
the common organizational structure of comprehensive secondary schools,
but also that organizational changes alone offer no guarantees of enhanced
student engagement and achievement. I first consider the kinds of changes
suggested and then some findings indicating that organizational changes
alone offer no panacea.
Types of Structural Change Within Schools
What features in the typical organizational structure of secondary
schools should be changed and why? The criteria of school membership,
for example, suggest the need for more focused instructional missions for
the school, channels for student input into rule making and enforcement,
learning communities within schools that provide more sustained contact
with staff who function in advisory as well as instructional roles, and
minimizing the stratification of students into ability groups. All of these
can be facilitated in smaller schools.
We found that students at risk benefit particularly from programs
based on a "family" model in which a small group of teachers (about four)
take collective responsibility for planning and delivering education in the
main subjects to a group of students (about 100) that stays together for at
0

----- Page 193 (native) -----
188
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
least a two-year period. The main strengths in the family model are its
potential for developing stronger bonds of student trust, higher teacher
expectations for students, teachers feeling more accountable for student
performance, and teachers providing one another with the technical assis-
tance anu emotiOnal support required for success with these students.
Criteria for authentic schoolwork suggest the desirability of more
flexibility in the scheduling of instruction to allow for both much shorter
and much longer instructional periods than the typical 50 minutes; re-
duced time in large-group instruction and increased time in small-group
and individual study; making greater use of peers, libraries, and comput-
ers; formal and informal procedures for increasing student influence over
the planning, execution, and evaluation of schoolwork; easier access to
learning resources beyond the school (e.g., through use of telephones and
community-based learning experiences); new arrangements and incentives
that facilitate the display of student work to the public at large and feed-
back on its quality from audiences other than a single teacher (e.g., peers,
the public, and outside authorities); and reduction in teachers' total stu-
dent load to allow more personhlization. We saw examples in which each
of these organizational innovations, in concert with other important fac-
tors (especially improved curriculum and teaching), was associated with
high levels of student engagement and achievement.
Criteria for a culture of collegial professionalism beckon for such
organizational changes as increased opportunities for ongoing professional
development (in contrast to four half-days per year); school-wide faculty
committees to influence decisions on curriculum, staff development, bud-
get, hiring, student affairs, and other aspects of school policy; incentives
that reward teachers for experimentation and program development;
teachers working in teams; and increased common time for teachers to
plan and evaluate their work. Consistent with other literature, we found
schools where such organizational features contributed to teachers' high
level of commitment and technical competence. But, as discussed next,
none of these structures alone produced the kind of student membership,
authentic curriculum, or collegial professionalism required to boost stu-
dent engagement and achievement.
Limitations of New Structures
Changes in organizational structure are unlikely to enhance student
engagement and achievement unless structural changes are deliberately
linked to efforts to improve the substance of educational missions, cultural
norms, curriculum, and teaching. Students working with faculty tutors or
in small groups, for example, can be exposed to either boring or exciting

----- Page 194 (native) -----
Conclusion
189
material. Even dramatic reductions in class size (e.g., from about 25 to 10)
will have little effect unless they are accompanied by changes in teaching
(Bennett, 1987). Our study of social studies departments indicated that
restructuring assisted in the promotion of higher-order thinking, but that
the more intense programmatic emphasis we found in select conventional
schools allowed these schools to perform better than restructured ones.
Our study of teachers' work lives in restructured schools concluded that
collegial professional culture depended as much or more on the quality of
leadership as on the presence of new organizational structures.
Research on ability grouping provides a further illustration of the
indeterminate effects of specific structures. There seems to be consensus
that overall the use of homogeneous ability grouping in secondary schools
does not raise average achievement levels in the student population (Sla-
vin, 1990). The main issue is whether high-achieving students gain and
low-achieving students lose as a result of homogeneous grouping, and if so
what instructional processes account for this. The instructional quality of
low-ability classes tends to be inferior to that of high-ability classes, and
students tracked into several low-ability classes throughout secondary
school encounter a cumulative regimen of fewer academic courses and less
academic content, leading to reduced levels of engagement and achieve-
merfc (Gamoran, 1987; Oakes, 1985). This suggests either that major ef-
forts must be devoted to improving instruction in low-ability classes or
that these should be replaced with heterogeneously grouped classes. On
the other hand, we recognize the difficulties teachers face with heteroge-
neous classes, particularly the problem of providing sufficient challenge to
high-achieving students in these classes.
All of this indicates the need for reconsidering the way students are
grouped, so as to reduce the problems of large-group instruction arid to
rely more on small, cooperative learning groups and individual study.
New groupin6 patterns might avoid some of the problems of whole-class
ability grouping, but the new patterns alone offer no guarantee of at once
raising the achievement level of all and reducing the disparity between
the most and least successful students.
Changes in organizational structure offer much potential, and in
some cases seem logically necessary, for boosting student engagement and
achievement. But no single organizational structure alone (e.g., school-site
council, heterogeneous grouping, teacher mentors, longer school day,
team teaching) is likely either to advance or to impair valued outcomes. it
all depends on how the innovations are used. The effects of organizational
innovation are influenced largely by the values, beliefs, and technical
capacity that individuals bjng to their work. Educators' instructional
goals; their knowledge of subjects; their patterns of interaction; their corn-

----- Page 195 (native) -----
190
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
mitments to excellence, equity, or the development of children; and their
receptiveness to innovation constitute the "content" that ultimately deter-
mines what impact schools have on students. Yet new structures, by pro-
viding opportunities, limits, incentives, and sanctions, can themselves help
stimulate changes in educational vision and school culture. We have seen,
for example, that frequent scheduling of small classes devoted to discus-
sion, or scheduling of instructional periods that last two hours, have led
teachers to reexamine their assumptions about the main -ducational mis-
sion and how to achieve it with today's students. Later I will say more
about the balance between structure and content in school change.
Change Processes
How can secondary schools be changed to realize those aspects of
school culture, curriculum, and organizational structuie that boost stu-
dent engagement and achievement? Our theoretical and empirical re-
search did not concentrate on the process of changing schools, but our
studies of higher-order thinking, programs for students at risk, and the
quality of teachers' work life familiarized us with diverse change efforts in
more than 30 middle and 60 high schools. For the most part these innova-
tions ie re initiated and sustained primarily within single schools, but we
also observed efforts by districts to mandate and support school change
across several schools at once. Research in these schools, along with the
broader literature on school change, lead to conclusions on the importance
of a school's social context, the nature of effective leadership within
schools, the role of change agents external to the school, and problems in
planning and managing systemic change.'
Social Context
Secondary schools are complex environments that pose enormous ob-
stacles to fundamental change. There are common obstacles across schools,
but the social context of each school has a powerful impact on how these
can be attacked. Three aspects of the social context of comprehensive
public secondary schools in the United States make change particularly
problematic.
The first is diversity. Schools serve student constituencies with widely
diverse needs and expectations, and there is profound disagreement on the
essential goals of education. The plurality of needs and goals arises from
major differences in students' economic resources and in their ethnic and
cultural backgrounds, from long-standing and unresolved philosophical
argument over the proper ends of socialization and education of children,
and from the increased demands for knowledge and skills in a technologi-

----- Page 196 (native) -----
a
Conclusion
191
cally advanced, multicultural, democratic society. The diversity leads to a
complex agenda of multiple goals for all children and for separate pro-
grams for particular constituencies. Such a context makes it difficult to
develop and implement common solutions to problems in school culture,
curriculum, and organization. This issue will be discussed further under
"Choices for the Future."
The second is satisfaction. In spite of evidence that millions of adoles-
cents are poorly served by secondary schools, that thousands of teachers
are burned out, and that politicians and corporate leaders are dissatisfied
with school performance, most students, teachers, and parents continue
to believe their own schools are working well enough. In the 1991 Gallup
poll, 73 percent of the parents graded their oldest child's school as A or B,
42 percent of all adults gave A's or B's to the schools in their community,
and only 15 percent of all adults rated their community's schools as D or
failing (Elam, Rose, & Gallup, 1991). When most of the people touched
by the nation's 20,000 secondary schools feel reasonably well served, it is
hard to mustei commitment for fundamental change.
The third is systemic constraint. Even school staff who would like to
change their schools in major ways face a host of obstacles thrown up by
different parts of the social system. District, state, and federal jurisdictions
impose regulations on schools and subject them to vagaries of leadership.
Schools' dependence on colleges, universities, and the economic and regu-
latory structures of the teaching profession limits the quality of teachers
they can hire. Relying for instructional materials on a centralized,
market-oriented publishing industry restricts the availability of engaging
texts. The quality of students' education prior to secondary school and the
entrance requirements for higher education also influence the nature of
secondary school instruction. Finally, the system of social support for chil-
dren offered by families, private social networks, and community agencies
magnifies the range of problems schools face in engaging students.
Effcrts to change what happens in a single classroom (e.g., increasing
teacher questions that build on students' knowledge), to spread a single
innovation to several classes (e.g., cooperative learning), or to fundamen-
tally change a school's organizational structure (e.g., eliminating ability
grouping) must face the problems of diversity, satisfaction, and systemic
constraint within the special historical and social context of the school.'
Leadership Within the School
As we observed changes in school culture, curriculum, and organiza-
tion, we found, as have others, that leadership within the school seemed
critical both in the initiation and maintenance of innovation. Consistent
with research on secondary school leadership (Peterson, 1989), we found
t,,'

----- Page 197 (native) -----
1 92
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
signif.....ant leadership emerged not only from the school principal. In
many cases department chairs and teachers took the most visible initiatives
to establish a sense of mission and to develop new curricula, programs,
and school policy. Often principals acted largely as facilitators and sup-
porters to these other leaders. Since effective school change depends on
school leadership beyond the principal, a major function of effective ad-
ministrative leadership is to nurture it in others
a point recognized in
the literature, but not prominently emphasized in common images of the
effective school principal.
Effective leaders differed in many ways, but all seemed to strike a
delicate balance between directive decisions and guidance, on the one
hand, and the support/empowerment of staff on the other. These leaders
(principals, department chairs, and teachers) helped to establish visions,
to argue for some priorities over others, and to become highly involved in
program details and in the daily lives of students and teachers. But they
also delegated considerable authority, provided financial and moral sup-
port, buffered staff from hostile forces, and stayed out of the way when
teachers exercised constructive initiative.
These qualities of leadership, exercised with sensitivity to the school's
social context, suggest an evolutionary notion of school change (Louis &
Miles, 1990). According to this notion, productive school change does not
proceed on a tight linear path from a detailed plan to implementation
to evaluation of success in terms of original intentions. Instead, specific
objectives and approaches to implementation evolve in a less predictable
fashion as participants respond o unexpected challenges in the school's
social context. Accepting an evolutionary concept of change has significant
implications for the way leaders behave and the way school participants
react to explicit school change efforts. This notion suggests, for example,
that the precise consequences of proposed changes can never be fully antic-
ipated, that criteria for evaluation of success or failure may themselves
need to be modified in the process, and that changes originally intended
may never be implemented in a stable, final form. School change itself is
considered an endless dialectic rather than a journey with a beginning
and an end. This is not to suggest that effective leaders lack direction and
simply "go with the flow," remaining open to all alternatives and directions.
On the contrary, they help to develop organizational commitment to goals
and missions that guide the course of evolution down certain paths.
Change Agents External to the School
The systemic constraints of individual schools described earlier por-
trayed an almost endless maze of obstacles. But different parts of the
system might also be viewed more positively as a set of potential resources

----- Page 198 (native) -----
Conclusion
193
to help schools increase student engagement and achievement. School dis-
tricts, states, universities, and publishers could and ought to be helpful in
stimulating school improvement. Other agents external to the school also
try to play constructive roles, such as teacher unions, other professional
organizations, foundations, businesses, federally sponsored research cen-
ters and educational laboratories, and reform-oriented projects and con-
sortia supported by these sources (e.g., Coalition of Essential Schools,
Project 2061, National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, and National
Network for Educational Renewal). External change agents represent di-
verse goals and strategies. They wield varying degrees of influence over
what actually happens with students in schools.
The most successful change efforts we saw in individual schools did
rely in some way on stimulation, ideas, and support from people, projects,
or agencies beyond the school. Like Louis and Miles (1990), we found
that the most successful of these were sought out by the school or provided
assistance tailored to the school's situation. We are convinced of the need
for outside stimulation and support to fulfill the kinds of changes suggested
in our conceptions of school membership and authentic work. Ultimately
the staff in individual schools must own their innovations, but current
structures within schools that prescribe teachers' and students' work and
that influence professional development are unable by themselves to stim-
ulate and sustain significant change in school culture, curriculum, or or-
ganization. Just as schools depend on external agents to maintain the status
quo, so also do schools need pressure and support from external agencies
to change.
We have not, however, discovered a productive way of harnessing
and linking the resources that many external agents might use to support
individual school change. Consistent with other literature (e.g., David,
Purkey, & White, 1989), we found that local districts can help to stimulate
significant school-levei change. But more often we found either that the
great bulk of district and state policy was irrelevant to school-level efforts
to enhance student engagement and achievement or that top-down man-
dates and regulations undermined school efforts.
Much work needs to be done to devise approaches that maximize
benefits from external change agents. It will be important to maintain a
balance between putting direct, explicit pressure on schools to change in
some specific directions while at the same time offering the kind of support
and autonomy that empower them to chart their own courses. We have
seen examples of district-initiated reforms that fail to take root in schools
or in teachers' minds because people at the school have insufficient oppor.
tunity to reexamine their practice and to reach their own conclusions
about the need for and the most appropriate strategies toward improve-
ment. While some articulation of higher standards is necessary, top-down

----- Page 199 (native) -----
194
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
imposition of new curricula, new assessment procedures, or new organiza-
tional forms alone can exacerbate the difficulties that teachers have engag-
ing students. Striking a proper balance between institutional pressure and
support from external change agents will be a major challenge of district,
state, and federal efforts to restructure schools.
THOMAS JEFFERSON HIGH SCHOOL:
A STORY IN BUILDING STUDENT ENGAGEMENT
The findings from diverse studies in the Secondary Center can be
illustrated through events in a school. Here we show students in a variety
of engaging learning activities and how the school made changes to pro-
duce them. The description of Thomas Jefferson represents a composite of
events and processes observed in actual secondary schools, including those
with large proportions of students at risk. We have observed no school
that actually integrates all of the scenes, but believe that the story of
Thomas Jefferson offers a realistic vision for any school to work toward.'
Most of the students at Thomas Jefferson come from minority groups
and from economically disadvantaged homes. They live in an urban area
beset with problems of unemployment, crime, and family disruption.
Many students have been retained in earlier grades, and a number have
records of misbehavior and truancy. When entering the school as 9th
graders, most read below grade level and test below the 50th percentile in
mathematics achievement. Despite what some might see as a discouraging
situation, the atmosphere at Thomas Jefferson is upbeat. Staff are gener-
ally positive about teaching, and in contrast to the bored, reluctant learn-
ers that occupy the seats in many secondary school classrooms, most stu-
dents here display an air of interest and even excitement about their
academic work.
Curriculum and Instruction
In the science and technology laboratory, students from an interdisci-
plinary science-mathematics class work in groups to program a computer
that is capable of controlling a small robot. Their challenge is to create a
program that controls the robot's movement to do several mechanical tasks
such as sharpening a pencil and opening and closing a door. While each
group must successfully learn to program the robot, the class will enter its
best collective project in the state's science fair later in the year.
In another wing of the same lab, a group of students conducts a series
of experiments with small-scale bridges constructed of balsa wood. The
a

----- Page 200 (native) -----
Conclusion
195
students are trying to apply principles of engineering, physics, and mathe-
matics learned earlier, as they prepare for a contest with several other
schools to determine who can build the strongest bridge.
Across the hall in the school's humanities office, a mixed group of
freshmen through seniors prepares for the publication of the school news-
paper using desk-top publishing equipment. The work is part of the En-
glish curriculum in which each course requires an "applied" experience.
Several younger students are huddled around the hardware as an experi-
enced senior teaches them about various operations in the printing process.
In one corner of the room, the teacher and student editor discuss with two
students revisions of an article they wrote after interviewing a local writer
about issues of violence and racism. They are trying to decide what revi-
sions need to be made in the article before it can be published in the school
paper. In another corner, advertising sales representatives are holding a
meeting prior to calling on local businesses. Nearby, a small group of
photographers are sharing tips on action photography, such as sporting
events.
In the classroom next door, students from a social studies class are
completing their social research project on the homeless. They are rehears-
ing a skit that they wrote to be performed and recorded in the school's
television production studio. Later, with guidance from both the social
studies and drama teachers, they will edit the video to be played on the
city's public cable channel. Other students from the class chose to present
their findings through written articles. The teacher helps them check the
statistical tables and offers suggestions for rewriting the papers as articles
suitable for the "guest column" in the city's newspaper to which some
students want to contribute.
In another wing, seniors in the community involvement class meet in
their weekly seminar. The class satisfies the 12th Grade social studies
requirement. Monday through Thursday students spend at least two hours
per day in volunteer community service outside the school. On Fridays
students and the teacher meet in a two-hour seminar to reflect on their
experiences. Students keep a daily journal and write an essay once a week
that links some social science concept or theory with their activities that
week.
Across the hall, occasional cries from infants announce the location of
the school's special program for teenage mothers or mothers-to-be. The
community has a high pregnancy rate among teenagers, and Thomas Jef-
ferson provides girls with extra support intended to help them complete
high school and also become good mothers. Pregnant students help tend
others' babies and toddlers in one of three nurseries. The on-site child care
facility provides child care for mothers with no other child care options

----- Page 201 (native) -----
196
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
and also serves as a "lab" for expectant mothers. In classes they learn
about their own developing fetus and the stages of development in infants.
Information about exercise, nutrition, labor, and delivery is shared within
an environment where love for children and concern for their well-being
are evident.
Toward the back of the building, students in the technical studies
program spend most of their class hours designing, constructing, and re-
pairing things. They solve special practical problems related to auto me-
chanics, woodworking, machine shop, drafting, and electrical studies.
Half the final exam for each course in the program is a conventional
written test, but students must also demonstrate their ability to use their
technical knowledge with hands-on performance. For instance, the writ-
ten test in electrical studies covers, among other things, Ohm's law and
theories of parallel circuitry. In demonstrations, students are required to
create an electrical device based on a wiring diagram. In a recent exam
they constructed an alarm unit to warn drivers that their headlights re-
main on after the ignition has been turned off.
From nearby practice rooms clustered around a rehearsal room come
strains of music from strings, brass, piano, diverse electronic instruments,
and voices. Students are encouraged by the school to use a free study
period to practice. In the rehearsal room, the school orchestra is rehearsing
for the spring orchestra tour. Some students are competing to be selected
as the orchestra soloists. Three small bands are working to polish their sets
in order to gain entry in the upcoming festival that includes rock, jazz,
and folk. The competitions will be judged by music faculty from a local
college and professional musicians in the area.
Outside the building students from a biology class walk back and
forth systematically through the tall, uncut weeds and grass behind the
athletic field. Each has been given a long, oversize wool sock to wear over
one shoe. The sock accumulates a variety of seeds that will become the
raw material for study and experimentation in their biology class during
the coming weeks.
School Change
A few years ago, these scenes did not exist. Instead, teachers and
administrators spent most of their day trying to control students and cajole
them into studying topics and texts that seemed to provoke resistance
rather than engagement. How did the school become what most agree is a
stimulating place for both students and teachers?
There were many starting points for this transformation, and in retro-
spect it is difficult to say which came first. Some would say it was the
I.
.1

----- Page 202 (native) -----
Conclusion
197
superintendent's revelation of the high failure and retention rates in the
district's secondary sch( Dls. He, along with the school board, argued that
these were unacceptable outcomes and that new resources needed to be
directed at the secondary schools. The superintendent publicly promised
to begin creating exemplary places of learning for adolescents and invited
teachers to join him in this task. His challenge stirred excitement and
controversy, and it became a signal that authorized educational entrepre-
neurship in a number of schools. In fact, at Jefferson many of the staff
had for some time been unhappy with the results of their teaching. In
response, the principal had already sponsored a series of faculty discussions
ar.-.:und issues of school improvement and these had prepared some staff
for the challenge in the superintendent's message. With enthusiasm, a
handful of teachers began to openly question old assumptions about the
way school was organized, what was taught, and how students and teach-
er related to each other. One especially spirited discussion focused on the
well-entrenched practice of tracking students into low-
, middle- , and
high-ability groups. Research on the effects of tracking and the prospects
of accelerating the learning of those who were labeled as low achievers
was brought into the discussion. Eventually the pros and cons of track-
ing permeated dialogue in the school, and the issue was brought before
the faculty for a policy decision. Despite some initial dissent, consen-
sus was reached that tracking would be eliminated in all subjects at the
school.
Prompted in part 13,, the superintendent's publication of rather shock-
ing data about the low achievement, failure, and retention rates in the
system, a group of parents and teachers began to study these problems at
Jefferson. Determined to change what most agreed was an unacceptable
situation, this group became known as the "school improvement" commit-
tee. It tapped into district funds for staff development, began discussing a
set of readings on school improvement, and sponsored visits by teachers
to schools in other districts that had been described as "excellent" and
"effective." As one teacher recalls, the difference between this and previ-
cus committees to improve school was the depth and substance of the
issues discussed.
In the past we always identified superficial things to change, like
using the latest teaching technique, but we didn't consider
changes in what we taught, what we asked kids to learn, or
what we expected them to be able to do. When teachers began
to see that we needed to make some fundamental changes in
these areas, like focusing on student performance as our teaching
goal, things got real exciting.

----- Page 203 (native) -----
198
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
Membership on the school improvement committee began to grow,
and the committee eventually split into subcommittees. The most aggres-
sive of these was a group of science and mathematics teachers who were
convinced that student interest and achievement in their subjects could be
substantially improved. Idezs developed from visits to other schools and
from their readings eventually led to a decision to create a science and
technology laboratory that could provide a focus for almost all science
and much mathematics coursewoik. The lab would provide a place and
special equipment for an applied, hands-on approach to curriculum, but
this also required a complete restructuring of the science and mathematics
curriculum.
The lab got its biggest boost when the subcommittee was successful in
getting a grant from a local foundation to remodel a large classroom and
buy some state-of-the-art equipment the sc.hool system said it was unable
to afford. Several professionals from the community who worked in scien-
tific areas had been brought onto the subcommittee to provide guidance
about the knowledge required by contemporary technology. This group
of citizens has since become permanent advisors. In addition, they are
active in helping raise small amounts of money, identifying surplus science
and technology equipment in local businesses that can be donated to the
lab, providing occasional assistance with special projects, and opening
their own businesses and labs for use by teachers and students. Several
employees of these businesses have volunteered as mentors to work with
students especially interested in pursuing careers involving science. One
member of the advisory group is now working with the local university to
develop a summer "college for kids" focused on attracting minority youth
into science fields.
The science and technology lab immediately became a highly visible
and successful feature of the school, and soon the language arts and social
studies teachers at Jefferson were developing their own variation. After
extensive joint discussions and planning, teachers from these two subjects
created an interdisciplinary program of study that utilizes media technol-
ogy. However, securing the hardware required by the new curriculum
proved difficult. A subcommittee consisting of teachers, the principal, and
one of the language arts specialists from the central office eventually was
successful in persuading the district to provide funding for the necessary
equipment. As a result, the school now has three media labs
a desk-top
publishing center, and radio and television studios.
New curricula and supporting hardware are not the only new features
at Jefferson. The school day was lengthened and scheduling was reorgan-
ized to create teams of math/science and English/social studies teachers
with common teaching and planning periods. These changes came about
2:ti

----- Page 204 (native) -----
Conclusion
199
only after lengthy, and sometimes heated, discussions by the staff. Some
teachers raised objections to required teaming and a longer work day
without a corresponding increase in pay. Eventually, however, consensus
was reached that the new curriculum was important, and that it required
increased structured time and new teaming arrangements, and in an ex-
pression of collegial and professional commitment, the teachers' union and
staff aueed to support the changes.
In addition, restructuring of staff roles has provided a high level of
social support for students who come from homes under stress because of
unemployment, poverty, divorce, and drug and alcohol abuse. Additional
counseling staff was obtained through an experimental state program that
helps counselors develop skills in home assessment and a knowledge of
social services in the community that can assist families in difficulty.
Counselors now must spend a portion of the time linking students and
families to social services. Another change in role makes each staff mem-
ber, including the principal, a student advisor. Three mornings a week
adults meet with their "advisees" to provide academic and personal guid-
ance. Contact with the home about each student's academic and personal
progress is required at least once a month.
Another major innovation is the Student Responsibility Committee,
made up of students and staff, which deals with disciplinary and school
climate problems. This committee has real governing authority, and
among the things it has accomplished are creating alternatives to out-of-
school suspension, a student conflict resolution team, and a community
service program. The latter provides student volunteers to aid the elderly
and handicapped. The principal credits these initiatives by the Student
Responsibility Committee for creating a much improved school climate,
discipline, and a sense of pride in the school. As evidence, he cites data
showing a 90 percent reduction in out-of-school suspensions over the last
three years.
In discussing life at Jefferson with teachers, one finds that the school
is a good place to teach, partly because of the excitement the new curricu-
lum has created. Teachers generally believe that teaching is more satis-
fying because students are more successful. Teaching is also satisfying
because of teachers' commitment to a curriculum they have constructed.
Also contributing to staff satisfaction is the school's shared governance
system that gives staff real deciFton-making power.
Despite this optimistic pir cure, there are still problems that remain to
be solved. A few teachers resent the loss of autonomy that resulted from
the new organization and curriculum. Also, the governance system contin-
ues to take substantial time and requires teachers to perform a role for
which they have little preparation. For example, each week the Principal's
2 '

----- Page 205 (native) -----
200
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
Cabinet, composed of teacher representatives, meets to take up a wide
range of governance issues such as spending money tc develop new
courses, hiring teacher aides, and modifying class schedules. While these
are important issues to teachers, some claim that the governance process
contributes to a burnout problem. The work load from serving on the
Principal's Cabinet, the Student Responsibility Committee, and other
committees is exacerbated by the fact that some faculty participate mini-
mally, which creates a buren on those who are active. Ultimately, these
are problems that will require more resources to provide staff with addi-
tional noninstructional time. Finally, a more serious problem is finding a
way to strengthen and sustain the additional resources the staff has already
generated from social services, the business community, and the univer-
sity. Despite these problems, most teachers and administrators say they
could never go back to the "bad old days" when teachers were ignored
and felt alienated from administrative directives and decisions.
CHOICES FOR THE FUTURE
What are the implications of Thomas Jefferson and the summary of
findings for improving secondary schools in the future? No single model
or set of alternatives will work in every community. Thus, rather than
offering a formula for success, it makes more sense to clarify some critical
choices that need to be faced. After listening to teachers, administrators,
parents, students, and policy makers, and studying research on education,
we find confusion, lack of understanding, and reluctance to confront sev-
eral critical issues. There is a tendency to view education largely as a
technical enterprise and to underestimate its moral and political content.
There is confusion on goals, especially on how to resolve differences be-
tween progressive and traditional conceptions of education, and on the
extent to which schools should promote common curriculum for all. Al-
most no attention is given to the relationship between organizational struc-
ture and educational content. There is ambivalence about the priority to
place on large-scale systemic reform versus changing one school at a time.
And there is profound neglect of the problem of building social capital so
that students can benefit from schooling. In making choices about the
future, each of these issues must be careful4 considered.
Education as a Moral and Political Enterprise
The solutions to educational problems will not be found simply
through research that discovers how to teach reading or mathematics,
how to lead a school, how to run a community service program, or how
a

----- Page 206 (native) -----
Conclusion
201
to assess students. Behind each of these apparently straightforward ques-
tions lie significant moral and political choices. Education is a moral activ-
ity, because it prescribes, either explicitly or implicitly, what people ought
to do, what they ought to think, and even what they ought to feel. There
is no escape from the controversies entailed in taking on this responsibility.
The familiar injunction that education can and should avoid moral pre-
scriptions
by teaching tolerance and respect for diversity and by teaching
critical inquiry rather than one right way of thinking offers little refuge.
These "protectk,ns" themselves are, of course, also prescriptions for certain
kinds of behavior, thought, and affect. They define at least in part what
it means to be a good person and to live a good life. This is not to say that
all educational activity necessarily indoctrinates, narrows one's options,
or limits freedom. But even the choice to maximize freedom and choice is,
of course, a prescription for valued behavior.
Education is political in the sense that it allocates scarce reFources
and power. What resources are invested in affluent versus poor stadents,
English-speaking versus limited-English-proficiency students, gifted and
talented versus disabled students? Whose cultural heritage is emphasized
in the curriculum? What kinds of adult work are honored through the
curriculum and what kinds are neglected or devalued? Which citizens
have more and less opportunity to influence the conduct of schooling?
Beyond the allocation of scarce resources, education is political in another
sense; namely, for schools to function they must earn the support of partic-
ular constituencies. What schools do to earn community support may not
always be consistent with offering students the best education possible.
Some questions about how to teach or how to organize schools may seem
to call for technical knowledge independent of politics, but often they
must be answered with great deference to the kinds of power relations
that school participants need to support.
The connection between moral and political aspects of education is
illustrated in judgments about educational equity. The effective schools
movement began as an effort to narrow the gap in reading and math
achievement between low-income minority children and the more affluent
middle class. National test results indicate that considerable progress has
been made in narrowing the achievement gap in basic skills between mi-
nority and white students. Average results, however, obscure the fact that
in thousands of secondary schools enormous disparities remain between
students at risk due to low income, limited English proficiency, or lack
of family support and those whose advantaged positions in the social-
economic mainstream bring them much higher levels of school success.
Disparities abound between these two groups in the quality of instruction
offered and in the achievement of both basic skills and more complex
understanding of important subjects. What investment should be made to
4

----- Page 207 (native) -----
202
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
reduce these disparities is a moral issue, but how the issue will actually be
decided depends not simply on moral argument and scientific evidence
about the costs and benefits of alternative positions. The actual resolution
will depend heavly on existing power relations in the political environ-
ment.
An awareness of the moral and political bases of educational decision
making should temper the extent to which we expect technical knowledge
alone to resolve four issues likely to become increasingly troublesome;
namely, education goals, structure versus content, reforming separate
schools versus the whole system, and the connection between schooling
and social capital.
Goals
We have spoken a good deal about the importonce of consensus on
clear goals, and have argued that goals such as membership and authentic
academic work are likely to enhance engagement and achievement. At
the same time, there is substantial disagreement in the society on what to
teach and the extent to which there should be one set of goals for all
students.
Traditional and Progressive Educational Visions
Disagreement over educational goals is due in part to long-standing
issues in educational philosophy that are unlikely to be resolved soon, even
with societal agreement that schools should be improved, that students
should come to school ready to learn, or that all students should have
more science and mathematics. The most publicized debates highlight
issues such as the importance given to science versus humanities, voca-
tional versus college prep curriculum, or programs for gifted vs. at-risk
students. A less publicized, lcs articulated, but more fundamental tension
often centers around a set of apparently competing choices between tradi-
tional and progressive visions of education. In all curriculum areas, these
visions harbor conflicting assumptions about the nature of knowledge and
its use in education. Some of the assumptions that have major implications
for curriculum and teaching are summarized below.'
Traditional
1. Knowledge as conclusive and objective
2. Education for surveys of knowledge and basic skills
3. Absorption of knowledge for future use
2

----- Page 208 (native) -----
Conclusion
203
4. Knowledge grounded in formal disciplines external to the learner
5. Education for verbal and mathematical competence
Progressive
1. Knowledge as tentative and socially constructed
2. Education for in-depth understanding and critical thinking
1 Using knowledge in order to learn
4. Knowledge grounded in interaction between student experiences
and formal disciplined knowledge
5. Education for multiple intelligences
This is not to suggest that people take clear, categorical positions on
these issues or that it is always necessary to choose between stark alterna-
tives. What makes the issues so persistent is that each side contains enough
truth that it cannot be completely dismissed. Disagreement of this sort
will never be conclusively resolved on one side or the other. Instead, op-
posing sides will continue as horns of persisting dilemmas for thoughtful
educators .7
The historical record shows that school reform movements have
pushed in both traditional and progressive directions, but that traditional
visions have consistently dominated.' Progressive visions have been toler-
ated only occasionally as alternatives for special groups of students. The
overall conclusion of this book, however, supported by material in most
of the chapters, is that to enhance student engagement and achievement,
far more weight should be given to the progressive side than is typically
found in secondary schools. Scenes at Thomas Jefferson High School illus-
trated what this might look like.
Differentiation and Commonality in Curriculum
In spite of recent movement toward national education goals and
increased l'.trge-scale testing, implying increased uniformity in curricu-
lum, several forces push toward differentiation, both of student experi-
ences within schools and of schools from one another. The forces that
drive differentiation are cultural, vocational, pedagogical, and political.
Rapidly increasing numbers of racially and ethnically diverse students
and of students without English as a first language have raised, and will
continue to raise, questions about what should be taught in common and
what educational content should be different to respond to needs of unique
cultural groups.
There are increasing pressures to design education so that students
6
Not

----- Page 209 (native) -----
204
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
are placed into different career tracks. Even with agreement that the work
force needs more advanced competencies in thinking and problem solving
and more education beyond secondary school, clear divisions in academic
preparation exist between students aiming for elite liberal arts institutions,
state universities, community colleges, and technical schools. Oregon has
adopted a system that accentuates such differentiation after 10th Grade.
Research and experience in teaching continue to highlight individual
differences in student motivation and learning style, accentuated even
further by dramatic differences in students' cultural backgrounds and
home environments. In the face of these differences, teachers are increas-
ingly reluctant to shape all students into one mold.
One way of handling human diversity and disagreement over educa-
tional ends or means is to allow individuals, schools, communities, and
states to choose their own paths, rather than requiring uniformity. Resis-
tance to formal centralized control of curriculum in the United States has
bolstered a tradition of local control. Individual schools, districts, states,
and parents united through neighborhood or common interests have exer-
cised unique influences over school curriculum, which leads to further
differentiation in the nation as a whole.
Significant tension exists between the differentiation of schooling due
to cultural diversity, vocational specialization, individual differences, and
local political control, and the desire for standard, more uniform outcomes
across a large number of schools. The case for more uniform standards
is based largely in arguments for equity for all students regardless of so-
cial background and residential location, for more efficient assessment
of results, and for increasing student achievement on a state or national
scale.
Discussion of education goals within a school or a unit containing
more than one school (district, state, nation) is likely, therefore, to involve
difficulties not only on the substance of education to pursue (e.g., along
traditional or progressive lines), but also in deciding which goals should
be common to all students (schools) and which should be different.
Structure Versus Content
Recent alarm over the condition of public education, expressed most
visibly by political and corporate leaders, has focused attention on struc-
tural issues. Enormous energy and resources have recently been invested
in debates over and attempts to implement a variety of changes in the
organization of schools. The more visible proposals are summarized
below.
!

----- Page 210 (native) -----
Conclusion
205
Parents should choose their children's schools, and schoGls should com-
pete for funding based on student enrollment.
Individual schools should have autonomy from district and state regula-
tions in basic decisions on curriculum, hiring, and budget.
Teachers and parents should share decision-making authority with ad-
ministrators in local school governance.
Schools should be held accountable for student performance by districts,
states, and parents.
Tracking and ability grouping should be abolished and replaced by
heterogeneous grouping.
Schools should operate year-round.
Community social services should be coordinated with school programs.
There should be national certification of teachers and ladders of profes-
sional advancement within the teaching profession.
There should be more opportunity for teachers to plan and work to-
gether in school.
Students should spend more time in small-group and individual study,
and less in large-group instruction.
Students should advance in school not according to grades attended and
credits earned, but according to demonstrated proficiency.
Literature on educational restructuring is remarkably silent on the
question of why or how particular organizational structures such as these
are likely to improve student achievement. The assumed, but rarely well-
argued, connections between organizational structure and specific student
outcomes can usually be reduced to two types of claims. New structures
will presumably either inc.iease the commitment (motivation) of adults to
teach and students to learn, or they will increase the competence (techni-
cal capacity) of adults to offer a more effective learning environment.
The reasoning can be illustrated in arguments for school-based man-
agement and shared decision making. If teachers and administrators are
given more autonomy, discretion, and control in conducting the work,
they will feel a greater sense of ownership of and responsibility for its
quality. This sense of control leads to more pride in success and more
personal culpability for failure, both of which inspire greater commitment
to do a good job.
Increased control allows educators to us:- their professional knowledge
and experience to the fullest. Rather than having to rely on technical
direction from authorities far removed from the scene, the teacher is free
to teach only according to approaches that his or her best judgment says
will work. Access to and application of technical know-how are thus made
0

----- Page 211 (native) -----
206
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
more efficient. In this sense, local empowerment can be expected to en-
hance teachers' competence.
Enhancing school-level teacher control seems likely to promote com-
mitment and competence, but this alone offers no guarantees. Will the
teachers be sufficiently committed to low-achieving students? Will they
know enough about mathematics to teach it well? Will they have access
to new knowledge on assessment? Will they be committed to traditional or
progressive visions of education? Will ideological and personality conflict
within the group of teachers prevent their developing consensus and learn-
ing from one another? Whether any given organizational arrangement
actually leads to improved student engagement or learning depends large-
ly on the content of commitment and the content of competence exercised.
A variety of structural changes may seem reasonable, but the chal-
lenge is to determine how to maximize the probability that apparently
more sensible structural arrangements will actually be filled with valid
educational content that engages students. In short, "where's the beef," or
what kind of "beef should fill the new structures? What particular kinds
of commitments and what particular kinds of competencies should new
structures promote?
A comprehensive look at the kinds of commitments and competence
needed in restructured schools would consider administrators, parents,
publishers, test-makers, and others. I focus here on teachers, because they
have the most direct opportunities to influence stuCmts. The three themes
discussed next represent, in my view, the most important substantive goals
for teachers that new structures should serve.
Theme 1: Depth of Understanding and Authentic Learning
The content of school restructuring can conceivably lead in either
direction, but the more well-developed proposals aim more toward the
progressive vision. To infuse restructuring with powerful content calls for
building teacher commitment to an educational vision that emphasizes
depth of understanding and authentic learning, rather than only transmis-
sion and reproduction of declarative knowledge. This emphasis on the
progressive vision does not deny, as many erroneously believe, the impor-
tance of teaching basic information, concepts, and skills. The point is to
move beyond the "basics," recognizing that unless such knowledge is ap-
plied to questions more complex than those of quiz shows or crossword
puzzles, it will rarely be useful to individuals or society. To execute this
commitment, teachers will need lots of help. The earlier discussion about
the synthesis between student-centered and challenging content ap-

----- Page 212 (native) -----
Conclusion
207
proaches to curriculum suggested some of the issues that must be faced in
helping teachers with this theme.
Theme 2: Success for All Students
The escalating diversity of the student population and the growing
numbers of students at risk have dramatized failures of the current social
and educational system. Dominant structures of schooling can respond to
students who come to school eager to learn, competent in speaking En-
glish, and from home environments that provide food, health care, intel-
lectual stimulation, emotional stability, and the belief that working hard
in school will lead to economic success and full-fledged membership in
white, middle-class society. But teachers face increasing numbers of stu-
dents who don't fit this mold. Instead, poverty, poor health, emotional
turmoil, limited proficiency in English, increased responsibilities for fam-
ily care, cultural norms that differ from the white middle class, and histo-
ries of failure in school make it very difficult for children to invest them-
selves in conventional forms of schoolwork. These students pose major
challenges for teachers, especially those from white, middle-class back-
grounds. When students don't seem to learn within the conventional struc-
ture of schools, teachers begin to lower their expectations. As children
experience failure, they lower expectations for themselves. This creates a
self-fulfilling downward spiral for both students and staff.
As discussed later, some of the problems of students at risk will ulti-
mately be solved only through massive societal efforts to rebuild social
capital. But schools cannot and need not wait. Research has already
shown that vs.;achers with high expectations can successfully teach cultur-
ally diverse students and at-risk students (see Brice Heath & Magnolia,
1991; Brookover, Beady, Flood, Schweitzer, & Wisenbaker, 1979; Ed-
monds, 1979; Madden, Slavin, Karweit, Dolan, & Wasik, 1991; Slavin,
Karweit, & Madden, 1989; Stedman, 1985; U.S. Department of Educa-
tion, 1987; Wehlage, Rutter, Smith, Lesko, & Fernandez, 1989). The
problem is how to help all teachers become more effective with these
students. White, middle-class teachers, for example, will need to gain new
understanding of students' diverse cultural and social backgrounds. They
will need opportunities to get to know these students better through work-
ing relationships that nurture the kind of personal bonding and trust on
which mutual commitment to teach and to learn must be built. They
will need to develop understanding of important competencies that these
students possess but may not be able to express through convention-
al school routines. As teachers participate in such new organizational

----- Page 213 (native) -----
208
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
structures as teams, school councils, or student advisory groups, critical
attention must be given to this second arena for powerful content:
building commitment and competence to teach all students, especially
those from culturally diverse backgrounds and with histories of school
failure.
Theme 3: New Roles for Teachers
Themes 1 and 2 suggest that teachers may need to function in new
roles that depart substantially from the familiar role of pedagogue within
a self-contained class, teaching many students simultaneously in a large
group. Restructuring projects suggest a variety of new roles for teachers,
including instructional coach, instructional or curriculum team member,
facilitator of new programs, student advisor, and participant in organiza-
tional decision making. These roles extend the responsibilities of teaching
enormously and call for a host of commitments and competencies.
Will teachers commit themselves to new responsibilities? Will they
function competently in the new roles? There is no reason to assume that
simply placing teachers in the new roles of coach, organizational decision
maker, or even team member with other teachers will necessarily build
teacher commitment or proficiency to perform the role well. Most teachers
have had little experience and no formal training in these roles. And, as
indicated earlier, the knowledge base on how to be effective in some of
these ioles is weak. As with other innovations, new roles can become
overplayed as ends in themselves without critical examination of their
necessity and relevance to improved instruction. There may be an impor-
tant trade-off, for example, between helping teachers become better deci-
sion makers on governance issues versus helping them learn how to re-
spond more constructively to student writing. This third theme calls for
close analysis of the new roles needed, along with reinforcement for and
education in the roles that new structures require.9
These three areas of teacher commitment and competence offer an
agenda of content to be infused into new organizational structures through
the selection of staff, the building of organizational missions, and the
conduct of professional development activity.
The merits of this particular agenda, of course, will be debated. The
debate will take us back to consideration of fundamental goals and the
moral and political issues that lie at the heart of much educational contro-
versy. The point here is not to claim that research has resolved the con-
troversies, but to show that deciding to change the structures of schooling
will not necessarily enhance student engagement and achievement. Deci-
sions about the particular directions of commitment and particular forms

----- Page 214 (native) -----
Conclusion
209
oi competence to promote in both teachers and students are equally, if
not more, important.
To implement their progressive educational vision, staff at Thomas
Jefferson relied on specific organizational structures and also on substan-
tive commitments and competencies of faculty. Efforts at school reform
can focus too much on either structure or content. Schools will be more
effective if organizational structure and content reinforce one another.
School-by-School and Systemic Reform
To improve education, choices must be made not only about goals
and the emphasis given to structure and content, but also about the under-
lying reform strategies. For the most part, our research took a bottom-up
perspective, trying to understand the process of student engagement and
achievement within individual secondary schools, in contrast to studying
how the broader system might be changed for the benefit of many schools
at once. My comments on social context, leadership, and external change
agents focused on how schools might be changed, essentially one at a time.
This approach to research was consistent with several studies on school
change that document the unique nature of schools and the difficulties of
top-down strategies for changing them.
Thomas Jefferson High School offered an illustration of the process of
individual school improvement, and other research has shown how it is
possible to improve secondary schools one by one (see Grant, 1988; Lip-
sitz, 1984; Louis & Miles, 1990; Metz, 1986). At the same time, it is
important to consider educational improvement as a collective social re-
sponsibility. This requires thinking about systemic reform: What pro-
grams and policies might make it possible to change many schools within
a district, a state, or the nation? Recent national concern for systemic
change is illustrated by the U.S. Department of Education's issuing of
"National Goals for Education" in 1990 and the plan "America 2000" in
1991. Many initiatives have been proposed and some implemented by
commissions and agencies. They include new systems of district, state,
and national assessment to hold schools more accountable for student out-
comes; new curriculum standards (for teachers, schools, and publishers of
instructional materials) that emphasize thinking and in-depth study; re-
form of preservice training and of staff development of teachers and ad-
ministrators; new career and reward structures for teachers and adminis-
trators; new systems of governance that give more authority to parents
and teachers to run schools; schools programmed to serve more specialized
missions than the common comprehensive secondary school; and increased
nhool choice for students and parents.
,

----- Page 215 (native) -----
210
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
Each of the above remedies appears reasonable at first glance and
offers the potential for improving school culture, curriculum, and organi-
zation consistent with our conceptions of school membership and authen-
tic work. But we can also imagine ways in which each of the above
remedies could undermine the forms of engagement and achievement we
propose. High-stakes testing by districts or states could continue to sanctify
inauthentic reproduction of fragmented knowledge. School-based man-
agement can remain preoccupied with personnel and budget issues and
neglect important matters of school culture, curriculum, and instruction
(Ma len, Ogawa, & Krantz, 1990). Specialized magnet schools and systems
of choice can lead to deteriorating conditions for students who remain
in conventional neighborhood schools (Moore & Davenport, 1989). It is
impossible to assess the effects on student learning of most of the items
above, because, as phrased here, they are silent on the specific commit-
ments and competencies to be promoted. Our research found no clear
systemic solutions about how to change hundreds or thousands of schools
to enhance student engagement and achievement. But the research did
suggest important questions that should guide evaluation of proposals for
systemic change.
Are proposed systemic strategies consistent with what is known about
human learning, social-cultural relations, and organizational functioning?
We have learned much, for example, about the folly of trying to imple-
ment curriculum change simply by producing new curricula and mandat-
ing their use. Instead, the actual users of an innovation
teachers, admin-
istrators, parents must be sufficiently involved :n the process of adoption
so they develop a sense of ownership. School-based ownership of innova-
tion by participants closest to students and classrooms is widely endorsed.
But will it be possible to nurture a sense of ownership among teachers
within a system that may impose high-stakes accountability to perfor-
mance standards set by distant state authorities?
The importance of local ownership may suggest an entirely new ap-
proach to systemic change. The traditional policy approach relies on top-
down regulations that schools must meet to stay in operation. More recent
thinking urges district and state bureaucracies to transform themselves
from regulating agencies into those that instead offer services and support,
based on needs of the schools. But who will set and enforce the purposes
for which systemic support is offered
the local school or the state bureau-
cracy? A middle ground between these positions recommends that change
might be pursued more effectively through thoughtful dialogue between
people at the school site and state authorities. In this role, the education
bureaucracy would function primarily neither as a regulator nor as a
service provider. It would take on aspects of each, but its major mission
gm r)
I.;

----- Page 216 (native) -----
=t
Conclusion
21 1
would be to establish a constructive dialogue that, through a continuing
dialectic, balances needs of individual schools and those of systemic re-
form.
Proposals for systemic change should be scrutinized for the oxtent to
which they address the problem of loose-coupling and fragmentation
within the system. Smith and O'Day (1991) described the vacuum of coor-
dination among critical elements that influence education in schools.
There is virtually no alignment among teacher education; local school
curriculum; student performance standards set by schools, districts, or
states; the preparation of commercial curriculum materials; criteria for
teachers' professional advancement; and the nature of professional devel-
opment activities. Given the failure to link critical elements in the system
to reinforce one another, it should be no surprise that the system produces
results of such low quality.
The costs and benefits of any single systemic intervention, such as
national tests or school-based councils, can be debated. A more fundamen-
tal issue, however, is the extent to which discrete remedies can be inte-
grat-td in ways that enhance systemic coordination. Taking this problem
seriously leads to the question of scale. At what level
school, district,
state, region, nation
would tighter, comprehensive coordination kr de-
sirable? Is it possible to work toward tighter linkages and still avoic; the
dangers of a monolithic system that does more harm than good? Tighter
linkages will entail reductions in organizational autonomy from individual
classrooms to university programs of teacher education. At what point
should systemic responsibility for the education of children justify placing
greater constraints oil the variety of participants in that enterprise? If
tightir linkages are desirable, what political, legal, and economic ch=inges
would make then-i happen? Unfoitimately, most proposed systemic inno-
vations have failed to ad,:des:., thes,- i.,:oblems of linkage and coordinatiun.
Schooling and Social Capital
just as we concluded the reports of resrar-h by 13,,king at adolescents
beyond the classroom, in these final observations on choices for the future
I try to put school in perspective. Parents, educators, researcheis, and
youth-serving professionals commonly acknowledge the :normous power
of factors beyond formal schooling to affect the values, dispositions skills,
and knowledge of youth, and the likelihood that students wiil benefit
from schooling. Economic re-ources, parenting stylcs, unique family and
social-cultural history, and the media provide a wealth of 'edu,.ation,"
informally delivered. Educators typically feel ove _iowered by societal in-
fluences beyond their con' rol. How can they educate students who come
-
0

----- Page 217 (native) -----
212
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
to school undernourished from homes filled with conflict or the emptiness
of neglect? How can they teach children to cooperate, to live frugally to
preserve the planet, or to pardcipate in communi'y affairs when the soci-
ety bombards them with messages of individual comp,'-ition, high mate-
rial consumption, and civic powerlessness? How can they :nspire students
to take pride in doing their best work when they SP ao many examples of
adults who take pride in doing only enough to get by?
Many educators answer such questions by abdicating responsibility
for the engagement and achievement of students who don't seem to fit
into conventional school routines. At the other extreme, parents, corporate
leaders, and policy makers often expect educators to take far more respon-
sibility for youth development than their resources permit. To the extent
that major difficulties in educating students reflect fundamental deficits
or dysfunctions in society, the improvement of education may depend on
far more than technicel advances or restructuring of schools. In addition,
it may require restrue uring of sooial, economic, and political life in the
community at large. The problem is to clarify the extent to which schools
might substantially enhance student engagement and achievement on
their own, and the extent to whiLh substantial school improvement re-
quires prior or concurrent changes in institutions beyond schools.
Children cannot invest themselves in learning unless they have stable
networks of social support beyond the school that provide basic material
needs of food, clothing, shelter, and health care, and, most important,
emotional bonding to adults who nurture trust, hope, and the self-
confidence needed to develop intellectual and social competence. Tradi-
tionally these forms of support foi children have been provided by fami-
lies, adult friends, and the social, religious, and political organizations of
ne.ighborhoods and small communities. Increasingly, however, middle-
class flight, a disintegrating economic base, deteriorating housing stock,
and a general loss of stable institutions have weakened the ability of many
urban neighborhoods to sustain constructive family life and other forms of
social support (Wilson, 1987), including the political capability required
for long-term fundamental school reform (Cohen, 1990). The problem
sefnns most dramatic, in urban areas, but recent investigations into the
condition of children in the United States ihows serious problems in di-
verse locations and roCi al groups (Committee for Economic Development,
1987; Hodgkinson, 1991; O'Neil, 1991).
The hu man resources the provide support for children can be consid-
ered social capital (Colemg
, )988). Like fiscal or material capital, social
capital is required for grov Li. Social capital is grounded in adults with
important individual attributes such as the commitment and competence
to care for children. Most important, however, social capital consists of
r..1"
t_i

----- Page 218 (native) -----
Conclusion
213
an organizational fabric that provides collective adult support. The orga-
nizational fabric must offer opportunities to develop both formal and
informal "institutions" that identify and solve collective problems. These
may involve activities ranging from card games and bowling leagues to
child care centers and drug rehabilitation programs.
The role of schools in the rebuilding of social capital is as yet unclear,
but there should be little doubt that over the long term, education for
many students will not improve substantially without advancs in the
social capital of their communities (Coleman & Hoffer, 1987; Schorr,
1988). Disparate efforts of churches, action organizations, social service
agencies, unions, and businesses have attacked parts of the problfm. Some
education projects have launched major efforts to enhance parental
involvement ir. schooling (e.g., James Corner's project in New hfaven) and
to coordinate social and health services in the school (San Diego's New
Beginnings project). In general, however, both education reform and so-
cial welfare policy have failed to address the decline of social capital in
American communities.
Most American secondary schools still have a long way to go to sub-
stantially improve the engagement and achievement of their students. We
must not forget that in spite of all the talk about improving schools, most
of the variation in students' school success across the system is due to
differences between classes within schools, not between schools of differ-
ent quality (Pauly, 1991). At the same time we did find schools and pro-
grams that distinguished themselves in the promotion of higher-order
thinking, in developing effective programs for students at risk, and in
maintaining high levels of teacher engagement with large proportions of
economically disadvantaged students. These schools achieved success not
primarily as a result of systemic policy pressure from external sources, but
through a process of reflective dialogue within the school that, in some
cases, benefitted substantially from the stimulation and support of external
change agents. Whether these schools were accidental heroes or whether
the lessons of their success can be generalized and harnessed toward more
systemic improvement remains to be seen.
Many voices have recently urged an historically unique national
agenda for education in the United States, and at this writing several
initiatives have begun. Unfortunately, the press for school choice, national
tests in six curriculum areas, school-based management, and new re-
structured schools leaves unresolved most of the issues just discussed.
Unless proposed innovations attempt to tackle these issues explicitly, it
will be difficult to predict their effects on student engagement and
achievement.

----- Page 219 (native) -----
214
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
NOTES
1. In Chapter 2 Gamoran and Nystrand found that teachers of low-track
students asked authentic, student-centered questions, but not about literature.
Only when authentic questions were directed toward substantive content (as in
high-track classes) did authenticity contribute to understanding of literature.
2. Elmore (1991) summarizes six emerging ideas about best teaching practice
that call for depth of understanding as a central focus of learning. Porter, Arch-
bald, and Tyree (1990) present the concept of "hard content" and discuss the
extent to which state policies of curriculum control and empowerment have
achieved it.
3. See Fullan and Stiegelbauer (1991) for a far-reaching synthesis of research
on educational change in individuals, institutions, and systems.
4. Sarason (1990) offers one of the most comprehensive essays on the problem
of educational change in the contemporary social context.
5. This material is taken from Wehlage, Lipman, and Smith (1990) and
adapted to a high school setting. The scenes of students' instructional experiences
were published in the National Center on Effective Secondary Schools Newsletter,
5(3) (Winter, 1990-91), p. 4.
6. I use the labels here only to draw general outlines of dispute, without
representing their full complexity and varied interpretation over several decades
of discussion. For a related set of persisting dilemmas, see Berlak and Berlak
(1981). Along similar lines, Jackson (1986, Chapter 6) summarizes disputes on
education dating back to the Greek sophist Protagoras. Jackson labels these two
alternative outlooks on teaching "mimetic" and "transformative."
7. Controversies over education goals also center on the relative priority to
give to preparation for work, for civic life, and for personal affairs. But regardless
of how one settles these three priorities, tensions between traditional and progres-
sive approaches remain.
8. For evidence on the dominance of traditional views see Cuban (1984);
Kliebard (1986); and Rugg and Shumaker (c1928). Some reformers who historians
consider progressive actually emphasized administrative efficiency or social re-
form without supporting a progressive vision of knowledge and learning (Tyack,
1974; Kliebard, 1986).
9. Directions for professional development are suggested in Lichtenstein,
McLaughlin, and Knudsen (1991) and Levin (1991).
REFERENCES
Bennett, S. (1987). New dimensions in research on class size and academic
achievement. Madison, WI: National Center on Effective Secondary Schools.
Berlak, A., & Berlak, H. (1981). Dilemmas of schooling: Teaching and social
change. New York: Methuen.
Brice Heath, S., dc Magnolia, L. (1991). Children of promise: Literate activity in

----- Page 220 (native) -----
Conclusion
linguistically and culturally diverse classrooms. Washington, DC: National
Education Association.
Brookover, W., Beady, C., Flood, P., Schweitzer, J., & Wisenbaker, J. (1979).
School social systems and student achievement: Schools can make a differ-
ence. New York: Praeger.
Bryk, A. S., & Driscoll, M. E. (1988). The high school as community: Contextual
influences, and consequences for students and teachers. Madison: National
Center on Effective Secondary Schools, University of Wisconsin.
Bryk, A. S., Lee, V. E., & Smith, J. B. (1990). High school organization and its
effects on teachers and students: An interpretive summary of the research. In
W. H. Clune & J. F. Witte (Eds.), Choice and control in American educa-
tion: Vol. 1. The theory of choice and control in American education (pp.
135-226). Philadelphia: Falmer Press.
Cohen, D. K. (1990). Governance and instruction: The promise of decentraliza-
tion and choice. In W. H. Clune & J. F. Witte (Eds.), Choice and control in
American education: Vol. I. The theory of choice and control in American
education (pp. 337-386). Philadelphia: Falmer Press.
Coleman, J. S. (1988). Social capital in the creation of human capital. American
Journal of Sociology, 94 (Supplement), 95-120.
Coleman, J. S., & Hoffer, T. (1987). Public and private high schools: The impact
of communities. New York: Basic Books.
Committee for Economic Development. (1987). Children in need: Investment
strategies for the educationally disadvantaged. New York: Author.
Cuban, L. (1984). How teachers taught. New York: Longman.
David, J. L., Purkey, S., & White, P. (1989). Restructuring in progress: Lessons
from pioneering districts. Washington, DC: National Governors Association.
Edmonds, R. (1979). Effective schools for the urban poor. Educational Leader-
ship, 37(1), 15-24.
Elam, S. M., Rose, L. C., & Gallup, A. M. (1991). The 23rd annual Gallup poll
of the public's attitudes toward the public schools. Phi Delta Kappan, 73(1),
41-56.
Elmore, R. F. (1991). Teaching, learning, and organization: School restructuring
and the recurring dilemmas of reform. Paper presented at the annual meeting
of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago, April 1991.
Fullan, M. G., & Stiegelbauer, S. (1991). The new meaning of educational
change. New York: Teachers College Press.
Gamoran, A. (1987). The stratification of high school learning opportunities.
Sociology of Education, 60, 135-155.
Grant, G. (1988). The world we created at Hamilton High. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Hodgkinson, H. (1991). Reform versus reality. Phi Delta Kappan, 73(1), 9-16.
Jackson, P. W. (1986). The practice of teaching. New York: Teachers College
Press,
Keating, D. P. (1988). Adolescents' ability to engage in critical thinking. Madison,
WI: National Center on Effective Secondary Schools.

----- Page 221 (native) -----
216
Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools
Kliebard, H. M. (1986). The struggle for the American curricu/um, 1893-1958.
Boston: Rout ledge & Kegan Paul.
Levin, H. M. (1991). Building school capacity for effective teacher empowerment:
Applications to elementary schools with at-risk students. New Brunswick,
NJ: Center for Policy Research in Education, Rutgers University.
Lichtenstein, G., McLaughlin, M., & Knudsen, J. (1991). Teacher empowerment
and professional knowledge. New Brunswick, NJ: Center for Policy Research
in Education, Rutgers University
Lipsitz, J. (1984). Successful schools for young adolescents. New Brunswick, NJ:
Transaction Books.
Louis, K. S., & Miles, M. B. (1990). Improving the urban high schow:: What
works and why. New York: Teachers College Press.
Madden, N. A., Slavin, R. E., Karweit, N. L., Dolan, L., & Wasik, B. (1991).
Success for all: Multiyear effects of a school-wide elementary restructuring
program. Paper presented to American Educational Research Association,
Chicago, April 1991.
Ma len, B., Ogawa, R. T., & Kranz, J. (1990). What do we know about school-
based management? A case study of the literatureA call for research. In
W. H. Clune and J. F. Witte (Eds.), Choice and control in American educa-
tion: Vol. 2. The practice of choice, decentralization and school restructuring
(pp. 289-342). New York: Falmer Press.
Metz, M. H. (1986). Different by design: The context and character of three
magnet schools. New York: Rout ledge & Kegan Paul.
Moore, D. R., & Davenport, S. (1989). High school choice and students at risk.
Equity and Choice, 5(1), 5-10.
National Center on Effective Secondary Schools. (Winter 1990-91). Authentic
work: Implications for curriculum knowledge and student participation.
Newsletter, 5(3), 4.
Oakes, J. (1985). Keeping track: How schools structure inequality. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
O'Neil, J. (1991). A generation adrift? Educational Leadership, 49(1), 4-10.
Pauly, E. (1991). The classroom crucible: What really works, what doesn't and
why. New York. Basic Books.
Peterson, K. D. (1989). Secondary principak and instructional leadership: Com-
plexities in a diverse role. Madison, WI: National Center on Effective Sec-
ondary Schools.
Porter, A. C., Archbald, D. A., & Tyree, A. K., Jr. (1990). Reforming the curricu-
lum: Will empowerment policies replace control? In S. H. Fuhrman & B.
Ma len (Eds.), The politics of curriculum and testing: The 1990 yearbook of
the Politics of Education Association (pp. 11-36). Philadelphia: Falmer Press.
Resnick, L. B. (1987). Education and learning to think. Washington, DC: Na-
tional Academy Press.
Rugg, H. 0. & Shumaker, A. (c1928). The child-centered school: An appraisal of
the new education. Yonkers, NY: World Book Co.
Sarason, S. B. (1990). The predictable failure of educational reform: Can we
change before it's to, late? San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
4

----- Page 222 (native) -----
Conclusion
217
Schorr, L. (1988). Within our reach: Breaking the cycle of disadvantage. New
York: Doubleday.
Slavin, R. E. (1990). Achievement effects of ability grouping in secondary schools:
A best-evidence synthesis. Review of Educational Research, 60(3), 471-499.
Slavin, R. E., Karweit, N. L., & Madden, N. A. (1989). Effective programs for
students at-risk. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Smith, M. S., & O'Day, J. (1991). Systemic school reform. In S. H. Fuhrman &
B. Malen (Eds.), The politics of curricu/um and testing: The 1990 yearbook
of the Politics of Education Association (pp. 233-267). Philadelphia: Falmer
Press.
Stedman, L. (1985). A new look at the effective schools literature. Urban Educa-
tion, 20, 295-326.
Tyack, D. B. (1974). The one best system: A histonj of American urban education.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
U.S. Department of Education. (1987). What works: Schools that work: Educat-
ing disadvantaged children. Washington, DC: Author,
Wehlage, G. G., Lipman, P., & Smith, G. (1990). A good school. Madison, WI:
National Center on Effective Secondary Schools.
Wehlage, G. G, Rutter, R. A., Smith, G. A., Lesko, N., & Fernandez, R. R.
(1989). Reducing the risk: Schools as communities of support. Philadelphia:
Falmer Press.
Wilson, W. J. (1987). The tru/y disadvantaged: The inner city, the undercl
and public policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
(13

----- Page 223 (native) -----
Index
Ability groups, 123, 183, 189, 197
and authenticity, 54-55, 214n. 1
and choices for the future, 203-204, 205
and discourse, 48, 54-55, 56
and higher-order thinking, 48, 73, 75, 76-
77, 88nn. 21, 22
and organizational factors, 187, 189, 205
Achievement, 3-8, 16-17, 33, 36n. 14, 111,
156, 171, 201, 204, 205
Ahlbrand, W., 62
Alienation
of students, 16-17, 19, 22, 23, 33, 35-
36nn. 8, 11, 17, 116, 173. See also Stu-
dents at risk
of teachers, 119, 200
Alternative schools, 115-117, 131, 132. Sec
also name of specific school
"America 2000" (USDE), 209
American Association for the Advancement
of Science. 87n. 1
Andre, T., 168
Authenticity, 17-18, 22. See also Authentic
work; Curriculum/instruction: and au-
thenticity: Questions: authentic
Authentic work, 23-28, 33, 34, 36n. 14, 40,
111, 114, 193, 202. See also specific
topic
Bachinan, J. G., 172
Baker, D., 160
Barnard, Chester, 150n. 3
Baumrind, D., 158
Beliefs/values, 17, 66, 86, 112, 123-124,
142, 147, 189-190
Bennett, S., 189
Berends, M., 21
Berlak, A., 214n. 6
Berlak, H., 214n. 6
Berndt, T., 162
Beyer, B., 87n. 4
Bidwell, C., 34-35n. 3
Bishop, J. H., 36n. 15
Blauner, R., 36n. 17
Bransford, J., 87n. 6
Braverman, H 36n. 17
Brice Heath, S., 207
Brigham Alternative High School, 127-128,
130-132, 134, 135, 130, 138-147
Britton, J., 57
Brookover, W. B., 1, 129, 149n. I, 207
Brophy, J., 34n. 2
Brown, B. B., 162, 167-168, 178n. 2
Bryk, A. S., 36n. 13, 80-81, 120, 149n, 1,
184
Caring, 20, 23, 116, 183, 185
as a source of engagement, 31-33, 36n. 12
and students at risk, 95-96, 103, 105, 109,
110-111, 116
and teacher engagement, 120-121, 136-
137, 140, 142, 148, 184
Carnegie Forum, 130
Carroll, J. B., 34-35n. 3
Casey Foundation. See New Futures Initia-
tive
Cazden, C., 58, 59n. 3
Challeng, 33, 36n. 19, 87-88nn. 14, 15.
See also specific topic
Change/reform
and building student engagement, 196-
200
and challenges, 192, 194, 197
and change agents, 190, 192-194, 209,
213
characteristics of effective, 192
and choices for the future, 203, 209, 212,
213
and constraints on change, 191
219

----- Page 224 (native) -----
220
Index
Change/reform (continued)
and curriculum/instruction, 198, 199-
200, 209, 210, 21:
and decision making, 199-200
and district context, 196-197
and family/parents, 197-198, 209
and the goals of education, 203
individual versus systemic, 202, 209-211.
213
and leadership, 196-197, 209
and mission. 209, 210-211
and organizational factors, 103-108, 197,
198-200, 209, 210-211
and resources, 198, 200
and restructuring existing schools, 115-117
and rewards, 209, 211
and school membership, 193
and social capital, 212
and social factors, 209
and staff/professional development, 197,
199, 209, 211
summary of findings about, 182, 190-194
and teacher engagement, 197, 199
and teachers' roles in the fut ire, 209
Charner, 1., 172
Cherry Clen, 122-123
Chrispeels, J., 178n. 4
City Park Secondary School, 126-127, 130-
148
Clark, 11., 158-159
Clasen, D. R., 162, 167-168
CoaP,ion of Essential Schools, 127, 128,
187, 193
Cohen, D. K., 34-35n. 3, 124, 212
Coherence, 45, 46, 49, 54, 68-69, Ill
Coleman, J. S., 1, 167, 212, 213
Collaboration, 27, 58-59, 142, 143-145,
146, 148, 188, 205
Collegiality, 145-146, 184, 188, 189, 199
Collins, J., 59n. 3
Commer, James, 213
Committee for Economic Development,
87n. 1, 212
Community, 34, 130-133
school as a, 120-121, 122, 147
Competence, 26, 183, 212
and choices for the future, 204, 205-206,
207-209, 212
as a factor affecting engagement, 17-19,
26, 33
and interest, 25
and motivation, 19, 35n. 10
and noninstructional activities, 158, 168,
175
and organizational factors, 188, 205-206
and school membership, 22-23, 183
and students at risk, 95, 98, 102-103, 117
and succms, 22-23, 207-208
of teachers, 188, 205-206, 207-209
Completion of work, 12-13, 22, 49, 51,
60n. 7
Comprehensive Competency Program
(CCP) learning labs, 107-108, 109,
113-114
Connell, J. P., 19-20, 35n. 9. 36n. 17
Content. See Curriculum/instruction
Coope;ative learning, 107, 144, 145, 186
Corcoran, T. B., 119, 129, 149n. /
Cornbleth, C., 87,1. 5
Counseling, 105, 106, 107-108, 111
Csikszentmihalyi, M., 35n. 5, 36n. .19, 156,
162
Cuban, L., 62, 214,1, 8
Cultural factors, 3, 5, 17, 21, 34. See cl ;o
School culture; Teacher culture
and choices for the future, 204, 207-208
and curriculum/instruction, 186-187
and discourse, 51, 59-60n. 6
and highcr-order thinking, 73-74, 86
and noninstructional activities, 175
and organizational factors, 188
and students at risk, 97, Ill
and success, 207-206
and teacher engagement, 119
Curriculum/instruction. See also Authentic
work; Knowledge
and authenticity, 185, 206-207
"Beyond the Basics," 105
and building student engagement, 194-
196
and challenges, 186
and change/reform, 114, 115, 192, 198,
199-200, 209, 210, 211
and choices for the future. 200, 202-204,
205, 206-207, 209, 210, 211, 214n. 2
and content of lessons, 49, 55, 78, 186-
187, 206-207, 214n. 2
control of, 133
criteria for design of, 184-187
and cultural factors, 186-187

----- Page 225 (native) -----
Index
221
differentiality and commonality in, 203-
204
and discourse, 49
and diversity, 204-209
as a factor affecting engagement, 5, 34
and the goals of education, 202-203, 204
and higher-order thinking, 64, 74, 78, 79-
81, 85, 184-185
interdisciplinary approach to, 105, 106,
142, 146, 194, 198
and the "new pedagogy," 186
and organizational factors, 81-83, 188-
189:200, 205, 209
purpose of, 56
and school membership, 183, 185
and socioeconomic factors, 123, 185, 203
student-centered, 185-187, 206-207
and students at risk, 94, 96, 99-101, 103,
105, 106, 107-108, 111, 112-113,
114, 115, 116
summary of findings about, 182, 184-187
and teacher engagement, 121, 123, 130,
133, 142, 146, 148-149
Cusick, P. A., 34-35n. 3, 156
Damico, R., 172
Davenport, S., 210
David, J. L., 193
Dayton, OH, 104, 105. 109, 110
De Bono, E., 87n. 4
DeCharms, R., 35n. 9, 36n. 17
Deci, E. L., 36nn. 16, 17
Decision making, 143, 148, 158, 161, 183,
187, 188, 199-200, 205
Deviance, 27, 117n. 1, 1491:. I, 156-157,
158, 160, 165, 169, 171, 173, 174, 176,
177-178n. 1. See also Students at risk
Dewey, J., 87n. 5
Discourse. See also specific topic
and achievement, 50-54
and choices for the future, 213
and conversation, 56, 59
and discussion, 43, 44, 46, 48, 49, 54
example of 9th Grade English, 45-56
and higher-order thinking, 48. 74
as an indicator of engagement, 4, 40, 41-59
norms in, 42
procedural basis of, 42-45
and questions, 40-42, 46, 48, 49, 54, 56,
57 . 58, 60n. 8
raising the quality of, 56-59
and risk-taking, 58-59
substance of, 42-45
and teacher characteristics, 49, 56, 57
and uptake, 43, 44, 46, 48, 49, 51, 54, 56,
58, 59n. 3
Disengagement. See also Alienation
causes of, 31-33
problems of, 16-17
Disposition of thoughtfulness, 64-68, 78-79,
84-85, 186
Distraction, 171, 176
Districts
and change/reform, 190, 191, 193, 196-
197, 210
and choices for the future, 210
as a factor affecting engagement, 34
and size of district, 131
and students at risk, 103-108, 115
and teacher engagement, 129, 130-133,
140, 147, 149
Diversity, 204-208. See also Cultural fac-
tors; Socioeconomic factors
Dornbusch, S. M., 158, 160
Driscoll, M. E., 36n. 13, 120, 184
Dunphey, D., 178n. 2
Dweck, C. S., 35n. 10
Dworkin, A., 122
Eckert, P., 12, 17
Edmonds, R. R., 1, 207
Education
goals of, 202-204, 208, 214n. 7
as a moral/political enterprise, 200-202,
208
traditional/progressive, 186, 202-203,
206, 209, 214n. 7
as the transmission of knowledge, 83-86
Effective schools, 1-2, 21, 149n. 1, 201
Effort (perseverance), 34-35n. 3, 49-50, 171
Elam, S. M., 191
Elmore, R. F., 214n. 2
Engagement. See also Teacher engagement;
specific factor affecting engagement
and achievement, 3-4, 16-17, 33
benefits of, 17
characteristics/definition of, 2-4, 11-13,
33
factors that affect, 3, 12, 15, 17-28, 33-
34, 41

----- Page 226 (native) -----
222
Index
Engagement (continued)
importance of, 13-17, 33
indicators of, 120
levels of, 12, 13, 16, 33, 73, 99, 171
measurement of, 16, 49-50, 87-88nn. 14,
15, 156
procedural/substantive, 50
psychological/behavior, 51
Ennis, R. H., 87n. 6
Environment. See also Caring; School cul-
ture
and leadership, 141, 142
and noninstructional activities, 169, 176
and students at risk, 109, 110
and teacher engagement. 123, 129, 131-
132, 133, 136, 137, 141, 142
Epstein, J. L., 178n. 4
Equity. See Fairness
Erickson, F. A., 35-36n. 11
Expectations, 188, 190, 207
and curriculum/instruction, 185, 186
levels of, 33
and noninstructional activities, 158, 168-
169, 171, 176, 177-178n. 1
of parents, 157-158, 161
and school culture, 183, 190
and socioeconomic factors, 124, 185
and students at risk, 109
and teacher engagement, 121, 124, 184
Extracurricular activities, 2, 3, 4, 107-108,
153, 155, 156, 167-171, 173, 176, 177,
178n. 3, 183, 195
Fairness, 19, 21-22, 23, 31-33, 183, 201,
204
"Family imagery," 135, 145-146, 184, 187-
188
Family/parents
authoritative, 157-162, 175, 183
and change/reform, 191, 197-198, 209
and choices for the future, 204, 205, 209,
212, 213
expectations of, 157-158, 161
as a factor affecting engagement, 3, 4,
154, 155, 156, 157-162, 175, 177,
178n. 4, 183
involvement in school of, 160-162, 175,
177, 178n. 4, 183, 197-198, 213
and noninstructional activities, 154, 155,
160-162, 175, 177, 178n. 4
and organizational factors, 205, 209
and school membership, 183
and social capital, 212, 213
and students at risk, 92-93, 107-108,
114
and teacher engagement, 130-131, 140,
142, 147
Farrar, E., 129
Farrell, E., 17, 35n. 5
Feedback, 26-27, 36n. 19, 85, 121, 139,
148, 149, 188
Finch, M. D., 172
Firestone, W., 120
Fish, S., 57
Foley, I. M., 93
Fordham, S., 156
Fraser, B., 172
Freedman, S., 122
Fullan, M. C., 214n. 3
Fun, 27-28, 184
Gallup poll, 191
Gamoran, A., 21, 59-60nn. 6, 8, 62, 189,
214n. 1
Gardner, H., 25, Ill
Gender issues, 156, 168, 178n. 2
Glaser, R., 87n. 3
Goodlad, J., 21, 62
Grabe, M., 34-35n. 3
Grant, G., 209
Greenberger, E., 172-173, 174
Greeno, J. G., 87n. 6
Hackman, J. R., 36n. 17
Hallinger, P., 124
Harker, W. J., 58-59
Health technologies program. See Pitts-
burgh, PA
Herrick, S. C., 178n. 4
Herrnstein, R. J., 87n. 4
Higher-order thinking. See also Questions
and authentic work, 114
barriers to, 83-86
and challenges, 63, 64-65, 69, 73-74, 86,
87-88nn. 14, 15
and change/reform, 190
and choices for the future, 213
definition of, 63-64
and departmental differences, 75, 77,
88n. 20

----- Page 227 (native) -----
Index
and dispositions, 64-68, 78-79, 84-85
as a factor in engagement, 4, 62
framework for assessing, 67-71
importance of, 62
indicators of, 67-71, 74
and knowledge, 63, 64-68, 69, 83,
84-85
and level of engagement, 73
levels of, 64, 73, 74-77, 79
and reasoning/explaining, 69, 74
as relative, 63-64
and skills, 64-68, 78-79, 84-85, 87n. 7
and student background, 75-77
and success, 63, 77-83
and teacher characteristics, 69, 75, 76-79,
86, 88n. 22
and time for thinking, 69, 83, 84, 85
High School and Beyond (HSB), 7, 9n. 4
High schools. See Secondary education
Hillside High School, 128-129, 130-131,
133-137, 139-143, 145-148
Hodgkinson, H., 92, 117n, 1, 212
Hoetker, J., 62
Hoffer, T., 213
Holland, A., 168
Holmes Group, 130
Hunter, Madeline, 40
Individual developmen., 5, 15, 101-103,
204
Interest, 25, 28, 33, 35n. 10, 74, 111,
198
and curriculum/instruction, 184, 185
and discourse, 49, 58
Jackson, P. W., 214n. 6
Jencks, C., 1
Johns Hopkins University, 1-2
Johnson, S. M., 148
Julius (case study subject), 154-155, 160--
161, 166-167, 168-169, 173-174
Keating, D. P., 185
Kevin (case study subject), 154-155, 160-
161, 166-167, 168-169, 175-174
Kidder, T., 122
King, M. B., 88n. 23
Kintsch, W., 57
Kliebard, H. M., 214n. 8
Knapp, M. S., 111
223
Knowledge. See also Curriculum/instruction
and authentic work, 111, 114
education as the transmission of, 83-86
and the goals of education, 202-203
hierarchy of, 114
and higher-order thinking, 64-68, 69, 83,
84-85
prior, 25, 63, 64, 69, 185
and socioeconomic factors, 123
and students at risk, 111, 114, 116
and teacher engagement, 121, 123, 148-
149
Kotlowitz, A., 173
Ladwig, J. G., 81-83
Laffey, J. M., 34-35n, 3
Lamborn, S., 158
Larson, R., 35n. 5, 36n. 19, 156, 162
Latta, R. M., 34-35n. 3
Leadership
and buffering teachers, 140
and change/reform, 190, 191-192, 196-
197, 209
characteristics of good, 139-142
and choices for the future, 209
and collaboration, 143-145
and confronting unengaged teachers, 142
and daily routines, 140-141
and delegation, 141
and environment, 141, 142
as an extracurricular activity, 169, 171,
176
and higher-order thinking, 79-81, 83, 84
and organizational factors, 142-143, 189
and teacher engagement, 129-130, 132,
139-145, 147, 149
Leventhal, H., 162
Levin, H. M., 111, 214n. 9
Lewin-Epstein, N., 172
Lichtenstein, G., 214n. 9
Lipsitz, J., 209
Little Rock, AK, 104, 106, 109, 112-113,
114
Louis, K. S., 125, 129-130, 192, 193, 209
McCarthy, C., 88n. 23
Maccoby, E., 158
McConnaughy, S. B., 93
McNeil, L. M., 12, 45, 62, 173, 174
McPeck, J. E., 87n, 3

----- Page 228 (native) -----
224
Index
Madden, N. A., 207
Madison Memorial School-Within-a-School
(Madison, WI), 94, 99-101, 115
Maehr, M., 36n. 16
Magnet schools, 21, 210
Magnolia, L., 207
Ma len, B., 210
Marshall, H. H., 35n. 4
Martin, J., 158
Marvin (case study subject), 28-33, 93, 104
Marzano, R. J., 87nn. 4, 7
Media Academy (Oakland, CA), 94, 96-99,
115, 116
Mentors, 142, 176, 183
Merton, R., 19-20
Metz, M. H., 119, 122-124, 130, 209
Maas, M. B., 129-130, 192, 193, 209
Mission, 133, 134-135, 139-140, 142, 184,
187, 188, 190, 192, 208, 209, 210-211.
See also Purpose: clarity of
Moore, D. R., 210
Moos, R. H., 36n. 13
Morality, and education, 200-202, 208
Mortimer, J. T., 172
Mosbach, P.. 162
Motivation, 13, 147, 168
and choices for the future, 204, 205
and competence, 19, 35n. 10
and learning versus performance, 34n. 2,
36n. 17
and students at risk, 102, Ill
Murphy, J. F., 124
National Center on Education Statistics
(NCES), 7, 9n. 4
National Center on Effective Secondary
Schools, 1-2, 4, 214n. 5
National Council of Teachers of Mathemat-
1.2s, 87n. 1, 111, 193
National Education Association, 119
National Education Longitudinal Study, 9-
10n. 4
"National Coals for Education" (USDE), 209
National Network for Educational Renewal,
193
New Beginnings project (San Diego, CA),
213
New Futures initiative, 103-117
New Futures School (Albuquerque, NM),
94, 101-103
New Haven, CT, 213
Newman, B. NI., 162
Newman, P. R., 162
Newmann, F. M., 34n. I, 35n. 8, 36n. 14,
65, 79, 87nn. 2, 8, 9, 12, 112, 120
Nickerson, R. S.. 87n. 3
Noninstructional activities. See also Extra-
curricular activities; Family/parents:
Part-time work; Peers
and authentic work, 177
case studies about, 154-155, 160-161,
166-167, 168-169, 173-174
and challenges, 154, 155, 167
and decision making, 158, 161
and deviance, 156-157, 158, 160, 165,
171, 173, 176
as a factor in engagement, 4, 15-16, 174-
177
importance of, 153
negative aspects of, 153
and school culture, 183-184
and school membership, 177
and socioeconomic factors, 156, 158, 160,
174, 176
Nystrand, M., 59-60nn. 6, 8, 62, 2I4n. 1
Oakes, J.. 21, 48, 189
O'Day, J., 211
Ogbu, J. U., 36n. 15, 156
O'Neil, J., 212
Onosko, J., 77, 83
Organizational factors
and ability groups, 187, 189, 205
and beliefs/values, 189-190
and caring, 116
and challenges, 189
and change/reform, 103-108, 197, 198-
200, 209, 210-211
and choices for the future, 200, 204-206,
207-208, 209, 210-211, 213
and collaboration, 188, 205
and competence, 188, 205-206
control of, 133
and cultural factors, 188
and curriculum/instruction, 81-83, 188-
189, 200, 205, 209
and decision making, 187, 188, 205
and discourse, 46, 48, 49, 56, 59n. 4
as factors in engagement, 4, 34
and family/parents, 205, 209
and higher-order thinking, 79-83, 85, 189
and leadership, 142-143, 189

----- Page 229 (native) -----
Index
225
and limitations of new structures, 188-
190
and mission, 187, 188, 190
and ownership, 205
and rewards, 188
and school culture, 190
and school membership, 115-116, 133,
187, 188
and size of class, 48, 49, 56, 59n. 4, 187-
188, 205
and size of school, 115-116, 187
and social capital, 212, 213
and socioeconomic factors, 124-130
and staff/professional development, 188,
189, 205
and students at risk, 103-108, 115-116,
187-188
and success, 207-208
summary of views about, 182, 187-190
and teacher engagement, 122, 123, 124-
130, 131, 133, 142-143, 149, 188
and teachers' roles in the future, 208, 209
and teacher-student relationship, 115-
116, 187-188
and types of structural change, 187-188
Ownership, 25-26, 28, 33, 35n. 10, 133,
184-185, 193, 205, 210
Page, R. N., 45, 48, 55
Paideia Project, 187
Parents. See Family/parents
Part-time work, 4, 153, 156, 171-174, 176-
177, 178n. 3, 184
Passion, 41, 42, 116, 117, 121
Paul, R. W., 64-65, 87n. 6
Pauly, E., 213
Pedagogy. See Curriculum/instruction
Peers. See also Collaboration
as a factor affecting engagement, 4
and noninstructional activities, 153, 154,
155, 156, 158, 162-168, 171, 175-
176, 177, 178n. 2
and organizational factors, 188
and school culture, 183
and school membership, 22
and students at risk, 97-99, 109
and :upport, 22, 167, 169, 171
and teacher engagement, 135, 138-139,
147, 184
Perkins, D. N., 87n. 6
Peterson, K. D., 191-192
Phi Delta Kappan, 178n. 4
Pittsbu-gh, PA, 104, 106-107, 109, 113,
114, 115
Politics, and education, 200-202, 208
Porter, A. C., 214n. 2
Powell, A. G., 12, 21, 34-35n. 3, 62, 119,
173
Pregnant/mothering women, school/pro-
gram for, 101-103, 195-196
Problem solving, 64, 114, 137-138, 141,
143, 184, 204
Professional organizations, 191, 193
Progressive education, 186, 202-203, 206,
209, 214n. 7
Project 2061, 187, 193
Psychological investment, 12-13, 33, 49-50,
51, 119, 121, 184
Publishing industry, 191, 193
Purkey, S. C., 21, 122
Purpose. See also Mission
clarity of, 19, 20-21, 23, 31-33, 147, 154,
155, 183
Purves, A. C., 57
Quality Education for Minorities Project,
87n. 1
Questions
authentic, 43, 44, 46, 48, 49, 51, 54, 56,
57, 58, 60n. 8, 214n. 1
and discourse, 41-42, 48, 48, 49, 54, 56,
57, 58, 60n. 8
and higher-order thinking, 69
student-centered, 214n. 1
on tests, 50, 51
and uptake, 43, 44, 46, 48, 49, 51, 54, 56,
58, 59n. 3
Real world, connection to the, 25, 26-27,
28, 98, 112, 153, 184. See also Part-time
work
Reform. See Change/reform
Resnick, L. B., 36n. 18, 111, 185
Resources, 132, 133, 169, 171, 198, 200, 212
Rewards
and change/reform, 209, 211
and choices for thc future, 209, 211
and curriculum/instruction, 184
and organizational factors, 188
and school culture, 183
and school membership, 183
and socioeconomic factors, 113, 124

----- Page 230 (native) -----
226
Index
Rewards (continued)
as a source of engagement, 24, 28, 36n
and students at risk, 105, 107-108
and teacher engagement, 123, :14, '.25,
139, 149
and a zero sum game, 36n. 15
Rosenblatt, L., 57, 60n. 9
Rosenblum, S., 120
Rosenhcltz, S. J., 80-81
Rugg, Id. 0., 214n. 8
Ryan, R. M., 36n. 17
Salomon, G., 87n. 6
San Diego, CA, 213
Sarason, S. B., 214n. 4
Savannah, GA, 104, 107-108, 109, 110,
113
Schill, W., 172
School as a community, 120-121, 122, 147
School culture, 34, 79-86, 116-117, 141,
142, 147, 149, 182-184, 190-192, 210.
See also Teacher engagement: and the
environment
School membership, 17-18, 19-23, 33, 34,
40. See also Caring; Fairness; Purpose;
Success; Support; specific topic
School-within-a-school concept, 94, 99-101,
107, 115
Schorr, L., 93, 213
Schrag, F., 87nn. 5, 8, 88n. 23
Secondary education
and choices for the future, 200-213
criticisms of, 1
diversity in, 204-208
homogenizing aspects of modern, 5
issues concerning, 5-8
Sedlak, M. W., 12, 34-35n. 3
Shields, P. M., Ill
Shumaker, A., 214n. 8
Sierra Mountain High School (Grass Valley,
CA), 94, 95-96
Sizer, T., Ill
Skills, 5, 64-68, 78-79, 84-85, 87n. 7, 116,
186
Slavin R E , 93, 189, 207
Smith, M B , 35n. 9
Smith, M S , 21, 211
Social capital, 202, 207, 211-213
Social class See Socioeconomic factors
Social meaning, 99-100, 199
Social studies. See Higher-order thinking
_
ioeccr omic Lctors
be;.: is/values, 123-124
and buil,ling student engagement, 194
and challenges, 123-124
-:d change/reform, 190, 209
and choices for the future, 201, 203, 207,
209, 213
and curriculum/instruction, 123, 185, 203
and discourse, 51, 59-60n. 6
and education as a moral/political enter-
prise, 201
and expectations, 124, 185
as a factor affecting engagement, 1, 15,
17, 33, 34
and higher-order thinking, 73-74, 75, 77,
86
and noninstructional activities, 156, 158,
160, 174, 175, 176
and organizational factors, 123, 124-130
and rewards, 123, 124
and school culture, 123, 129, 190
and students at risk, 92, 103
and success, 207
and teacher culture, 129
and teacher engagement, 119, 120-124,
150n. 4
Staff/professional development
and authentic work, 115
and change/reform, 193, 197, 199, 209,
211
and choices for the future, 205, 208, 209,
211
and discourse, 58
and higher-order thinking, 83, 84, 85
and organizational factors, 188, 189, 205
and school culture, 183, 184
and school membership, 183
and students at risk, 115
and teacher engagement, 133, 142, 144,
145-146
and teachers' roles in the future, 208
Stedman, L., 207
Steinberg, A., 36n. 12
Steinberg, L., 156, 358, 160, 167, 168, 172-
173, 174, 177
Stevenson, D., 160
Stevenson, R. B., 88n. 17
Stiegelbauer, S., 214n. 3
Stipek, D., 34n. 2, 35n. 10

----- Page 231 (native) -----
Index
227
Structure. See Organizational factors
Students at risk. See also Marvin
and authentic work, 93-103, 111-115,
116
and challenges, 114, 116
and change/reform, 190
and choices for the future, 201, 207, 213
and education as a moral/political enter-
prise, 201
examples of, 92
and higher-order thinking, 114
and noninstructional activities, 107-108,
175
and reasons for being at risk, 92-93
and school membership, 93-103, 108-111,
115-116
statistics about, 92-93
as a symptom of disengagement, 4
and teacher engagement, 135, 145-146,
149n. 1
Subject matter. See Curriculum/instruction;
Knowledge
Success
and achievement, 5, 22
and authenticity, 22
and causes for disengagement, 31-33
and challenges, 207
and choices for the future, 201, 207-208
and collaboration, 27
and competence, 22-23, 207-208
and completion of work, 22
and cultural factors, 207-208
and curriculum/instruction, 185
and diversity, 207-208
and education as a moral/political enter-
prise, 201
of effective schools, 21
and expectations, 207
and feedback, 26
and fun, 27-28
and higher-order thinking, 63, 77-83
and the importance of engagement, 13-14
indicators of, 2
and the Individual Success Plan, 107-108
and orfonizational factors, 207-208
and schod culture, 183
and school membership, 19. 20, 22-23,
183
and socioeconomic factors, 207
as a source of engagement, 36n. 19
and students at risk, 95-99, 102, 107-109,
110, 116, 117, 207
and support, 22
and teacher engagement, 125, 132
and teacher-student relationship, 13-14,
207-208
Support
and causes for disengagement, 31-33
and change/reform, 191, 192, 193, 194,
199, 210
and choices for the future. 210, 212-213
and curriculum/instruction, 185
and higher-order thinking, 83, 86
and noninstructional activities, 167, 169,
171, 176, 177
and organizational factors, 188
and peers, 22, 167, 169, 171
and school culture, 183
and school membership, 19, 20, 22, 23,
183
and social capital, 212-213
as a sdurce of engagement, 31-33, 36n. 12
and students at risk, 95-99, 105, 109,
110-111, 114-115
and success, 22
and teacher engagement, 129, 131, 132,
135, 136-137, 139, 140, 142, 147,
148
Suspension, 106, 107-108, 109-110
Teacher culture, 129, 133-139. 149
Teacher engagement. See also specific topic
and authentic work, 121, 150n. 3
and autonomy/control, 123, 133, 137,
146, 147
and challenges, 123, 130-131, 148
and change/reform. 197, 199
and choices for the future, 213
and confronting unengaged teachers,
142
and demands on teachers, 121, 122, 124,
125
and the district context, 129, 130-133,
140, 147, 149
and empowerment, 141, 143, 148, 149
and the environment, 123, 129, 131-132,
133, 136, 137, 141, 142
as a factor in student engagement, 4
framework for analyzing, 129-130
indicators of, 120
4.1

----- Page 232 (native) -----
228
Index
Teacher engagement (continued)
measurement of, 126
and responsibility, 137-138
and school membership, 121, 133, 183
and teacher culture, 129, 133-139,
149
types of. 120-121
Teachers. See also Teacher engagement;
Teacher-student relationship; specific
topic
alienation of, 119, 200
authority of, 82
background/experience of, 34, 49, 56
buffering of, 140
commitment of, 12-13, 133, 134-135,
199, 206, 207-209
competence of, 205-206, 207-209
differences among, 75
future roles for, 208-209
hiring of, 133
isolation of, 83-86, 135, 142, 144, 145
knowledge/skills of, 116
preparation of, 57, 119
as role models, 69
Teacher-student relationship. See also Dis-
course; Higher-order thinking
and choices for the future, 207-208
as a factor affecting engagement, 4, 34
norms in the, 42
and organizational factors, 115-116, 187-
188
and school membership, 115-116
and student attitudes about learning,
35n. 4
and students at risk, 95-96, 97-99, 101-
103, 105, 106, 108-111, 115-116
and success, 13-14, 207-208
and support, 105
I
and teacher engagement, 121, 137, 147,
145
and time spent on schoolwork, 15
Testing, 2, 5-8, 50-51, 57, 114, 201, 203,
210
Thomas Jefferson High School, 194-200,
203, 209
Thum, Y. M., 149n. I
Time spent on homework/schoolwork
and achievement, 7, 51
and discourse, 49
and the impertance of engagement, 15
and noninstructional activities, 154, 155,
156, 158, 161, 169, 171, 172-173,
174, 176, 177-178n. I
and the teacher-student relationship, 15
Tinto, V., 20
Tracking. See Ability groups
Tyack, D., 214n. 8
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1-2
U.S. Department of Education, 207, 209
Value beyond instruction, 26, 28, 36n. 15
Van Dijk, T., 57
Walsh, D., 64-65, 87n. 6
V 'Nage, G. C., 19, 20, 93, 109, 112, 120,
149n. I, 156, 207, 214n. 5
Wm L., 17
!Ate, 4. W., 35n. 9
W Ohs, P., 156
Wilson, B., 129, 149n. 1
Wilson, W. J., 212
Wirtz, P., 172
Work. See Authentic work; Completion of
work; Part-time work
Work experience programs, 99-101

----- Page 233 (native) -----
About the Contributors
B. Bradford Brown is a professor in the Department of Educational
Psychology and a research scientist at the Wisconsin Center for Education
Research at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. He received an A.B. in
sociology from Princeton Uniwxsity and a Ph.D. in human development
from the University of Chicago before joining the faculty of the University
of Wisconsin in 1979. His publications focus on coping with stress in adult-
hood and on peer relations in adolescence.
Adam Gamoran is an associate professor of sociology and educational
policy studies at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. He received a doc-
toral degree in education from the University of Chicago. His current
research projects include studies of the organization of schooling in inner
cities, the effects of ability grouping and curriculum tracking, and the
allocation and effects of instruction in classrooms.
Susie D. Lamborn is currently a research scholar at the University of
West Florida's Educational Research and Development Center. She re-
ceived her B.A. from Pennsylvania State University in psyr2hology and her
Ph.D. in developmental psychology from the University of Denver. She
has completed research on adolescent development in the family context,
with a focus on normative issues of development for youth from differing
cultural heritages. She has collaborated with program developers on the
design and implementation of evaluation studies of education and adoles-
cent development.
Karen Seashore Louis received her doctoral degree in sociology from
Columbia University, and has worked in a variety of policy research and
academic settings. She is currently an associate professor in the Depart-
ment of Educational Policy and Administration at the University of Min-
nesota. Her research and consulting have focused on how to improve
schools through organizational design and development, research utiliza-
tion, and better planning and implementation processes. This includes
229
',(;; 4 g_

----- Page 234 (native) -----
230
About the Contributors
evaluation and research on federal and state programs in the United States
and work on school improvement with a variety of European and Cana-
dian groups and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Devel-
opment.
Nina S. Mounts is currently a postdoctoral research fellow in develop-
mental psychology at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
She received a doctoral degree in child and family studies at the University
of Wisconsin-Madison, a master of science degree in child and family
studies from Syracuse University, and a bachelor of arts degree in sociol-
ogy from Saint Lawrence University, Canton, NY. Her research interests
are in both peer and parent-child relationships during childhood and
adolescence. She is especially interested in the linkages between parent-
child and peer relationships.
Fred M. Newmann, professor of curriculum and instruction at the
University of Wisconsin, directed the National Center on Effective Sec-
ondary Schools, and he now directs the Center on Organization and Re-
structuring of Schools. He majored in American studies at Amherst Col-
lege and received master's and doctoral degrees in education at Harvard.
His publications deal with curriculum for citizenship, higher-order think-
ing in social studies, education and the building of community, and alter-
natives to standardized testing.
Martin Nystrand is professor of English and a principal investigator
at the Center on Organization and Restructuring of Schools, located in the
Wisconsin Center for Education Research, the University of Wisconsin-
Madison. His publications have explored the structure of written commu-
nication and language as a way of knowing. He is active in research on
writing and on instructional discourse. He is also current president of
the American Education Research Association Special Interest Group for
Writing Research. His current research, with sociologist Adam Gamoran,
concerns the effects of instructional discourse, including writing, reading,
and talk, on achievement in high school English and social studies.
Bets Ann Smith is a doctoral candidate in the Department of Educa-
tional Policy and Administration, University of Minnesota. Her research
interests are in the areas of teachers' work and school organization.
Gregory A. Smith is an assistant professor at the University of Alaska-
Fairbanks where he is involved with an innovative secondary education
program called Teachers for Alaska. He received his Ph.D. from the Uni-
)
7;

----- Page 235 (native) -----
About the Contributors
231
versity of WisconsinMadison in educational policy studies. His research
has addressed the development of effective schools for students at risk of
academic failure, and education concerning environmental limits.
Laurence Steinberg is professor of psychology at Temple University.
He received his Ph.D. in human development and family studies from
Cornell University. A fellow of the American Psychological Association,
his research focuses on adolescent development and behavior, with an
emphasis on the role of family, peers, and community in young people's
lives.
Gary G. Wehlage is Associate Director of the Center on Organization
and Restructuring of Schools and a professor of curriculum and instruction
at the University of WisconsinMadison. He is a graduate of Augustana
College (SD) and received his master's and doctorate degrees from the
University of IllinoisUrbana. His research has addressed the high school
dropout problem, and the problem of restructuring schools for at-risk
students. For several years he has worked with the Annie E. Casey Foun-
dation's New Futures Initiative. His recent publications include (as
co-author) Reducing the Risk: Schools as Communities of Support (1989).
2 4