

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Springer Handbook
of Robotics

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Springer Handbooks provide
a concise compilation of approved
key information on methods of
research, general principles, and
functional relationships in physi-
cal sciences and engineering. The
world’s leading experts in the ﬁelds
of physics and engineering will be
assigned by one or several renowned
editors to write the chapters com-
prising each volume. The content
is selected by these experts from
Springer sources (books, journals,
online content) and other systematic
and approved recent publications of
physical and technical information.
The volumes are designed to be
useful as readable desk reference
books to give a fast and comprehen-
sive overview and easy retrieval of
essential reliable key information,
including tables, graphs, and bibli-
ographies. References to extensive
sources are provided.

----- Page 3 (native) -----
123
Handbook
Springer
of Robotics
Bruno Siciliano, Oussama Khatib (Eds.)
With DVD-ROM, 953 Figures, 422 in four color and 84 Tables

----- Page 4 (native) -----
Editors:
Professor Bruno Siciliano
PRISMA Lab
Dipartimento di Informatica e Sistemistica
Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II
Via Claudio 21, 80125 Napoli, Italy
siciliano@unina.it
Professor Oussama Khatib
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-9010, USA
khatib@cs.stanford.edu
Library of Congress Control Number:
2007942155
ISBN: 978-3-540-23957-4
e-ISBN: 978-3-540-30301-5
This work is subject to copyright. All rights reserved, whether the whole
or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation,
reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on
microﬁlm or in any other way, and storage in data banks. Duplication of
this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of
the German Copyright Law of September, 9, 1965, in its current version,
and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer-Verlag.
Violations are liable for prosecution under the German Copyright Law.
Springer is a part of Springer Science+Business Media
springer.com
c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008
The use of designations, trademarks, etc. in this publication does not imply,
even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general
use.
Product liability: The publisher cannot guarantee the accuracy of any
information about dosage and application contained in this book. In every
individual case the user must check such information by consulting the
relevant literature.
Production and typesetting: le-tex publishing services oHG, Leipzig
Senior Manager Springer Handbook: Dr. W. Skolaut, Heidelberg
Typography and layout: schreiberVIS, Seeheim
Illustrations: Hippmann GbR, Schwarzenbruck
Cover design: eStudio Calamar Steinen, Barcelona
Cover production: WMXDesign GmbH, Heidelberg
Printing and binding: Stürtz GmbH, Würzburg
Printed on acid free paper
SPIN 10918401
89/3180/YL
5 4 3 2 1 0

----- Page 5 (native) -----
V
Foreword
My ﬁrst introduction to robotics came via a phone call
in 1964. The caller was Fred Terman, the author of the
world-famous Radio Engineer’s Handbook, who was
at the time Provost of Stanford University. Dr. Terman
informed me that a computer science professor, John
McCarthy, had just been awarded a large research grant,
part of which required the development of computer-
controlled manipulators. Someone had suggested to
Terman that it would be prudent if the mathematically
oriented McCarthy had some contact with mechanical
designers. Since I was the only one on the Stanford
faculty whose specialty was mechanism design, Terman
decided to phone me, even though we had never met and
I was a young assistant professor fresh out of graduate
school with only 2 years at Stanford.
Dr. Terman’s phone call led me to a close association
with John McCarthy and the Stanford Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence Laboratory (SAIL) that he founded. Robotics
became one of the pillars of my entire academic ca-
reer, and I have maintained my interest in teaching and
researching the subject through to the present day.
The modern history of robotic manipulation dates
from the late 1940s when servoed arms were developed
in connection with master–slave manipulator systems
used to protect technicians handling nuclear materials.
Developments in this area have continued to the present
day. However, in the early 1960s there was very little
academic or commercial activity in robotics. The ﬁrst
academic activity was the thesis of H. A. Ernst, in 1961,
at MIT. He used a slave arm equipped with touch sensors,
and ran it under computer control. The idea in his study
was to use the information from the touch sensors to
guide the arm.
This was followed by the SAIL project and a simi-
lar project started by Professor Marvin Minsky at MIT,
which were the only sizeable academic ventures into
robotics at that time. There were a few attempts at com-
mercial manipulators, primarily in connection with part
production in the automotive industry. In the USA there
were two different manipulator designs that were being
experimented with in the auto industry; one came from
American Machine and Foundry (AMF) and the other
from Unimation, Inc.
There were also a few mechanical devices developed
as hand, leg, and arm prosthetics, and, a bit later, some
Bernard Roth
Professor of Mechanical
Engineering
Stanford University
exoskeletal devices to enhance hu-
man performance. In those days
there were no microprocessors. So,
these devices were either without
computer control, or tethered to
a remote so-called minicomputer,
or even a mainframe computer.
Initially, some in the computer
science community felt that com-
puters were powerful enough to
control any mechanical device and
make it perform satisfactorily. We
quickly learned that this was not to
be the case. We started on a twofold
track. One was to develop particu-
lar devices for SAIL, so that hardware demonstrations
and proof-of-concept systems were available for the
ﬂedgling robotics community to experiment with. The
other track, which was more or less moonlighted from
the work at SAIL, was the development of a basic me-
chanical science of robotics. I had a strong feeling that
a meaningful science could be developed, and that it
would be best to think in terms of general concepts rather
than concentrate exclusively on particular devices.
Fortuitously, it turned out that the two tracks sup-
ported each other very naturally and, most importantly,
the right students were interested in doing their re-
search in this area. Hardware developments proved to
be speciﬁc examples of more general concepts, and the
students were able to develop both the hardware and the
theory.
Originally, we purchased an arm in order to get
started quickly. A group at Rancho Los Amigos
Hospital, in Los Angeles, was selling a tongue-switch-
controlled motor-driven exoskeleton arm to assist
patients without muscular control of their arms. We pur-
chased one of these, and connected it to a time-shared
PDP-6 computer. The device was named Butterﬁngers; it
was our ﬁrst experimental robot. Several ﬁlms demon-
strating visual feedback control, block stacking tasks,
and obstacle avoidance were made with Butterﬁngers as
the star performer.
The ﬁrst manipulator that we designed on our own
was known simply as the Hydraulic Arm. As its name
implies, it was powered by hydraulics. The idea was

----- Page 6 (native) -----
VI
to build a very fast arm. We designed special rotary
actuators, and the arm worked well. It became the ex-
perimental platform for testing the ﬁrst ever dynamic
analysis and time-optimal control of a robotic arm. How-
ever, its use was limited since the design speeds were
much faster than required due to the limitations of the
computational, planning, and sensing capabilities that
were common at that time.
We made an attempt to develop a truly digital arm.
This led to a snake-like structure named the Orm (the
Norwegian word for snake.) The Orm had several stages,
each with an array of inﬂatable pneumatic actuators that
were either fully extended or fully contracted. The basic
idea was that, even though only a ﬁnite number of po-
sitions in the workspace could be reached, these would
be sufﬁcient if there were a large number of positions.
A small prototype proof-of-concept Orm was developed.
It led to the realization that this type of arm would not
really serve the SAIL community.
The ﬁrst truly functional arm from our group was
designed by Victor Scheinman, who was a graduate stu-
dent at the time. It was the very successful Stanford Arm,
of which over ten copies were made as research tools
to be used in various university, government, and indus-
trial laboratories. The arm had six independently driven
joints; all driven by computer-controlled servoed, DC
electric motors. One joint was telescoping (prismatic)
and the other ﬁve were rotary (revolute).
Whereas the geometry of Butterﬁngers required an
iterative solution of the inverse kinematics, the geomet-
ric conﬁguration of the Stanford Arm was chosen so
that the inverse kinematics could be programmed in any
easy-to-use time-efﬁcient closed form. Furthermore, the
mechanical design was speciﬁcally made to be compat-
ible with the limitations inherent in timeshare computer
control. Various end-effectors could be attached to act
as hands. On our version, the hand was in the form
of a vise-grip jaw, with two sliding ﬁngers driven by
a servoed actuator (hence, a true seventh degree of free-
dom). It also had a specially designed six-axis wrist force
sensor. Victor Scheinman went on to develop other im-
portant robots: the ﬁrst was a small humanoid arm with
six revolute joints. The original design was paid for by
Marvin Minsky at the MIT AI Lab. Scheinman founded
Vicarm, a small company, and produced copies of this
arm and the Stanford Arm for other labs. Vicarm later be-
came the West Coast Division of Unimation, Inc., where
Scheinman designed the PUMA manipulator under Gen-
eral Motors sponsorship through Unimation. Later, for
a company called Automatix, Scheinman developed the
novel Robot World multirobot system. After Scheinman
left Unimation, his colleagues Brian Carlisle and Bruce
Shimano reorganized Unimation’s West Coast Division
into Adept, Inc., which to this day is the largest US
manufacturer of assembly robots.
Quickly, the modern trend of carefully detailed me-
chanical and electronic design, optimized software, and
complete system integration became the norm; to this
day, this combination represents the hallmark of most
highly regarded robotic devices. This is the basic con-
cept behind mechatronic, a word conied in Japan as
a concatenation of the words mechanics and electronics.
Mechatronics that relies on computation is the essence
of the technology inherent in robotics as we know it
today.
As robotics developed around the world, a large
number of people started working on various aspects,
and speciﬁc subspecialties developed. The ﬁrst big di-
vision was between people working on manipulators
and those working on vision systems. Early on, vi-
sion systems seemed to hold more promise than any
other method for giving robots information about their
environment.
The idea was to have a television camera capture
pictures of objects in the environment, and then use
algorithms that allowed the computer images of the
pictures to be analyzed, so as to infer required infor-
mation about location, orientation, and other properties
of objects. The initial successes with image systems
were in problems dealing with positioning blocks, solv-
ing object manipulation problems, and reading assembly
drawings. It was felt that vision held potential for use
in robotic systems in connection with factory automa-
tion and space exploration. This led to research into
software that would allow vision systems to recognize
machine parts (particularly partially occluded parts, as
occurred in the so-called “bin-picking” problems) and
ragged-shaped rocks.
After the ability to “see” and move objects became
established, the next logical need had to do with plan-
ning a sequence of events to accomplish a complex task.
This led to the development of planning as an impor-
tant branch in robotics. Making ﬁxed plans for a known
ﬁxed environment is relatively straightforward. How-
ever, in robotics, one of the challenges is to let the
robot discover its environment, and to modify its ac-
tions when the environment changes unexpectedly due
to errors or unplanned events. Some early landmark stud-
ies in this area were carried out using a vehicle named
Shakey, which, starting in 1966, was developed by Char-
lie Rosen’s group at the Stanford Research Institute
(now called SRI). Shakey had a TV camera, a trian-

----- Page 7 (native) -----
VII
gulating range ﬁnder, bump sensors, and was connected
to DEC PDP-10 and PDP-15 computers via radio and
video links.
Shakey was the ﬁrst mobile robot to reason about
its actions. It used programs that gave it the abil-
ity for independent perception, world modeling, and
action generation. Low-level action routines took
care of simple moving, turning, and route planning.
Intermediate-level actions combined the low-level ones
in ways that accomplished more complex tasks. The
highest level programs could make and execute plans to
achieve high-level goals supplied by a user.
Vision is very useful for navigation, locating objects,
and determining their relative positions and orientation.
However, it is usually not sufﬁcient for assembling parts
or working with robots where there are environmental
constraining forces. This led to the need to measure the
forces and torques generated by the environment, on
a robot, and to use these measurements to control the
robot’s actions. For many years, force-controlled ma-
nipulation became one of the main topics of study at
SAIL, and several other labs around the world. The use
of force control in industrial practice has always lagged
the research developments in this area. This seems to
be due to the fact that, while a high level of force
control is very useful for general manipulation issues,
speciﬁc problems in very restricted industrial environ-
ments can often be handled with limited, or no, force
control.
In the 1970s, specialized areas of study such as
walking machines, hands, automated vehicles, sensor
integration, and design for hostile environments began
to develop rapidly. Today there are a large number of dif-
ferent specialties studied under the heading of robotics.
Some of these specialties are classical engineering sub-
ject areas within which results have been developed that
have been particularized to the types of machines called
robots. Examples here are kinematics, dynamics, con-
trols, machine design, topology, and trajectory planning.
Each of these subjects has a long history predating the
study of robotics; yet each has been an area of in-depth
robotics research in order to develop its special charac-
ter in regard to robotic-type systems and applications.
In doing this specialized development, researchers have
enriched the classical subjects by increasing both their
content and scope.
At the same time that the theory was being devel-
oped, there was a parallel, although somewhat separate,
growth of industrial robotics. Strong commercial devel-
opment occurred in Japan and Europe, and there was
also continued growth in the USA. Industrial associa-
tions were formed (the Japan Robot Association was
formed in March 1971, and the Robotic Industries As-
sociation (RIA) was founded in 1974 in the USA) and
trade shows, together with application-oriented techni-
cal sessions, were introduced and held on a regular basis.
The most important were the International Symposium
on Industrial Robots, the Conference on Industrial Robot
Technology (now called the International Conference on
Industrial Robot Technology), and the RIA annual trade
show, which is now called the International Robots and
Vision Show and Conference.
The ﬁrst regular series of conferences emphasizing
research, rather than the industrial, aspects of robotics,
was inaugurated in 1973. It was sponsored jointly by the
International Center for Mechanical Sciences (CISM),
based in Udine, Italy, and the International Federation
fortheTheoryofMechanismsandMachines(IFToMM).
(Although IFToMM is still used, its meaning has been
changed to the International Federation for the Pro-
motion of Mechanism and Machine Science.) It was
named the Symposium on Theory and Practice of Robots
and Manipulators (RoManSy). Its trademark was an
emphasis on the mechanical sciences and the active
participation of researchers from Eastern and Western
Europe as well as North America and Japan. It is still
held biannually. On a personal note, it is at RoManSy
where I ﬁrst met each of the editors of this Handbook:
Dr. Khatib in 1978 and Dr. Siciliano in 1984. They were
both students: Bruno Siciliano had been working on his
PhD for about one year, and Oussama Khatib had just
completed his PhD research. In both cases, it was love
at ﬁrst sight!
RoManSy was quickly joined by a host of other
new conferences and workshops; today there are a large
number of research oriented robotics meetings that take
place through the year in many countries. Currently,
the largest conference is the International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), which regularly
draws well over 1000 participants.
In the beginning of the 1980s, the ﬁrst real text-
book on robotic manipulation in the USA was written
by Richard “Lou” Paul (Richard P. Paul, Robot Manip-
ulators: Mathematics, Programming, and Control, The
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1981). It used the idea
of taking classical subjects in mechanics and applying
them to robotics. In addition there were several top-
ics developed directly from his thesis research at SAIL.
(In the book, many examples are based on Scheinman’s
Stanford Arm.) Paul’s book was a landmark event in
the USA; it created a pattern for several inﬂuential
future textbooks and also encouraged the creation of

----- Page 8 (native) -----
VIII
specialized robotics courses at a host of colleges and
universities.
At about this same time, new journals were created
to deal primarily with research papers in the areas re-
lated to robotics. The International Journal of Robotics
Research was founded in the spring of 1982, and three
years later the IEEE Journal of Robotics and Automation
(now the IEEE Transactions on Robotics) was founded.
As microprocessors became ubiquitous, the ques-
tion of what is or is not a robot came more into play.
This issue has, in my mind, never been successfully
resolved. I do not think a deﬁnition will ever be univer-
sally agreed upon. There are of course the science ﬁction
creatures-from-outer-space varieties, and the robots of
the theater, literature, and the movies. There are ex-
amples of imaginary robot-like beings that predate the
industrial revolution, but how about more down-to-Earth
robots? In my view the deﬁnition is essentially a mov-
ing target that changes its character with technological
progress. For example, when it was ﬁrst developed,
a ship’s gyro auto-compass was considered a robot. To-
day, it is not generally included when we list the robots
in our world. It has been demoted and is now considered
an automatic control device.
For many, the idea of a robot includes the concept
of multifunctionality, meaning the device is designed
and built with the ability to be easily adapted or repro-
grammed to do different tasks. In theory this idea is
valid, but in practice it turns out that most robotic de-
vices are multifunctional in only a very limited arena.
In industry it was quickly discovered that a specialized
machine, in general, performs much better than a gen-
eral purpose machine. Furthermore, when the volume of
production is high enough, a specialized machine can
cost less to manufacture than a generalized one. So, spe-
cialized robots were developed for painting, riveting,
quasiplanar parts assembly, press loading, circuit board
stufﬁng, etc. In some cases robots are used in such spe-
cialized ways that it becomes difﬁcult to draw the line
between a so-called robot and an adjustable piece of
“ﬁxed” automation. Much of this practical unfolding is
contrary to the dream of the pioneers in robotics, who
had hoped for the development of general purpose ma-
chines that would do “everything”, and hence sell in
great enough volume to be relatively inexpensive.
My view is that the notion of a robot has to do with
which activities are, at a given time, associated with
people and which are associated with machines. If a ma-
chine suddenly becomes able to do what we normally
associate with people, the machine can be upgraded in
classiﬁcation and classiﬁed as a robot. After a while,
people get used to the activity being done by machines,
and the devices get downgraded from “robot” to “ma-
chine”. Machines that do not have ﬁxed bases, and those
that have arm- or leg-like appendages have the advan-
tage of being more likely called robots, but it is hard to
think of a consistent set of criteria that ﬁts all the current
naming conventions.
In actuality any machines, including familiar house-
hold appliances, which have microprocessors directing
their actions can be considered as robots. In addition
to vacuum cleaners, there are washing machines, refrig-
erators, and dishwashers that could be easily marketed
as robotic devices. There are of course a wide range
of possibilities, including those machines that have
sensory environmental feedback and decision-making
capabilities. In actual practice, in devices considered
to be robotic, the amount of sensory and decision
making capability may vary from a great deal to
none.
In recent decades the study of robotics has expanded
from a discipline centered on the study of mechatronic
devices to a much broader interdisciplinary subject.
An example of this is the area called human-centered
robotics. Here one deals with the interactions between
humans and intelligent machines. This is a growing area
where the study of the interactions between robots and
humans has enlisted expertise from outside the classi-
cal robotics domain. Concepts such as emotions in both
robots and people are being studied, and older areas such
as human physiology and biology are being incorporated
into the mainstream of robotics research. These activi-
ties enrich the ﬁeld of robotics, as they introduce new
engineering and science dimensions into the research
discourse.
Originally, the nascent robotics community was fo-
cused on getting things to work. Many early devices
were remarkable in that they worked at all, and little
notice was taken of their limited performance. Today,
we have sophisticated, reliable devices as part of the
modern array of robotic systems. This progress is the
result of the work of thousands of people throughout
the world. A lot of this work took place in universi-
ties, government research laboratories, and companies.
It is a tribute to the worldwide engineering and scien-
tiﬁc community that it has been able to create the vast
amount of information that is contained in the 64 chap-
ters of this Handbook. Clearly these results did not arise
by any central planning or by an overall orderly scheme.
So the editors of this handbook were faced with the dif-
ﬁcult task of organizing the material into a logical and
coherent whole.

----- Page 9 (native) -----
IX
The editors have accomplished this by organizing the
contributions into a three-layer structure. The ﬁrst layer
deals with the foundations of the subject. This layer
consists of a single part of nine chapters in which the
authors lay out the root subjects: kinematics, dynamics,
control, mechanisms, architecture, programming, rea-
soning, and sensing. These are the basic technological
building blocks for robotics study and development.
The second layer has four parts. The ﬁrst of these
deals with robot structures; these are the arms, legs,
hands, and other parts that most robots are made up of.
At ﬁrst blush, the hardware of legs, arms, and hands
may look quite different from each other, yet they share
a common set of attributes that allows them to all be
treated with the same, or closely related, aspects of the
fundamentals described in the ﬁrst layer.
The second part of this layer deals with sensing
and perception, which are basic abilities any truly au-
tonomous robotic system must have. As was pointed out
earlier, in practice, many so-called robotic devices have
little of these abilities, but clearly the more advanced
robots cannot exist without them, and the trend is very
much toward incorporating such capabilities into robotic
devices. The third part of this layer treats the subject ar-
eas associated with the technology of manipulation and
the interfacing of devices. The fourth part of this layer
is made up of eight chapters that treat mobile robots and
various forms of distributed robotics.
The third layer consists of two separate parts (a total
of 22 chapters) that deal with advanced applications at
the forefront of today’s research and development. There
are two parts to this layer; one deals with ﬁeld and service
robots, and the other deals with human-centered and
lifelike robots. To the uninitiated observer, these chapters
are what advanced robotics is all about. However, it is
important to realize that many of these extraordinary
accomplishments would probably not exist without the
previous developments introduced in the ﬁrst two layers
of this Handbook.
It is this intimate connection between theory and
practice that has nurtured the growth of robotics and
become a hallmark of modern robotics. These two com-
plementary aspects have been a source of great personal
satisfaction to those of us who have had the opportu-
nity to both research and develop robotic devices. The
contents of this Handbook admirably reﬂect this com-
plementary aspect of the subject, and present a very
useful bringing together of the vast accomplishments
which have taken place in the last 50 years. Certainly,
the contents of this Handbook will serve as a valuable
tool and guide to those who will produce the even more
capable and diverse next generations of robotic devices.
The editors and authors have my congratulations and
admiration.
Stanford, August 2007
Bernard Roth

----- Page 10 (native) -----
X
Foreword
Georges Giralt
Emeritus Research Director
LAAS-CNRS Toulouse
To open this Handbook and un-
fold the richness of its 64 chapters,
we here attempt a brief personal
overview to sketch the evolution of
robotics in its many aspects, con-
cepts, trends, and central issues.
The modern story of Robotics
began about half a century ago with
developments in two different di-
rections.
First, let us acknowledge the
domain of mechanical arms, rang-
ing from teleoperated tasks on
radiation-contaminated products to
industrial arms, with the landmark
machine UNIMATE – standing for uni(versal)mate.
The industrial development of products, mostly around
the six-degree-of-freedom serial links paradigm and
active research and development, associating mechan-
ical engineering to the control specialism, was the
main driving force here. Of particular note nowa-
days is the successfully pursued effort to design
novel application-optimized structures, using power-
ful sophisticated mathematical tools. In a similar
way, an important issue concerns the design and
the actual building of arms and hands in the con-
text of human-friendly robots for tomorrow’s cognitive
robot.
Second, and less well recognized, we should ac-
knowledge the stream of work concerned with themes
in artiﬁcial intelligence. A landmark project in this area
was the mobile robot Shakey developed at Stanford In-
ternational. This work, which aimed to bring together
computer science, artiﬁcial intelligence, and applied
mathematics to develop intelligent machines, remained
a secondary area for quite some time. During the 1980s,
building strength from many study cases encompassing
a spectacular spectrum ranging from rovers for extreme
environments (planet exploration, Antarctica, etc.), to
service robots (hospitals, museum guides, etc.), a broad
research domain arose in which machines could claim
the status of intelligent robots.
Hence robotics researches could bring together these
two different branches, with intelligent robots cate-
gorized in a solely computational way as bounded
rationality machines, expanding on the 1980s third-
generation robot deﬁnition:
“(robot) . . .
operating in the three-dimensional
world as a machine endowed with the capacity to inter-
pret and to reason about a task and about its execution,
by intelligently relating perception to action.”
The ﬁeld of autonomous robots, a widely recognized
test-bed, has recently beneﬁted from salient contribu-
tions in robot planning using the results of algorithmic
geometry as well as of a stochastic framework approach
applied both to environmental modeling and robot local-
ization problems (SLAM, simultaneous localization and
modeling), and further from the development of deci-
sional procedures via Bayesian estimation and decision
approaches.
For the last decade of the millennium, robotics
largely dealt with the intelligent robot paradigm, blend-
ing together robots and machine-intelligence generic
research within themes covering advanced sensing and
perception, task reasoning and planning, operational
and decisional autonomy, functional integration archi-
tectures, intelligent human–machine interfaces, safety,
and dependability.
The second branch, for years referred to as non-
manufacturing robotics, concerns a wide spectrum of
research-driven real-world cases pertaining to ﬁeld,
service, assistive, and, later, personal robotics. Here, ma-
chine intelligence is, in its various themes, the central
research direction, enabling the robot to act:
1. as a human surrogate, in particular for intervention
tasks in remote and/or hostile environments
2. in close interaction with humans and operating
in human environments in all applications encom-
passed by human-friendly robotics, also referred to
as human-centered robotics
3. in tight synergy with the user, expanding from me-
chanical exoskeleton assistance, surgery, health care,
and rehabilitation into human augmentation.
Consequently, at the turn of the millennium, robotics
appears as a broad spectrum of research themes
both supporting market products for well-engineered
industrial workplaces, and a large number of domain-
oriented application cases operating in hazardous and/or

----- Page 11 (native) -----
XI
harsh environments (underwater robotics, rough-terrain
rovers, health/rehabilitation care robotics, etc.) where
robots exhibit meaningful levels of shared autonomy.
The evolution levels for robotics stress the role of
theoretical aspects, moving from application domains
to the technical and scientiﬁc area. The organization of
this Handbook illustrates very well these different lev-
els. Furthermore, it rightly considers, besides a body of
software systems, front-line matters on physical appear-
ance and novel appendages, including legs, arms, and
hands design in the context of human-friendly robots
for tomorrow’s cognitive robot.
Forefront robotics in the ﬁrst decade of the current
millennium is making outstanding progress, compound-
ing the strength of two general directions:
•
short/mid-term application-oriented study cases
•
mid/long-term generic situated research
For completeness, we should mention the large num-
ber of peripheral, robotics-inspired subjects, quite often
concerning entertainment, advertising, and sophisticated
toys.
The salient ﬁeld of human-friendly robotics encom-
passes several front-line application domains where the
robots operate in a human environment and in close
interaction with humans (entertainment and education,
public-oriented services, assistive and personal robots,
etc.), which introduces the critical issue of human–robot
interaction.
Right at the core of the ﬁeld, emerges the fore-
front topic of personal robots for which three general
characteristics should be emphasized:
1. They may be operated by a nonprofessional user;
2. They may be designed to share high-level decision
making with the human user;
3. They may include a link to environment devices
and machine appendages, remote systems, and op-
erators; the shared decisional autonomy concept
(co-autonomy) implied here unfolds into a large set
of cutting-edge research issues and ethical problems.
The concept of the personal robot, expanding to
robot assistant and universal companion, is a truly great
challenge for robotics as a scientiﬁc and technical ﬁeld,
offering the mid/long-term perspective of achieving
a paramount societal and economical impact. This in-
troduces, and questions, front-line topics encompassing
cognitive aspects: user-tunable human–machine intel-
ligent interfaces, perception (scene analysis, category
identiﬁcation), open-ended learning (understanding
the universe of action), skills acquisition, extensive
robot-world data processing, decisional autonomy, and
dependability (safety, reliability, communication, and
operating robustness).
There is an obvious synergistic effort between the
two aforementioned approaches, in spite of the neces-
sary framework time differences. The scientiﬁc link not
only brings together the problems and obtained results
but also creates a synergistic exchange between the two
sides and the beneﬁts of technological progress.
Indeed, the corresponding research trends and ap-
plication developments are supported by an explosive
evolution of enabling technologies: computer process-
ing power, telecommunications, networking, sensing
devices, knowledge retrieval, new materials, micro- and
nanotechnologies.
Today, looking to the mid- and long-term future, we
are faced with very positive issues and perspectives but
also having to respond to critical comments and looming
dangers for machines that are in physical contact with
the user and may also be capable of unwanted, unsafe
behavior. Therefore, there is a clear need to include at the
research level safety issues and the topic of multifaced
dependability and the corresponding system constraints.
The Handbook of Robotics is an ambitious and
timely endeavor. It summarizes a large number of prob-
lems, questions, and facets considered by 164 authors
in 64 chapters. As such it not only provides an efﬁ-
cient display of basic topics and results obtained by
researches around the world, but furthermore gives ac-
cess to this variety of viewpoints and approaches to
everyone. This is indeed an important tool for progress
but, much more, is the central factor that will establish
the two ﬁrst decades of this millennium as the dawn of
robotics, lifted to a scientiﬁc discipline at the core of
machine intelligence.
Toulouse, December 2007
Georges Giralt

----- Page 12 (native) -----
XII
Foreword
Hirochika Inoue
Professor Emeritus
The University of Tokyo
The ﬁeld of robotics was born in
the middle of the last century when
emerging computers were altering
every ﬁeld of science and engineer-
ing. Having gone through fast yet
steady growth via a procession of
stages from infancy, childhood, and
adolescence to adulthood, robotics
is now mature and is expected to en-
hance the quality of people’s lives
in society in the future.
In its infancy, the core of
robotics consisted of pattern recog-
nition, automatic control, and arti-
ﬁcial intelligence. Taking on these
new challenge, scientists and engineers in these ﬁelds
gathered to investigate novel robotic sensors and ac-
tuators, planning and programming algorithms, and
architectures to connect these components intelligently.
In so doing, they created artifacts that could interact with
humans in the real world. An integration of these early
robotics studies yielded hand–eye systems, the test-bed
of artiﬁcial intelligence research.
The playground for childhood robotics was the fac-
tory ﬂoor. Industrial robots were invented and introduced
into the factory for automating spraying, spot welding,
grinding, materials handling, and parts assembly. Ma-
chines with sensors and memories made the factory ﬂoor
smarter, and its operations more ﬂexible, reliable, and
precise. Such robotic automation freed humans from
heavy and tedious labor. The automobile, electric appli-
ance, and semiconductor industries rapidly retooled their
manufacturing lines into robot-integrated systems. In the
late 1970s, the word mechatronics, originally coined by
the Japanese, deﬁned a new concept of machinery, one in
which electronics was fused with mechanical systems,
making a wide range of industrial products simpler, more
functional, programmable, and intelligent. Robotics and
mechatronics exerted an evolutionary impact on the de-
sign and operation of manufacturing processes as well
as on manufactured products.
As robotics entered its adolescence, researchers were
ambitious to explore new horizons. Kinematics, dynam-
ics, and control system theory were reﬁned and applied
to real complex robot mechanisms. To plan and carry
out real tasks, robots had to be made cognizant of their
surroundings. Vision, the primary channel for external
sensing, was exploited as the most general, effective, and
efﬁcient means for robots to understand their external sit-
uation. Advanced algorithms and powerful devices were
developed to improve the speed and robustness of robot
vision systems. Tactile and force sensing systems also
needed to be developed for robots to manipulate objects.
Studies on modeling, planning, knowledge, reasoning,
and memorization expanded their intelligent properties.
Robotics became deﬁned as the study of intelligent con-
nection of sensing to actuation. This deﬁnition covered
all aspects of robotics: three scientiﬁc cores and one
synthetic approach to integrate them. Indeed, system in-
tegration became a key aspect of robotic engineering
as it allows the creation of lifelike machines. The fun
of creating such robots attracted many students to the
robotics ﬁeld.
In advancing robotics further, scientiﬁc interest
was directed at understanding humans. Comparative
studies of humans and robots led to new approaches
in scientiﬁc modeling of human functions. Cognitive
robotics, lifelike behavior, biologically inspired robots,
and a psychophysiological approach to robotic machines
culminated in expanding the horizons of robotic po-
tential. Generally speaking, an immature ﬁeld is sparse
in scientiﬁc understanding. Robotics in the 1980s and
1990s was in such a youthful stage, attracting a great
many inquisitive researchers to this new frontier. Their
continuous explorations into new realms form the rich
scientiﬁc contents of this comprehensive volume.
Further challenges, along with expertise acquired
on the cutting edge of robotics, opened the way to
real-world applications for mature robotics. The early-
stage playground gave way to a workshop for industrial
robotics. Medical robotics, robot surgery, and in vivo
imaging save patients from pain while providing doc-
tors with powerful tools for conducting operations. New
robots in such areas as rehabilitation, health care, and
welfare are expected to improve quality of life in an ag-
ing society. It is the destiny of robots to go everywhere,
in the air, under water, and into space. They are ex-
pected to work hand in hand with humans in such areas
as agriculture, forestry, mining, construction, and haz-
ardous environments and rescue operations, and to ﬁnd

----- Page 13 (native) -----
XIII
utility both in domestic work and in providing services
in shops, stores, restaurants, and hospitals. In a myr-
iad of ways, robotic devices are expected to support our
daily lives. At this point, however, robot applications
are largely limited to structured environments, where
they are separated from humans for safety sake. In
the next stage, their environment will be expanded to
an unstructured world, one in which humans, as ser-
vice takers, will always live and work beside robots.
Improved sensing, more intelligence, enhanced safety,
and better human understanding will be needed to pre-
pare robots to function in such an environment. Not
only technical but also social matters must be con-
sidered in ﬁnding solutions to issues impeding this
progress.
Since my initial research to make a robot turn
a crank, four decades have passed. I feel both lucky and
happy to have witnessed the growth of robotics from its
early beginnings. To give birth to robotics, fundamental
technologies were imported from other disciplines. Nei-
ther textbooks nor handbooks were available. To reach
the present stage, a great many scientists and engineers
have challenged new frontiers; advancing robotics, they
have enriched this body of knowledge from a variety
of perspectives. The fruits of their endeavors are com-
piled in this Handbook of Robotics. More than 100 of
the world’s leading experts have collaborated in produc-
ing this publication. Now, people who wish to commit
themselves to robotics research can ﬁnd a ﬁrm founda-
tion to build upon. This Handbook is sure to be used to
further advance robotics science, reinforce engineering
education, and systematically compile knowledge that
will innovate both society and industry.
The roles of humans and robots in an aging soci-
ety pose an important issue for scientists and engineers
to consider. Can robotics contribute to securing peace,
prosperity, and a greater quality of life? This is still
an open question. However, recent advances in personal
robots, robotic home appliances, and humanoids suggest
a paradigm shift from the industrial to the service sector.
To realize this, robotics must be addressed from such
viewpoints as the working infrastructure within soci-
ety, psychophysiology, law, economy, insurance, ethics,
art, design, drama, and sports science. Future robotics
should be studied as a subject that envelops both hu-
manity and technology. This Handbook offers a selected
technical foundation upon which to advance such newly
emerging ﬁelds of robotics. I look forward to contin-
uing progress adding page after page of robot-based
prosperity to future society.
Tokyo, September 2007
Hirochika Inoue

----- Page 14 (native) -----
XIV
Foreword
Rodney Brooks
Panasonic Professor
of Robotics
Massachusetts Institute
of Technology
Robots have fascinated people for
thousands of years. Those automa-
tons that were built before the
20th century did not connect sens-
ing to action but rather operated
through human agency or as repet-
itive machines. However, by the
1920s electronics had gotten to the
stage that the ﬁrst true robots that
sensed the world and acted in it ap-
propriately could be built. By 1950
we started to see descriptions of
real robots appearing in popular
magazines. By the 1960s industrial
robots came onto the scene. Com-
mercial pressures made them less
and less responsive to their envi-
ronments but faster and faster in what they did in their
carefully engineered world. Then in the mid 1970s in
France, Japan, and the USA we started to see robots ris-
ing again in a handful of research laboratories, and now
we have arrived at a world-wide frenzy in research and
the beginnings of large-scale deployment of intelligent
robots throughout our world. This Handbook brings to-
gether the current state of robotics research in one place.
It ranges from the mechanism of robots through sens-
ing and perceptual processing, intelligence, action, and
many application areas.
I have been more than fortunate to have lived with
this revolution in robotics research over the last 30 years.
As a teenager in Australia I built robots inspired by the
tortoises of Walter described in the Scientiﬁc Ameri-
can in 1949 and 1950. When I arrived in Silicon Valley
in 1977, just as the revolution in the personalization
of computation was really coming into being, I instead
turned to the much more obscure world of robots. In
1979 I was able to assist Hans Moravec at the Stanford
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab (SAIL) as he coaxed his robot
“The Cart” to navigate 20 m in 6 hours. Just 26 years
later, in 2005, at the same laboratory, SAIL, Sebastian
Thrun and his team coaxed their robot to autonomously
drive 200,000 m in 6 hours: four orders of magnitude
improvement in a mere 26 years, which is slightly better
than a doubling every 2 years. However, robots have not
just improved in speed, they have also increased in num-
ber. When I arrived at SAIL in 1977 we knew of three
mobile robots operating in the world. Recently a com-
pany that I founded manufactured its 3,000,000th mobile
robot, and the pace is increasing. Other aspects of robots
have had similarly spectacular advances, although it is
harder to provide such crisp numeric characterizations.
In recent years we have gone from robots being too un-
aware of their surroundings that it was unsafe for people
to share their workspace to robots that people can work
with in close contact, and from robots that were totally
unaware of people to robots that pick up on natural so-
cial cues from facial expressions to prosody in people’s
voices. Recently robotics has crossed the divide between
ﬂesh and machines so that now we are seeing neuro-
robotics ranging from prosthetic robotic extensions to
rehabilitative robots for the disabled. And very recently
robotics has become a respected contributor to research
in cognitive science and neuroscience.
The research results chronicled in this volume
give the key ideas that have enabled these spectacu-
lar advances. The editors, the part editors, and all the
contributors have done a stellar job in bring this knowl-
edge together in one place. Their efforts have produced
a work that will provide a basis for much further research
and development. Thank you, and congratulations to all
who have labored on this pivotal book.
Some of the future robotics research will be incre-
mental in nature, taking the state of the art and improving
upon it. Other parts of future research will be more rev-
olutionary, based on ideas that are antithetical to some
of the ideas and current state of the art presented in this
book.
As you study this volume and look for places to con-
tribute to research through your own talents and hard
work I want to alert you to capabilities or aspirations
that I believe will make robots even more useful, more
productive, and more accepted. I describe these capabil-
ities in terms of the age at which a child has equivalent
capabilities:
•
the object-recognition capabilities of a 2-year-old
child
•
the language capabilities of a 4-year-old child

----- Page 15 (native) -----
XV
•
the manual dexterity of a 6-year-old child
•
the social understanding of an 8-year-old child
Each of these is a very difﬁcult goal. However even
small amounts of progress towards any one of these goals
will have immediate applications to robots out in the
world. Good reading and best wishes as you contribute
further to robotkind.
Cambridge, October 2007
Rodney Brooks

----- Page 16 (native) -----
XVII
Preface
Reaching for the human frontier, robotics is vigorously
engaged in the growing challenges of new emerging
domains. Interacting, exploring, and working with hu-
mans, the new generation of robots will increasingly
touch people and their lives. The credible prospect
of practical robots among humans is the result of the
scientiﬁc endeavor of a half a century of robotic devel-
opments that established robotics as a modern scientiﬁc
discipline.
The undertaking of the Springer Handbook of
Robotics was motivated by the rapid growth of the
ﬁeld. With the ever increasing amount of publications
in journals, conference proceedings and monographs, it
is difﬁcult for those involved in robotics, particularly
those who are just entering the ﬁeld, to stay abreast of
its wide range of developments. This task is made even
more arduous by the very multidisciplinary nature of
robotics.
The handbook follows preceding efforts in the 1980s
and1990s,whichhavebroughtvaluablereferencestothe
robotics community: Robot Motion: Planning and Con-
trol (Brady, Hollerbach, Johnson, Lozano-Pérez, and
Mason, MIT Press 1982), Robotics Science (Brady, MIT
Press 1989), The Robotics Review 1 and 2 (Khatib,
Craig, and Lozano-Pérez, MIT Press 1989 and 1992).
With the greater expansion of the robotics ﬁeld and its
increased outreach towards other scientiﬁc disciplines,
the need for a comprehensive reference source com-
bining basic and advanced developments has naturally
become yet more urgent.
The volume is the result of the effort by a number
of contributors who themselves are actively involved in
robotics research in countries around the world. It has
been a gigantic task to insightfully provide coverage of
all the areas of robotics by such a motivated and versatile
group of individuals committed to this endeavour.
The project started in May 2002 during a meeting
the two of us had with Springer Director Engineering
Europe Dieter Merkle and STAR Senior Editor Thomas
Ditzinger. A year earlier, together with Frans Groen, we
had launched the Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics
(STAR) series, which was rapidly establishing itself as
an important medium for the timely dissemination of
robotics research.
It was in this context that we took on this challenging
task and enthusiastically began the planning to develop
the technical structure and build the group of contribu-
tors. To capture the multiple dimensions of the ﬁeld in its
well-established academic core, ongoing research devel-
opments, and emerging applications, we conceived the
handbook in a three-layer structure for a total of seven
parts.
The ﬁrst layer and part is devoted to the robotics
foundations. The consolidated methodologies and tech-
nologies are grouped in the four parts of the second
layer, covering robot structures, sensing and percep-
tion, manipulation and interfaces, mobile and distributed
robotics. The third layer includes the advanced applica-
tions in the two parts on ﬁeld and service robotics, and
human-centered and life-like robotics, respectively.
To develop each of these parts, we envisioned the es-
tablishment of an editorial team which could coordinate
the authors’ contributions to the various chapters. A year
later our seven-member editorial team was formed:
David Orin, Frank Park, Henrik Christensen, Makoto
Kaneko, Raja Chatila, Alex Zelinsky and Daniela Rus.
With the commitment of such a group of distinguished
scholars, the handbook was granted quality, span, and
balance in the scientiﬁc areas.
By early 2005, we assembled an authorship of
more than one-hundred-and-ﬁfty contributors. An in-
ternal web site was created to facilitate inter-part and
chapter cross-references, and to pace the schedule for
the development of the project. The contents were care-
fully tuned over the following year, and especially during
the two full-day workshops held in the spring of 2005
and 2006, well attended by most of the authors.
Each chapter was peer reviewed by at least three in-
dependent reviewers, typically involving the part editor,
and two authors of related chapters; and in some cases,
included external experts in the ﬁeld. Two review cycles
were necessary, and even three in some cases. During
the process, a few more authors were recruited whenever
it was deemed necessary. Most chapters were ﬁnalized
by the end of the summer of 2007, and the project was
completed by the early spring of 2008 – generating, by
that time, a record of over 10 000 emails in our fold-
ers. The result is an impressive collection of 64 chapters

----- Page 17 (native) -----
XVIII
over the 7 parts, contributed by 165 authors, with more
than 1650 pages, 950 illustrations and 5500 references.
We are deeply thankful to the authors for their intel-
lectual contributions, as well as to the reviewers and part
editors for their conscientious work. We are indebted to
Werner Skolaut, the Senior Manager of Springer Hand-
books in Science and Engineering, who soon became
a devoted member of our team with his painstaking sup-
port to technically editing the authors’ typescripts and
linking the editors’ work with the copy editing and pro-
duction of the handbook. We also wish to acknowledge
the highly professional work by the Le-TeX staff, which
re-typeset all the text, redrew and improved the many
illustrations, while timely interacting with the authors
during the proof-reading of the material.
Six years after its conception the handbook comes
to light. Beyond its tutorial value for our community,
it is our hope that it will serve as a useful source to
attract new researchers to robotics and inspire decades of
vibrant progress in this fascinating ﬁeld. The completion
of every endeavor also brings new exciting challenges;
at such times, our fellows are always reminded to . . .
keep the gradient ;-)
Napoli and Stanford
Bruno Siciliano
April 2008
Oussama Khatib

----- Page 18 (native) -----
XIX
About the Editors
Bruno Siciliano received his Doctorate degree in Electronic Engineering from the
University of Naples in 1987. He is Professor of Control and Robotics, and Director
of the PRISMA Lab in the Department of Computer and Systems Engineering at
University of Naples. His current research is in force control, visual servoing, dual-
arm/hand manipulation, lightweight ﬂexible arms, human-robot interaction and service
robotics. Professor Siciliano has co-authored 6 books and 5 edited volumes, 65 journal
papers, 165 conference papers and book chapters, and has delivered 85 invited lectures
and seminars at institutions around the world. He is Co-Editor of the Springer Tracts
in Advanced Robotics (STAR) series, the Springer Handbook of Robotics, and has
served on the Editorial Boards of prestigious journals, as well as Chair or Co-Chair for
numerous international conferences. He is a Fellow of both IEEE and ASME. Professor
Siciliano is the President of the IEEE Robotics and Automation Society (RAS), after
serving as Vice President for Technical Activities and Vice President for Publications,
as a Distinguished Lecturer, as a member of the Administrative Committee and of
several other society committees.
Oussama Khatib received his Doctorate degree in Electrical Engineering from
Sup’Aero, Toulouse, France, in 1980. He is Professor of Computer Science at Stanford
University. His current research, which focuses on human-centered robotics, is con-
cerned with human motion synthesis, humanoid robotics, haptic teleoperation, medical
robotics, and human-friendly robot design. His research in these areas builds on a large
body of studies he pursued over the past 25 years and published in over 200 con-
tributions. Professor Khatib has delivered over 50 keynote presentations and several
hundreds of colloquia and seminars at institutions around the world. He is Co-Editor
of the STAR series, the Springer Handbook of Robotics, and has served on the Ad-
visory and Editorial Boards of prestigious institutions and journals, as well as Chair
or Co-Chair for numerous international conferences. He is a Fellow of IEEE and has
served RAS as a Distinguished Lecturer and as a member of the Administrative Com-
mittee. Professor Khatib is the President of the International Foundation of Robotics
Research (IFRR) and a recipient of the Japan Robot Association (JARA) Award in
Research and Development.

----- Page 19 (native) -----
XX

----- Page 20 (native) -----
XXI
About the Part Editors
David E. Orin
Part A
The Ohio State University
Department of Electrical Engineering
Columbus, OH, USA
orin.1@osu.edu
David E. Orin received his PhD degree in Electrical Engineering from The Ohio
State University in 1976. From 1976 to 1980 he taught at Case Western Reserve
University. Since 1981, he has been at The Ohio State University, where he is currently
a Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering. His current work focuses on
dynamic movement in biped locomotion. He has made many contributions to robot
dynamics and legged locomotion, and he has over 125 publications. He has received
a number of educational awards from his institution. He is an IEEE Fellow and has
served on the program committee for several international conferences. He has received
the Distinguished Service Award in recognition of his service for the IEEE Robotics
and Automation Society, such as Vice President for Finance, Secretary, member of the
Administrative Committee, and co-chair of the Fellow Evaluation Committee.
Frank C. Park
Part B
Seoul National University
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Seoul, Korea
fcp@snu.ac.kr
Frank C. Park received the PhD degree in Applied Mathematics from Harvard
University in 1991. From 1991 to 1995 he was an Assistant Professor of Mechanical
and Aerospace Engineering at the University of California, Irvine. Since 1995 he
has been at the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at Seoul National
University, where he is currently full professor. His primary research interests in
robotics include robot mechanics, planning, and control, robot design and structures,
and industrial robotics. His other research interests include nonlinear systems theory,
differential geometry and its applications, and related areas of applied mathematics. He
has served the IEEE Robotics and Automation Society as a Secretary and as a Senior
Editor of the IEEE Transactions on Robotics.
Henrik I. Christensen
Part C
Georgia Institute of Technology
Robotics and Intelligent Machines @ GT
Atlanta, GA, USA
hic@cc.gatech.edu
Henrik I. Christensen is the KUKA Chair of Robotics and Director of
Robotics at Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA. He received
the MS and PhD degrees from Aalborg University in 1987 and 1990,
respectively. He has held positions in Denmark, Sweden, and USA. He
has published more than 250 contributions across vision, robotics, and AI.
Results from his research have been commercialized through a number of
major companies and 4 spin-offs. He served as the founding coordinator of
the European Robotics Research Network (EURON). He has participated
as a senior organizer in more than 50 different conferences and workshops.
He is a Fellow of the International Foundation of Robotics Research, an
Editorial Board member of the STAR series, and has served on the editorial
board of several leading journals in the ﬁeld. He has been a Distinguished
Lecturer of the IEEE Robotics and Automation Society.

----- Page 21 (native) -----
XXII
Makoto Kaneko
Part D
Osaka University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Graduate School of Engineering
Suita, Japan
mk@mech.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp
Makoto Kaneko received the MS and PhD degrees in Mechanical
Engineering from Tokyo University in 1978 and 1981, respectively.
From 1981 to 1990 he was Researcher at the Mechanical Engineering
Laboratory, from 1990 to 1993 an Associate Professor at Kyushu
Institute of Technology, from 1993 to 2006 Professor at Hiroshima
University, and in 2006 became a Professor at Osaka University. His
research interests include tactile-based active sensing, grasping strategy,
hyper human technology and its application to medical diagnosis, and
his work has received 17 awards. He is an Editorial Board member of the
STAR series and has served as chair or co-chair for several international
conferences. He is an IEEE Fellow. He has served the IEEE Robotics
and Automation Society as a Vice-President for Member Activities
and as a Technical Editor of the IEEE Transactions on Robotics and
Automation.
Raja Chatila
Part E
LAAS-CNRS
Toulouse, France
raja.chatila@laas.fr
Raja Chatila received his PhD degree from the University of Toulouse in 1981. He is
currently Director of LAAS-CNRS (Laboratory of Systems Analysis and Architecture),
Toulouse, France where he is since 1983. He was an invited professor at Tsukuba
University in 1997. His research work encompasses several aspects in ﬁeld, planetary,
aerial and service robotics, cognitive robotics, learning, human-robot interaction, and
networked robotics. He is author of over 150 international publications on these topics.
He is a Fellow of the International Foundation of Robotics Research. He has served
on the editorial boards of several leading publications, including the STAR series,
and as chair or co-chair for several international conferences. He has served the IEEE
Robotics and Automation Society as a member of the Administrative Committee, as
an Associate Editor of the IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation and as
a Distinguished Lecturer. He is a member of IEEE, ACM and AAAI, and a member of
various national and international boards and evaluation committees.
Alexander Zelinsky
Part F
Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and Industrial
Research Organisation (CSIRO)
ICT Centre
Epping, NSW, Australia
alex.zelinsky@csiro.au
Alexander Zelinsky is the Director of the Information and Communication Technologies
Centre at the CSIRO. Before joining CSIRO, he was CEO and Founder of Seeing
Machines Pty Limited and a Professor at the Australian National University, in the
Research School of Information Sciences and Engineering. He is a well-known scientist
specializing in robotics and computer vision, he is widely recognized as an innovator in
human-machine interaction, and he has over 100 publications in the ﬁeld. His work has
received both national and international awards. He has served on the editorial boards
of two leading publications, and on the program committees of several international
conferences. He is an IEEE Fellow and has served the IEEE Robotics and Automation
Society as a member of the Administrative Committee and as Vice-President for
Industrial Activities.
Daniela Rus
Part G
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
CSAIL Center for Robotics
Cambridge, MA, USA
rus@csail.mit.edu
Daniela Rus received her PhD degree in Computer Science from Cornell
University in 1992. From 1994 to 2003 she taught at Dartmouth, Hanover.
Since 2004 she has been at MIT, where she is currently a Professor of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. She co-directs the CSAIL
Center for robotics and is an Associate Director of CSAIL. Her research
interests center on distributed robotics and mobile computing, and she has
published extensively in the ﬁeld. Her work in robotics aims to develop
self-organizing systems and spans the spectrum from novel mechanical
design and experimental platforms to developing and analyzing algorithms
for locomotion, manipulation, and group control. She has received
a number of awards, including the MacArthur Fellow. She has been on the
program committees of several international conferences, and has served
the IEEE Robotics and Automation Society as Education Co-Chair.

----- Page 22 (native) -----
XXIII
List of Contributors
Jorge Angeles
McGill University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
and Centre for Intelligent Machines
817 Sherbrooke St. W.
Montreal, Quebec H3A 2K6, Canada
e-mail: angeles@cim.mcgill.ca
Gianluca Antonelli
Università degli Studi di Cassino
Dipartimento di Automazione, Ingegneria
dell’Informazione e Matematica Industriale
Via G. Di Biasio 43
03043 Cassino, Italy
e-mail: antonelli@unicas.it
Fumihito Arai
Tohoku University
Department of Bioengineering and Robotics
6-6-01 Aoba-yama
980-8579 Sendai, Japan
e-mail: arai@imech.mech.tohoku.ac.jp
Michael A. Arbib
University of Southern California
Computer, Neuroscience and USC Brain Project
Los Angeles, CA 90089-2520, USA
e-mail: arbib@usc.edu
Antonio Bicchi
Università degli Studi di Pisa
Centro Interdipartimentale di Ricerca
“Enrico Piaggio” e Dipartimento
di Sistemi Elettrici e Automazione
Via Diotisalvi 2
56125 Pisa, Italy
e-mail: bicchi@ing.unipi.it
Aude Billard
Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL)
Learning Algorithms and Systems Laboratory (LASA)
STI-I2S-LASA
1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
e-mail: aude.billard@epﬂ.ch
John Billingsley
University of Southern Queensland
Faculty of Engineering and Surveying
Toowoomba QLD 4350, Australia
e-mail: billings@usq.edu.au
Wayne Book
Georgia Institute of Technology
G.W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering
771 Ferst Drive
Atlanta, GA 30332-0405, USA
e-mail: wayne.book@me.gatech.edu
Cynthia Breazeal
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
The Media Lab
20 Ames St.
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
e-mail: cynthiab@media.mit.edu
Oliver Brock
University of Massachusetts
Robotics and Biology Laboratory
140 Governors Drive
Amherst, MA 01003, USA
e-mail: oli@cs.umass.edu
Alberto Broggi
Università degli Studi di Parma
Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione
Viale delle Scienze 181A
43100 Parma, Italy
e-mail: broggi@ce.unipr.it
Heinrich H. Bülthoff
Max-Planck-Institut für biologische Kybernetik
Kognitive Humanpsychophysik
Spemannstr. 38
72076 Tübingen, Germany
e-mail: heinrich.buelthoff@tuebingen.mpg.de

----- Page 23 (native) -----
XXIV
List of Contributors
Joel W. Burdick
California Institute of Technology
Mechanical Engineering Department
1200 E. California Blvd.
Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
e-mail: jwb@robotics.caltech.edu
Wolfram Burgard
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Institut für Informatik
Georges-Koehler-Allee 079
79110 Freiburg, Germany
e-mail: burgard@informatik.uni-freiburg.de
Zack Butler
Rochester Institute of Technology
Department of Computer Science
102 Lomb Memorial Dr.
Rochester, NY 14623, USA
e-mail: zjb@cs.rit.edu
Fabrizio Caccavale
Università degli Studi della Basilicata
Dipartimento di Ingegneria e Fisica dell’Ambiente
Via dell’Ateneo Lucano 10
85100 Potenza, Italy
e-mail: fabrizio.caccavale@unibas.it
Sylvain Calinon
Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL)
Learning Algorithms and Systems Laboratory (LASA)
STI-I2S-LASA
1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
e-mail: sylvain.calinon@epﬂ.ch
Guy Campion
Université Catholique de Louvain
Centre d’Ingénierie des Systèmes d’Automatique
et de Mécanique Appliquée
4 Avenue G. Lemaître
1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
e-mail: guy.campion@uclouvain.be
Raja Chatila
LAAS-CNRS
7 Avenue du Colonel Roche
31077 Toulouse, France
e-mail: raja.chatila@laas.fr
François Chaumette
INRIA/IRISA
Campus de Beaulieu
35042 Rennes, France
e-mail: francois.chaumette@irisa.fr
Stefano Chiaverini
Università degli Studi di Cassino
Dipartimento di Automazione, Ingegneria
dell’Informazione e Matematica Industriale
Via G. Di Biasio 43
03043 Cassino, Italy
e-mail: chiaverini@unicas.it
Nak Young Chong
Japan Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (JAIST)
School of Infomation Science
1-1 Asahidai, Nomi
923-1292 Ishikawa, Japan
e-mail: nakyoung@jaist.ac.jp
Howie Choset
Carnegie Mellon University
The Robotics Institute
5000 Forbes Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
e-mail: choset@cs.cmu.edu
Henrik I. Christensen
Georgia Institute of Technology
Robotics and Intelligent Machines @ GT
Atlanta, GA 30332-0760, USA
e-mail: hic@cc.gatech.edu
Wankyun Chung
POSTECH
Department of Mechanical Engineering
San 31 Hyojading
Pohang 790-784, Korea
e-mail: wkchung@postech.ac.kr
Woojin Chung
Korea University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Anam-dong, Sungbuk-ku
Seoul 136-701, Korea
e-mail: smartrobot@korea.ac.kr

----- Page 24 (native) -----
List of Contributors
XXV
J. Edward Colgate
Northwestern University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Segal Design Institute
2145 Sheridan Rd.
Evanston, IL 60208, USA
e-mail: colgate@northwestern.edu
Peter Corke
Commonwealth Scientiﬁc
and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO)
ICT Centre
PO Box 883
Kenmore QLD 4069, Australia
e-mail: peter.corke@csiro.au
Jock Cunningham
Commonwealth Scientiﬁc
and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO)
Division of Exploration and Mining
PO Box 883
Kenmore QLD 4069, Australia
e-mail: jock.cunningham@csiro.au
Mark R. Cutkosky
Stanford University
Mechanical Engineering
Building 560, 424 Panama Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-2232, USA
e-mail: cutkosky@stanford.edu
Kostas Daniilidis
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Computer and Information Science
GRASP Laboratory
3330 Walnut Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
e-mail: kostas@cis.upenn.edu
Paolo Dario
Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna
ARTS Lab e CRIM Lab
Piazza Martiri della Libertà 33
56127 Pisa, Italy
e-mail: paolo.dario@sssup.it
Alessandro De Luca
Università degli Studi di Roma “La Sapienza”
Dipartimento di Informatica
e Sistemistica “A. Ruberti”
Via Ariosto 25
00185 Roma, Italy
e-mail: deluca@dis.uniroma1.it
Joris De Schutter
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Celestijnenlaan 300, Box 02420
3001 Leuven-Heverlee, Belgium
e-mail: joris.deschutter@mech.kuleuven.be
Rüdiger Dillmann
Universität Karlsruhe
Institut für Technische Informatik
Haid-und-Neu-Str. 7
76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
e-mail: dillmann@ira.uka.de
Lixin Dong
ETH Zentrum
Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Systems
Tannenstr. 3
8092 Zürich, Switzerland
e-mail: ldong@ethz.ch
Gregory Dudek
McGill University
Department of Computer Science
3480 University Street
Montreal, QC H3Y 3H4, Canada
e-mail: dudek@cim.mcgill.ca
Mark Dunn
University of Southern Queensland
National Centre for Engineering in Agriculture
Toowoomba QLD 4350, Australia
e-mail: mark.dunn@usq.edu.au
Hugh Durrant-Whyte
University of Sydney
ARC Centre of Excellence for Autonomous Systems
Australian Centre for Field Robotics (ACFR)
Sydney NSW 2006, Australia
e-mail: hugh@acfr.usyd.edu.au

----- Page 25 (native) -----
XXVI
List of Contributors
Jan-Olof Eklundh
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Teknikringen 14
10044 Stockholm, Sweden
e-mail: joe@nada.kth.se
Aydan M. Erkmen
Middle East Technical University
Department of Electrical Engineering
Ankara, 06531, Turkey
e-mail: aydan@metu.edu.tr
Bernard Espiau
INRIA Rhône-Alpes
38334 Saint-Ismier, France
e-mail: bernard.espiau@inria.fr
Roy Featherstone
The Australian National University
Department of Information Engineering
RSISE Building 115
Canberra ACT 0200, Australia
e-mail: roy.featherstone@anu.edu.au
Eric Feron
Georgia Institute of Technology
School of Aerospace Engineering
270 Ferst Drive
Atlanta, GA 30332-0150, USA
e-mail: feron@gatech.edu
Gabor Fichtinger
Queen’s University
School of Computing
#725 Goodwin Hall, 25 Union St.
Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada
e-mail: gabor@cs.queensu.ca
Paolo Fiorini
Università degli Studi di Verona
Dipartimento di Informatica
Strada le Grazie 15
37134 Verona, Italy
e-mail: paolo.ﬁorini@univr.it
Robert B. Fisher
University of Edinburgh
School of Informatics
James Clerk Maxwell Building, Mayﬁeld Road
Edinburgh, EH9 3JZ, UK
e-mail: rbr@inf.ed.ac.uk
Paul Fitzpatrick
Italian Institute of Technology
Robotics, Brain, and Cognitive
Sciences Department
Via Morego 30
16163 Genova, Italy
e-mail: paul.ﬁtzpatrick@iit.it
Dario Floreano
Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL)
Laboratory of Intelligent Systems
EPFL-STI-I2S-LIS
1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
e-mail: dario.ﬂoreano@epﬂ.ch
Thor I. Fossen
Norwegian University of Science
and Technology (NTNU)
Department of Engineering Cybernetics
Trondheim, 7491, Norway
e-mail: fossen@ieee.org
Li-Chen Fu
National Taiwan University
Department of Electrical Engineering
Taipei, 106, Taiwan, R.O.C.
e-mail: lichen@ntu.edu.tw
Maxime Gautier
Université de Nantes
IRCCyN, ECN
1 Rue de la Noë
44321 Nantes, France
e-mail: maxime.gautier@irccyn.ec-nantes.fr
Martin A. Giese
University of Wales
Department of Psychology
Penrallt Rd.
Bangor, LL 57 2AS, UK
e-mail: martin.giese@uni-tuebingen.de

----- Page 26 (native) -----
List of Contributors
XXVII
Ken Goldberg
University of California at Berkeley
Department of Industrial Engineering
and Operations Research
4141 Etcheverry Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-1777, USA
e-mail: goldberg@ieor.berkeley.edu
Clément Gosselin
Université Laval
Departement de Genie Mecanique
Quebec, QC G1K 7P4, Canada
e-mail: gosselin@gmc.ulaval.ca
Agnès Guillot
Université Pierre et Marie Curie – CNRS
Institut des Systèmes Intelligents et de Robotique
4 Place Jussieu
75252 Paris, France
e-mail: agnes.guillot@lip6.fr
Martin Hägele
Fraunhofer IPA
Robot Systems
Nobelstr. 12
70569 Stuttgart, Germany
e-mail: mmh@ipa.fhg.de
Gregory D. Hager
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Computer Science
3400 N. Charles St.
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
e-mail: hager@cs.jhu.edu
David Hainsworth
Commonwealth Scientiﬁc
and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO)
Division of Exploration and Mining
PO Box 883
Kenmore QLD 4069, Australia
e-mail: david.hainsworth@csiro.au
William R. Hamel
University of Tennessee
Mechanical, Aerospace,
and Biomedical Engineering
414 Dougherty Engineering Building
Knoxville, TN 37996-2210, USA
e-mail: whamel@utk.edu
Blake Hannaford
University of Washington
Department of Electrical Engineering
Box 352500
Seattle, WA 98195-2500, USA
e-mail: blake@ee.washington.edu
Kensuke Harada
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
and Technology (AIST)
Intelligent Systems Research Institute
1-1-1 Umezono
305-8568 Tsukuba, Japan
e-mail: kensuke.harada@aist.go.jp
Martial Hebert
Carnegie Mellon University
The Robotics Institute
5000 Forbes Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
e-mail: hebert@ri.cmu.edu
Thomas C. Henderson
University of Utah
School of Computing
50 S. Central Campus Dr. 3190 MEB
Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA
e-mail: tch@cs.utah.edu
Joachim Hertzberg
Universität Osnabrück
Institut für Informatik
Albrechtstr. 28
54076 Osnabrück, Germany
e-mail: hertzberg@informatik.uni-osnabrueck.de

----- Page 27 (native) -----
XXVIII
List of Contributors
Hirohisa Hirukawa
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
and Technology (AIST)
Intelligent Systems Research Institute
1-1-1 Umezono
305-8568 Tsukuba, Japan
e-mail: hiro.hirukawa@aist.go.jp
Gerd Hirzinger
Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR)
Oberpfaffenhofen
Institut für Robotik und Mechatronik
Münchner Str. 20
82230 Wessling, Germany
e-mail: gerd.hirzinger@dlr.de
John Hollerbach
University of Utah
School of Computing
50 S. Central Campus Dr.
Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA
e-mail: jmh@cs.utah.ledu
Robert D. Howe
Harvard University
Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Pierce Hall, 29 Oxford St.
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
e-mail: howe@seas.harvard.edu
Su-Hau Hsu†
National Taiwan University
Taipei, Taiwan
Phil Husbands
University of Sussex
Department of Informatics
Falmer, Brighton BN1 9QH, UK
e-mail: philh@sussex.ac.uk
Seth Hutchinson
University of Illinois
Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
e-mail: seth@uiuc.edu
Adam Jacoff
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Intelligent Systems Division
100 Bureau Drive
Gaithersburg, MD 20899, USA
e-mail: adam.jacoff@nist.gov
Michael Jenkin
York University
Computer Science and Engineering
4700 Keel St.
Toronto, Ontario M3J 1P3, Canada
e-mail: jenkin@cse.yorku.ca
Eric N. Johnson
Georgia Institute of Technology
Daniel Guggenheim School of
Aerospace Engineering
270 Ferst Drive
Atlanta, GA 30332-0150, USA
e-mail: eric.johnson@ae.gatech.edu
Shuuji Kajita
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
and Technology (AIST)
Intelligent Systems Research Institute
1-1-1 Umezono
305-8568 Tsukuba, Japan
e-mail: s.kajita@aist.go.jp
Makoto Kaneko
Osaka University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Graduate School of Engineering
2-1 Yamadaoka
565-0871 Suita, Osaka, Japan
e-mail: mk@mech.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp
Sung-Chul Kang
Korea Institute of Science and Technology
Cognitive Robotics Research Center
Hawolgok-dong 39-1, Sungbuk-ku
Seoul 136-791, Korea
e-mail: kasch@kist.re.kr

----- Page 28 (native) -----
List of Contributors
XXIX
Imin Kao
State University of New York at Stony Brook
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Stony Brook, NY 11794-2300, USA
e-mail: imin.kao@stonybrook.edu
Lydia E. Kavraki
Rice University
Department of Computer Science, MS 132
6100 Main Street
Houston, TX 77005, USA
e-mail: kavraki@rice.edu
Homayoon Kazerooni
University of California at Berkeley
Berkeley Robotics and Human Engineering
Laboratory
5124 Etcheverry Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-1740, USA
e-mail: kazerooni@berkeley.edu
Charles C. Kemp
Georgia Institute of Technology
and Emory University
The Wallace H. Coulter Department
of Biomedical Engineering
313 Ferst Drive
Atlanta, GA 30332-0535, USA
e-mail: charlie.kemp@bme.gatech.edu
Wisama Khalil
Université de Nantes
IRCCyN, ECN
1 Rue de la Noë
44321 Nantes, France
e-mail: wisama.khalil@irccyn.ec-nantes.fr
Oussama Khatib
Stanford University
Department of Computer Science
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
Stanford, CA 94305-9010, USA
e-mail: khatib@cs.stanford.edu
Lindsay Kleeman
Monash University
Department of Electrical and Computer Systems
Engineering
Department of ECSEng
Monash VIC 3800, Australia
e-mail: kleeman@eng.monash.edu.au
Tetsunori Kobayashi
Waseda University
Department of Computer Science
3-4-1 Okubo, Shinjuku-ku
169-8555 Tokyo, Japan
e-mail: koba@waseda.jp
Kurt Konolige
SRI International
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Center
333 Ravenswood Ave.
Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA
e-mail: konolige@ai.sri.com
David Kortenkamp
TRACLabs Inc.
1012 Hercules Drive
Houston, TX 77058, USA
e-mail: korten@traclabs.com
Kazuhiro Kosuge
Tohoku University
Department of Bioengineering and Robotics
Graduate School of Engineering
6-6-01 Aoba-yama
980-8579 Sendai, Japan
e-mail: kosuge@irs.mech.tohoku.ac.jp
Roman Kuc
Yale University
Department of Electrical Engineering
10 Hillhouse Ave
New Haven, CT 06520-8267, USA
e-mail: kuc@yale.edu
James Kuffner
Carnegie Mellon University
The Robotics Institute
5000 Forbes Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
e-mail: kuffner@cs.cmu.edu

----- Page 29 (native) -----
XXX
List of Contributors
Vijay Kumar
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Mechanical Engineering
and Applied Mechanics
220 S. 33rd Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6315, USA
e-mail: kumar@grasp.upenn.edu
Florent Lamiraux
LAAS-CNRS
7 Avenue du Colonel Roche
31077 Toulouse, France
e-mail: ﬂorent@laas.fr
Jean-Paul Laumond
LAAS-CNRS
7 Avenue du Colonel Roche
31077 Toulouse, France
e-mail: jpl@laas.fr
Steven M. LaValle
University of Illinois
Department of Computer Science
201 N. Goodwin Ave, 3318 Siebel Center
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
e-mail: lavalle@cs.uiuc.edu
John J. Leonard
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Department of Mechanical Engineering
5-214 77 Massachusetts Ave
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
e-mail: jleonard@mit.edu
Kevin Lynch
Northwestern University
Mechanical Engineering Department
2145 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208, USA
e-mail: kmlynch@northwestern.edu
Alan M. Lytle
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Construction Metrology and Automation Group
100 Bureau Drive
Gaithersburg, MD 20899, USA
e-mail: alan.lytle@nist.gov
Maja J. Matari´c
University of Southern California
Computer Science Department
3650 McClintock Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA
e-mail: mataric@usc.edu
Yoshio Matsumoto
Osaka University
Department of Adaptive Machine Systems
Graduate School of Engineering
565-0871 Suita, Osaka, Japan
e-mail: matsumoto@ams.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp
J. Michael McCarthy
University of California at Irvine
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering
Irvine, CA 92697, USA
e-mail: jmmccart@uci.edu
Claudio Melchiorri
Università degli Studi di Bologna
Dipartimento di Elettronica Informatica
e Sistemistica
Via Risorgimento 2
40136 Bologna, Italy
e-mail: claudio.melchiorri@unibo.it
Arianna Menciassi
Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna
CRIM Lab
Piazza Martiri della Libertà 33
56127 Pisa, Italy
e-mail: arianna@sssup.it
Jean-Pierre Merlet
INRIA Sophia-Antipolis
2004 Route des Lucioles
06902 Sophia-Antipolis, France
e-mail: jean-pierre.merlet@sophia.inria.fr
Giorgio Metta
Italian Institute of Technology
Department of Robotics, Brain and Cognitive
Sciences
Via Morego 30
16163 Genova, Italy
e-mail: pasa@liralab.it

----- Page 30 (native) -----
List of Contributors
XXXI
Jean-Arcady Meyer
Université Pierre et Marie Curie – CNRS
Institut des Systèmes Intelligents et de Robotique
4 Place Jussieu
75252 Paris, France
e-mail: jean-arcady.meyer@lip6.fr
François Michaud
Université de Sherbrooke
Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Engineering
2500 Boulevard Université
Sherbrooke, Québec J1K 2R1, Canada
e-mail: francois.michaud@usherbrooke.ca
David P. Miller
University of Oklahoma
School of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering
865 Asp Ave.
Norman, OK 73019, USA
e-mail: dpmiller@ou.edu
Javier Minguez
Universidad de Zaragoza
Departamento de Informática e Ingeniería de
Sistemas
Centro Politécnico Superior
Ediﬁcio Ada Byron, Maria de Luna 1
Zaragoza 50018, Spain
e-mail: jminguez@unizar.es
Pascal Morin
INRIA Sophia-Antipolis
2004 Route des Lucioles
06902 Sophia-Antipolis, France
e-mail: pascal.morin@inria.fr
Robin R. Murphy
University of South Florida
Computer Science and Engineering
4202 E. Fowler Ave ENB342
Tampa, FL 33620-5399, USA
e-mail: murphy@cse.usf.edu
Daniele Nardi
Università degli Studi di Roma “La Sapienza”
Dipartimento di Informatica e Sistemistica
“A. Ruberti”
Via Ariosto 25
00185 Roma, Italy
e-mail: nardi@dis.uniroma1.it
Bradley J. Nelson
ETH Zentrum
Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Systems
Tannenstr. 3
8092 Zürich, Switzerland
e-mail: bnelson@ethz.ch
Günter Niemeyer
Stanford University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Design Group, Terman Engineering Center
Stanford, CA 94305-4021, USA
e-mail: gunter.niemeyer@stanford.edu
Klas Nilsson
Lund University
Department of Computer Science
Ole Römers väg 3
22100 Lund, Sweden
e-mail: klas@cs.lu.se
Stefano Nolﬁ
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR)
Instituto di Scienze e Tecnologie della Cognizione
Via S. Martino della Battaglia 44
00185 Roma, Italy
e-mail: stefano.nolﬁ@istc.cnr.it
Illah R. Nourbakhsh
Carnegie Mellon University
The Robotics Institute
5000 Forbes Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
e-mail: illah@cs.cmu.edu
Jonathan B. O’Brien
University of New South Wales
School of Civil and Environmental Engineering
Sydney 2052, Australia
e-mail: j.obrien@unsw.edu.au

----- Page 31 (native) -----
XXXII
List of Contributors
Allison M. Okamura
The Johns Hopkins University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
e-mail: aokamura@jhu.edu
Fiorella Operto
Scuola di Robotica
Piazza Monastero 4
16149 Sampierdarena, Genova, Italy
e-mail: operto@scuoladirobotica.it
David E. Orin
The Ohio State University
Department of Electrical Engineering
2015 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
e-mail: orin.1@osu.edu
Giuseppe Oriolo
Università degli Studi di Roma “La Sapienza”
Dipartimento di Informatica e Sistemistica
“A.Ruberti”
Via Ariosto 25
00185 Roma, Italy
e-mail: oriolo@dis.uniroma1.it
Michel Parent
INRIA Rocquencourt
78153 Le Chesnay, France
e-mail: michel.parent@inria.fr
Frank C. Park
Seoul National University
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Seoul 51-742, Korea
e-mail: fcp@snu.ac.kr
Lynne E. Parker
University of Tennessee
Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science
1122 Volunteer Blvd.
Knoxville, TN 37996-3450, USA
e-mail: parker@eecs.utk.edu
Michael A. Peshkin
Northwestern University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
2145 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208, USA
e-mail: peshkin@northwestern.edu
J. Norberto Pires
Universidade de Coimbra
Departamento de Engenharia Mecânica
Polo II
Coimbra 3030, Portugal
e-mail: norberto@robotics.dem.uc.pt
Erwin Prassler
Fachhochschule Bonn-Rhein-Sieg
Fachbereich Informatik
Grantham-Allee 20
53757 Sankt Augustin, Germany
e-mail: erwin.prassler@fh-brs.de
Domenico Prattichizzo
Università degli Studi di Siena
Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione
Via Roma 56
53100 Siena, Italy
e-mail: prattichizzo@ing.unisi.it
Carsten Preusche
Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR)
Oberpfaffenhofen
Institut für Robotik und Mechatronik
Münchner Str. 20
82234 Wessling, Germany
e-mail: carsten.preusche@dlr.de
William R. Provancher
University of Utah
Department of Mechanical Engineering
50 S. Central Campus, 2120 MEB
Salt Lake City, UT 84112-9208, USA
e-mail: wil@mech.utah.edu
David J. Reinkensmeyer
University of California at Irvine
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
4200 Engineering Gateway
Irvine, CA 92617-3975, USA
e-mail: dreinken@uci.edu

----- Page 32 (native) -----
List of Contributors
XXXIII
Alfred Rizzi
Boston Dynamics
78 Fourth Ave
Waltham, MA 02451, USA
e-mail: arizzi@bostondynamics.com
Jonathan Roberts
Commonwealth Scientiﬁc
and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO)
ICT Centre, Autonomous Systems Laboratory
P.O. Box 883
Kenmore QLD 4069, Australia
e-mail: jonathan.roberts@csiro.au
Daniela Rus
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
CSAIL Center for Robotics
32 Vassar Street
Cambridge, MA 01239, USA
e-mail: rus@csail.mit.edu
Kamel S. Saidi
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Building and Fire Research Laboratory
100 Bureau Drive
Gaitherbsurg, MD 20899, USA
e-mail: kamel.saidi@nist.gov
Claude Samson
INRIA Sophia-Antipolis
2004 Route des Lucioles
06902 Sophia-Antipolis, France
e-mail: claude.samson@inria.fr
Stefan Schaal
University of Southern California
Computer Science and Neuroscience
3710 S. McClintock Ave.
Los Angeles, CA 90089-2905, USA
e-mail: sschaal@usc.edu
Victor Scheinman
Stanford University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
e-mail: vds@stanford.edu
James Schmiedeler
The Ohio State University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
E307 Scott Laboratory, 201 West 19th Ave
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
e-mail: schmiedeler.2@osu.edu
Bruno Siciliano
Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II
Dipartimento di Informatica e Sistemistica,
PRISMA Lab
Via Claudio 21
80125 Napoli, Italy
e-mail: siciliano@unina.it
Roland Siegwart
ETH Zentrum
Department of Mechanical and Process
Engineering
Tannenstr. 3, CLA E32
8092 Zürich, Switzerland
e-mail: rsiegwart@ethz.ch
Reid Simmons
Carnegie Mellon University
The Robotics Institute
School of Computer Science
5000 Forbes Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15241, USA
e-mail: reids@cs.cmu.edu
Dezhen Song
Texas A&M University
Department of Computer Science
H.R. Bright Building
College Station, TX 77843, USA
e-mail: dzsong@cs.tamu.edu
Gaurav S. Sukhatme
University of Southern California
Department of Computer Science
3710 South McClintock Ave
Los Angeles, CA 90089-2905, USA
e-mail: gaurav@usc.edu

----- Page 33 (native) -----
XXXIV
List of Contributors
Satoshi Tadokoro
Tohoku University
Graduate School of Information Sciences
6-6-01 Aoba-yama
980-8579 Sendai, Japan
e-mail: tadokoro@rm.is.tohoku.ac.jp
Atsuo Takanishi
Waseda University
Department of Modern Mechanical Engineering
3-4-1 Ookubo, Shinjuku-ku
169-8555 Tokyo, Japan
e-mail: takanisi@waseda.jp
Russell H. Taylor
The Johns Hopkins University
Department of Computer Science
Computational Science and Engineering Building
1-127, 3400 North Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
e-mail: rht@jhu.edu
Charles E. Thorpe
Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar
Qatar Ofﬁce SMC 1070
5032 Forbes Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15289, USA
e-mail: thorpe@qatar.cmu.edu
Sebastian Thrun
Stanford University
Department of Computer Science
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
Stanford, CA 94305-9010, USA
e-mail: thrun@stanford.edu
James P. Trevelyan
The University of Western Australia
School of Mechanical Engineering
35 Stirling Highway, Crawley
Perth Western Australia 6009, Australia
e-mail: james.trevelyan@uwa.edu.au
Jeffrey C. Trinkle
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Department of Computer Science
Troy, NY 12180-3590, USA
e-mail: trink@cs.rpi.edu
Masaru Uchiyama
Tohoku University
Department of Aerospace Engineering
6-6-01 Aoba-yama
980-8579 Sendai, Japan
e-mail: uchiyama@space.mech.tohoku.ac.jp
H.F. Machiel Van der Loos
University of British Columbia
Department of Mechanical Engineering
6250 Applied Science Lane
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada
e-mail: vdl@mech.ubc.ca
Patrick van der Smagt
Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR)
Oberpfaffenhofen
Institut für Robotik und Mechatronik
Münchner Str. 20
82230 Wessling, Germany
e-mail: smagt@dlr.de
Gianmarco Veruggio
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche
Istituto di Elettronica e di Ingegneria
dell’Informazione e delle Telecomunicazioni
Via De Marini 6
16149 Genova, Italy
e-mail: gianmarco@veruggio.it
Luigi Villani
Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II
Dipartimento di Informatica e Sistemistica,
PRISMA Lab
Via Claudio 21
80125 Napoli, Italy
e-mail: luigi.villani@unina.it
Arto Visala
Helsinki University of Technology (TKK)
Department of Automation and Systems
Technology
Helsinki 02015, Finland
e-mail: arto.visala@tkk.ﬁ

----- Page 34 (native) -----
List of Contributors
XXXV
Kenneth Waldron
Stanford University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Terman Engineering Center 521
Stanford, CA 94305-4021, USA
e-mail: kwaldron@stanford.edu
Ian D. Walker
Clemson University
Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
Clemson, SC 29634, USA
e-mail: ianw@ces.clemson.edu
Christian Wallraven
Max-Planck-Institut für biologische Kybernetic
Kognitive Humanpsychophysik
Spemannstr. 38
72076 Tübingen, Germany
e-mail: christian.wallraven@tuebingen.mpg.de
Brian Wilcox
California Institute of Technology
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
4800 Oak Grove Drive
Pasadena, CA 91109, USA
e-mail: brian.h.wilcox@jpl.nasa.gov
Jing Xiao
University of North Carolina
Department of Computer Science
Charlotte, NC 28223, USA
e-mail: xiao@uncc.edu
Dana R. Yoerger
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
Department of Applied Ocean Physics
and Engineering
MS7 Blake Bldg.
Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA
e-mail: dyoerger@whoi.edu
Kazuhito Yokoi
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
and Technology (AIST)
Intelligent Systems Research Institute
1-1-1 Umezono
305-8568 Tsukuba, Japan
e-mail: kazuhito.yokoi@aist.go.jp
Kazuya Yoshida
Tohoku University
Department of Aerospace Engineering
6-6-01 Aoba-yama
980-8579 Sendai, Japan
e-mail: yoshida@astro.mech.tohoku.ac.jp
Alexander Zelinsky
Commonwealth Scientiﬁc
and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO)
ICT Centre
Epping, Sydney NSW 1710, Australia
e-mail: alex.zelinsky@csiro.au

----- Page 35 (native) -----
XXXVII
Contents
List of Abbreviations .................................................................................
LIII
Introduction
Bruno Siciliano, Oussama Khatib...................................................................
1
Part A Robotics Foundations
1
Kinematics
Kenneth Waldron, James Schmiedeler.......................................................
9
1.1
Overview.......................................................................................
9
1.2
Position and Orientation Representation ........................................
10
1.3
Joint Kinematics............................................................................
18
1.4
Geometric Representation .............................................................
23
1.5
Workspace ....................................................................................
25
1.6
Forward Kinematics.......................................................................
26
1.7
Inverse Kinematics ........................................................................
27
1.8
Forward Instantaneous Kinematics ................................................
29
1.9
Inverse Instantaneous Kinematics ..................................................
30
1.10
Static Wrench Transmission............................................................
30
1.11
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
31
References ..............................................................................................
31
2
Dynamics
Roy Featherstone, David E. Orin................................................................
35
2.1
Overview.......................................................................................
36
2.2
Spatial Vector Notation ..................................................................
37
2.3
Canonical Equations ......................................................................
43
2.4
Dynamic Models of Rigid-Body Systems..........................................
45
2.5
Kinematic Trees.............................................................................
50
2.6
Kinematic Loops............................................................................
57
2.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
60
References ..............................................................................................
62
3
Mechanisms and Actuation
Victor Scheinman, J. Michael McCarthy......................................................
67
3.1
Overview.......................................................................................
67
3.2
System Features ............................................................................
68
3.3
Kinematics and Kinetics.................................................................
69
3.4
Serial Robots .................................................................................
72
3.5
Parallel Robots ..............................................................................
73
3.6
Mechanical Structure .....................................................................
75

----- Page 36 (native) -----
XXXVIII
Contents
3.7
Joint Mechanisms..........................................................................
76
3.8
Robot Performance........................................................................
82
3.9
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
84
References ..............................................................................................
84
4
Sensing and Estimation
Henrik I. Christensen, Gregory D. Hager ....................................................
87
4.1
The Perception Process ..................................................................
88
4.2
Sensors .........................................................................................
90
4.3
Estimation Processes .....................................................................
93
4.4
Representations ............................................................................
104
4.5
Conclusions and Further Readings..................................................
106
References ..............................................................................................
106
5
Motion Planning
Lydia E. Kavraki, Steven M. LaValle...........................................................
109
5.1
Motion Planning Concepts .............................................................
110
5.2
Sampling-Based Planning .............................................................
111
5.3
Alternative Approaches..................................................................
115
5.4
Differential Constraints ..................................................................
118
5.5
Extensions and Variations..............................................................
121
5.6
Advanced Issues............................................................................
124
5.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
127
References ..............................................................................................
128
6
Motion Control
Wankyun Chung, Li-Chen Fu, Su-Hau Hsu† ...............................................
133
6.1
Introduction to Motion Control.......................................................
134
6.2
Joint Space Versus Operational Space Control ..................................
135
6.3
Independent-Joint Control ............................................................
137
6.4
PID Control....................................................................................
139
6.5
Tracking Control ............................................................................
141
6.6
Computed-Torque Control..............................................................
143
6.7
Adaptive Control ...........................................................................
147
6.8
Optimal and Robust Control ...........................................................
150
6.9
Digital Implementation .................................................................
153
6.10
Learning Control............................................................................
155
References ..............................................................................................
157
7
Force Control
Luigi Villani, Joris De Schutter...................................................................
161
7.1
Background ..................................................................................
161
7.2
Indirect Force Control ....................................................................
164
7.3
Interaction Tasks ...........................................................................
171
7.4
Hybrid Force/Motion Control...........................................................
177

----- Page 37 (native) -----
Contents
XXXIX
7.5
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
181
References ..............................................................................................
183
8
Robotic Systems Architectures and Programming
David Kortenkamp, Reid Simmons............................................................
187
8.1
Overview.......................................................................................
187
8.2
History..........................................................................................
189
8.3
Architectural Components..............................................................
193
8.4
Case Study – GRACE .......................................................................
200
8.5
The Art of Robot Architectures ........................................................
202
8.6
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
203
References ..............................................................................................
204
9
AI Reasoning Methods for Robotics
Joachim Hertzberg, Raja Chatila...............................................................
207
9.1
Knowledge Representation and Inference ......................................
208
9.2
KR Issues for Robots ......................................................................
212
9.3
Action Planning.............................................................................
214
9.4
Robot Learning .............................................................................
219
9.5
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
221
References ..............................................................................................
222
Part B Robot Structures
10 Performance Evaluation and Design Criteria
Jorge Angeles, Frank C. Park.....................................................................
229
10.1
The Robot Design Process...............................................................
229
10.2
Workspace Criteria.........................................................................
231
10.3
Dexterity Indices ...........................................................................
235
10.4
Other Performance Indices.............................................................
238
References ..............................................................................................
242
11 Kinematically Redundant Manipulators
Stefano Chiaverini, Giuseppe Oriolo, Ian D. Walker ....................................
245
11.1
Overview.......................................................................................
245
11.2
Task-Oriented Kinematics ..............................................................
247
11.3
Inverse Differential Kinematics ......................................................
250
11.4
Redundancy Resolution via Optimization........................................
255
11.5
Redundancy Resolution via Task Augmentation ..............................
256
11.6
Second-Order Redundancy Resolution............................................
259
11.7
Cyclicity ........................................................................................
260
11.8
Hyperredundant Manipulators .......................................................
261
11.9
Conclusion and Further Reading ....................................................
265
References ..............................................................................................
265

----- Page 38 (native) -----
XL
Contents
12 Parallel Mechanisms and Robots
Jean-Pierre Merlet, Clément Gosselin ........................................................
269
12.1
Deﬁnitions....................................................................................
269
12.2
Type Synthesis of Parallel Mechanisms ...........................................
271
12.3
Kinematics....................................................................................
271
12.4
Velocity and Accuracy Analysis .......................................................
273
12.5
Singularity Analysis .......................................................................
274
12.6
Workspace Analysis .......................................................................
276
12.7
Static Analysis and Static Balancing................................................
277
12.8
Dynamic Analysis ..........................................................................
279
12.9
Design ..........................................................................................
279
12.10 Application Examples ....................................................................
280
12.11 Conclusion and Further Reading ....................................................
281
References ..............................................................................................
281
13 Robots with Flexible Elements
Alessandro De Luca, Wayne Book..............................................................
287
13.1
Robots with Flexible Joints ............................................................
288
13.2
Robots with Flexible Links .............................................................
306
References ..............................................................................................
317
14 Model Identiﬁcation
John Hollerbach, Wisama Khalil, Maxime Gautier .....................................
321
14.1
Overview.......................................................................................
321
14.2
Kinematic Calibration ....................................................................
323
14.3
Inertial Parameter Estimation ........................................................
330
14.4
Identiﬁability and Numerical Conditioning .....................................
334
14.5
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
341
References ..............................................................................................
342
15 Robot Hands
Claudio Melchiorri, Makoto Kaneko...........................................................
345
15.1
Basic Concepts ..............................................................................
346
15.2
Design of Robot Hands ..................................................................
347
15.3
Technologies for Actuation and Sensing..........................................
351
15.4
Modeling and Control of a Robot Hand...........................................
355
15.5
Applications and Trends ................................................................
359
15.6
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
359
References ..............................................................................................
359
16 Legged Robots
Shuuji Kajita, Bernard Espiau...................................................................
361
16.1
A Brief History ...............................................................................
362
16.2
Analysis of Cyclic Walking...............................................................
363
16.3
Control of Biped Robots Using Forward Dynamics............................
366
16.4
Biped Robots in the ZMP Scheme ...................................................
371
16.5
Multilegged Robots........................................................................
378

----- Page 39 (native) -----
Contents
XLI
16.6
Other Legged Robots......................................................................
383
16.7
Performance Indices......................................................................
385
16.8
Conclusions and Future Trends.......................................................
386
References ..............................................................................................
387
17 Wheeled Robots
Guy Campion, Woojin Chung ....................................................................
391
17.1
Overview.......................................................................................
391
17.2
Mobility of Wheeled Robots ...........................................................
392
17.3
State-Space Models of Wheeled Mobile Robots ...............................
398
17.4
Structural Properties of Wheeled Robots Models..............................
403
17.5
Wheeled Robot Structures ..............................................................
405
17.6
Conclusions...................................................................................
409
References ..............................................................................................
410
18 Micro/Nanorobots
Bradley J. Nelson, Lixin Dong, Fumihito Arai .............................................
411
18.1
Overview of Micro- and Nanorobotics.............................................
411
18.2
Scaling..........................................................................................
414
18.3
Actuation at the Micro- and Nanoscales .........................................
415
18.4
Sensing at the Micro- and Nanoscales............................................
417
18.5
Fabrication ...................................................................................
419
18.6
Microassembly ..............................................................................
422
18.7
Microrobotics ................................................................................
427
18.8
Nanorobotics ................................................................................
431
18.9
Conclusions...................................................................................
443
References ..............................................................................................
444
Part C Sensing and Perception
19 Force and Tactile Sensors
Mark R. Cutkosky, Robert D. Howe, William R. Provancher .........................
455
19.1
Sensor Types .................................................................................
456
19.2
Tactile Information Processing .......................................................
464
19.3
Integration Challenges...................................................................
471
19.4
Conclusions and Future Developments ...........................................
471
References ..............................................................................................
471
20 Inertial Sensors, GPS, and Odometry
Gregory Dudek, Michael Jenkin.................................................................
477
20.1
Odometry......................................................................................
477
20.2
Gyroscopic Systems........................................................................
479
20.3
Accelerometers..............................................................................
482
20.4
IMU Packages ................................................................................
483
20.5
GPS...............................................................................................
484
20.6
GPS–IMU Integration .....................................................................
488

----- Page 40 (native) -----
XLII
Contents
20.7
Further Reading ............................................................................
489
20.8
Currently Available Hardware.........................................................
489
References ..............................................................................................
490
21 Sonar Sensing
Lindsay Kleeman, Roman Kuc...................................................................
491
21.1
Sonar Principles ............................................................................
492
21.2
Sonar Beam Pattern ......................................................................
494
21.3
Speed of Sound .............................................................................
496
21.4
Waveforms....................................................................................
496
21.5
Transducer Technologies ................................................................
497
21.6
Reﬂecting Object Models................................................................
499
21.7
Artifacts ........................................................................................
500
21.8
TOF Ranging ..................................................................................
501
21.9
Echo Waveform Coding ..................................................................
503
21.10 Echo Waveform Processing.............................................................
506
21.11 CTFM Sonar....................................................................................
508
21.12 Multipulse Sonar ...........................................................................
511
21.13 Sonar Rings...................................................................................
512
21.14 Motion Effects ...............................................................................
513
21.15 Biomimetic Sonars ........................................................................
515
21.16 Conclusions...................................................................................
516
References ..............................................................................................
517
22 Range Sensors
Robert B. Fisher, Kurt Konolige.................................................................
521
22.1
Range Sensing Basics.....................................................................
521
22.2
Registration ..................................................................................
530
22.3
Navigation and Terrain Classiﬁcation..............................................
537
22.4
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
540
References ..............................................................................................
540
23 3-D Vision and Recognition
Kostas Daniilidis, Jan-Olof Eklundh..........................................................
543
23.1
3-D Vision and Visual SLAM ............................................................
544
23.2
Recognition ..................................................................................
551
23.3
Conclusion and Further Reading ....................................................
558
References ..............................................................................................
559
24 Visual Servoing and Visual Tracking
François Chaumette, Seth Hutchinson .......................................................
563
24.1
The Basic Components of Visual Servoing........................................
564
24.2
Image-Based Visual Servo..............................................................
565
24.3
Position-Based Visual Servo...........................................................
572
24.4
Advanced Approaches....................................................................
574
24.5
Performance Optimization and Planning ........................................
577
24.6
Estimation of 3-D Parameters ........................................................
578

----- Page 41 (native) -----
Contents
XLIII
24.7
Target Tracking..............................................................................
579
24.8
Eye-in-Hand and Eye-to-Hand Systems Controlled
in the Joint Space..........................................................................
580
24.9
Conclusions...................................................................................
581
References ..............................................................................................
582
25 Multisensor Data Fusion
Hugh Durrant-Whyte, Thomas C. Henderson .............................................
585
25.1
Multisensor Data Fusion Methods...................................................
585
25.2
Multisensor Fusion Architectures ....................................................
598
25.3
Applications..................................................................................
603
25.4
Conclusions...................................................................................
608
References ..............................................................................................
608
Part D Manipulation and Interfaces
26 Motion for Manipulation Tasks
Oliver Brock, James Kuffner, Jing Xiao.......................................................
615
26.1
Overview.......................................................................................
615
26.2
Task-Level Control .........................................................................
618
26.3
Manipulation Planning..................................................................
622
26.4
Assembly Motion ...........................................................................
628
26.5
Unifying Feedback Control and Planning ........................................
634
26.6
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
637
References ..............................................................................................
639
27 Contact Modeling and Manipulation
Imin Kao, Kevin Lynch, Joel W. Burdick.....................................................
647
27.1
Overview.......................................................................................
647
27.2
Kinematics of Rigid-Body Contact ..................................................
648
27.3
Forces and Friction ........................................................................
652
27.4
Rigid-Body Mechanics with Friction ...............................................
655
27.5
Pushing Manipulation ...................................................................
658
27.6
Contact Interfaces and Modeling ....................................................
659
27.7
Friction Limit Surface.....................................................................
661
27.8
Contacts in Grasping and Fixture Designs .......................................
664
27.9
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
666
References ..............................................................................................
666
28 Grasping
Domenico Prattichizzo, Jeffrey C. Trinkle ...................................................
671
28.1
Background ..................................................................................
671
28.2
Models and Deﬁnitions..................................................................
672
28.3
Controllable Twists and Wrenches ..................................................
677
28.4
Restraint Analysis ..........................................................................
680
28.5
Examples ......................................................................................
687

----- Page 42 (native) -----
XLIV
Contents
28.6
Conclusion and Further Reading ....................................................
697
References ..............................................................................................
698
29 Cooperative Manipulators
Fabrizio Caccavale, Masaru Uchiyama ......................................................
701
29.1
A Historical Overview .....................................................................
701
29.2
Kinematics and Statics...................................................................
703
29.3
Cooperative Task Space ..................................................................
707
29.4
Dynamics and Load Distribution.....................................................
708
29.5
Task-Space Analysis.......................................................................
710
29.6
Control .........................................................................................
711
29.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
715
References ..............................................................................................
716
30 Haptics
Blake Hannaford, Allison M. Okamura ......................................................
719
30.1
Overview.......................................................................................
719
30.2
Haptic Device Design .....................................................................
724
30.3
Haptic Rendering ..........................................................................
727
30.4
Control and Stability of Haptic Interfaces ........................................
730
30.5
Tactile Display ...............................................................................
731
30.6
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
735
References ..............................................................................................
735
31 Telerobotics
Günter Niemeyer, Carsten Preusche, Gerd Hirzinger ...................................
741
31.1
Overview.......................................................................................
741
31.2
Telerobotic Systems and Applications .............................................
743
31.3
Control Architectures .....................................................................
746
31.4
Bilateral Control and Force Feedback..............................................
751
31.5
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
754
References ..............................................................................................
755
32 Networked Telerobots
Dezhen Song, Ken Goldberg, Nak Young Chong.........................................
759
32.1
Overview and Background .............................................................
759
32.2
A Brief History ...............................................................................
760
32.3
Communications and Networking ..................................................
761
32.4
Conclusion and Future Directions ...................................................
769
References ..............................................................................................
769
33 Exoskeletons for Human Performance Augmentation
Homayoon Kazerooni...............................................................................
773
33.1
Survey of Exoskeleton Systems .......................................................
773
33.2
Upper-Extremity Exoskeleton.........................................................
775
33.3
Intelligent Assist Device .................................................................
776
33.4
Control Architecture for Upper-Extremity Exoskeleton Augmentation
778

----- Page 43 (native) -----
Contents
XLV
33.5
Applications of Intelligent Assist Device ..........................................
780
33.6
Lower-Extremity Exoskeleton.........................................................
780
33.7
The Control Scheme of an Exoskeleton............................................
782
33.8
Highlights of the Lower-Extremity Design.......................................
786
33.9
Field-Ready Exoskeleton Systems...................................................
790
33.10 Conclusion and Further Reading ....................................................
792
References ..............................................................................................
792
Part E Mobile and Distributed Robotics
34 Motion Control of Wheeled Mobile Robots
Pascal Morin, Claude Samson ...................................................................
799
34.1
Background ..................................................................................
800
34.2
Control Models ..............................................................................
801
34.3
Adaptation of Control Methods for Holonomic Systems....................
804
34.4
Methods Speciﬁc to Nonholonomic Systems ....................................
806
34.5
Complementary Issues and Bibliographical Guide ...........................
823
References ..............................................................................................
825
35 Motion Planning and Obstacle Avoidance
Javier Minguez, Florent Lamiraux, Jean-Paul Laumond.............................
827
35.1
Nonholonomic Mobile Robots:
Where Motion Planning Meets Control Theory ................................
828
35.2
Kinematic Constraints and Controllability .......................................
829
35.3
Motion Planning and Small-Time Controllability ............................
830
35.4
Local Steering Methods and Small-Time Controllability ..................
832
35.5
Robots and Trailers........................................................................
835
35.6
Approximate Methods ...................................................................
837
35.7
From Motion Planning to Obstacle Avoidance ................................
837
35.8
Deﬁnition of Obstacle Avoidance....................................................
838
35.9
Obstacle Avoidance Techniques ......................................................
839
35.10 Robot Shape, Kinematics, and Dynamics in Obstacle Avoidance.......
845
35.11 Integration Planning – Reaction ....................................................
847
35.12 Conclusions, Future Directions, and Further Reading.......................
849
References ..............................................................................................
850
36 World Modeling
Wolfram Burgard, Martial Hebert .............................................................
853
36.1
Historical Overview........................................................................
854
36.2
World Models for Indoors and Structured Environments ..................
855
36.3
World and Terrain Models for Natural Environments .......................
859
36.4
Dynamic Environments ..................................................................
866
References ..............................................................................................
867
37 Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
Sebastian Thrun, John J. Leonard .............................................................
871
37.1
Overview.......................................................................................
871

----- Page 44 (native) -----
XLVI
Contents
37.2
SLAM: Problem Deﬁnition...............................................................
872
37.3
The Three Main SLAM Paradigms.....................................................
875
37.4
Conclusion and Future Challenges ..................................................
885
37.5
Suggestions for Further Reading.....................................................
886
References ..............................................................................................
886
38 Behavior-Based Systems
Maja J. Matari´c, François Michaud............................................................
891
38.1
Robot Control Approaches..............................................................
891
38.2
Basic Principles of Behavior-Based Systems....................................
894
38.3
Basis Behaviors .............................................................................
897
38.4
Representation in Behavior-Based Systems ....................................
897
38.5
Learning in Behavior-Based Systems..............................................
898
38.6
Continuing Work ...........................................................................
902
38.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
905
References ..............................................................................................
906
39 Distributed and Cellular Robots
Zack Butler, Alfred Rizzi............................................................................
911
39.1
Modularity for Locomotion.............................................................
911
39.2
Modularity for Manipulation ..........................................................
914
39.3
Modularity for Geometric Reconﬁguration of Robot Systems ............
915
39.4
Modularity for Robustness .............................................................
918
39.5
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
918
References ..............................................................................................
919
40 Multiple Mobile Robot Systems
Lynne E. Parker........................................................................................
921
40.1
History..........................................................................................
922
40.2
Architectures for Multirobot Systems ..............................................
922
40.3
Communication.............................................................................
925
40.4
Swarm Robots ...............................................................................
926
40.5
Heterogeneity ...............................................................................
928
40.6
Task Allocation ..............................................................................
930
40.7
Learning .......................................................................................
932
40.8
Applications..................................................................................
933
40.9
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
935
References ..............................................................................................
936
41 Networked Robots
Vijay Kumar, Daniela Rus, Gaurav S. Sukhatme.........................................
943
41.1
Overview.......................................................................................
943
41.2
State of the Art and Potential ........................................................
945
41.3
Research Challenges ......................................................................
947
41.4
Control .........................................................................................
949
41.5
Communication for Control ............................................................
950
41.6
Communication for Perception.......................................................
951

----- Page 45 (native) -----
Contents
XLVII
41.7
Control for Perception....................................................................
952
41.8
Control for Communication ............................................................
953
41.9
Conclusions and Further Reading ...................................................
955
References ..............................................................................................
955
Part F Field and Service Robotics
42 Industrial Robotics
Martin Hägele, Klas Nilsson, J. Norberto Pires............................................
963
42.1
A Short History of Industrial Robots ................................................
964
42.2
Typical Applications and Robot Conﬁgurations ................................
969
42.3
Kinematics and Mechanisms ..........................................................
975
42.4
Task Descriptions – Teaching and Programming..............................
976
42.5
End-Effectors and System Integration ............................................
980
42.6
Conclusions and Long-Term Challenges ..........................................
983
References ..............................................................................................
985
43 Underwater Robotics
Gianluca Antonelli, Thor I. Fossen, Dana R. Yoerger...................................
987
43.1
The Expanding Role of Marine Robotics in Oceanic Engineering .......
987
43.2
Underwater Robotics .....................................................................
989
43.3
Applications.................................................................................. 1003
43.4
Conclusions and Further Reading ................................................... 1005
References .............................................................................................. 1005
44 Aerial Robotics
Eric Feron, Eric N. Johnson ....................................................................... 1009
44.1
Background .................................................................................. 1010
44.2
History of Aerial Robotics ............................................................... 1010
44.3
Applications of Aerial Robotics ....................................................... 1012
44.4
Current Challenges ........................................................................ 1014
44.5
Basic Aerial Robot Flight Concepts .................................................. 1015
44.6
The Entry Level for Aerial Robotics: Inner-Loop Control ................... 1020
44.7
Active Research Areas .................................................................... 1022
44.8
Conclusions and Further Reading ................................................... 1026
References .............................................................................................. 1027
45 Space Robots and Systems
Kazuya Yoshida, Brian Wilcox .................................................................. 1031
45.1
Historical Developments and Advances of Orbital Robotic Systems ... 1032
45.2
Historical Developments and Advances of Surface Robotic Systems .. 1037
45.3
Mathematical Modeling ................................................................. 1044
45.4
Future Directions of Orbital and Surface Robotic Systems ................. 1056
45.5
Conclusions and Further Reading ................................................... 1060
References .............................................................................................. 1060

----- Page 46 (native) -----
XLVIII
Contents
46 Robotics in Agriculture and Forestry
John Billingsley, Arto Visala, Mark Dunn................................................... 1065
46.1
Deﬁnitions.................................................................................... 1066
46.2
Forestry ........................................................................................ 1066
46.3
Broad Acre Applications ................................................................. 1070
46.4
Horticulture .................................................................................. 1071
46.5
Livestock....................................................................................... 1072
46.6
Unmanned Vehicles....................................................................... 1075
46.7
Conclusions and Future Directions.................................................. 1075
References .............................................................................................. 1075
47 Robotics in Construction
Kamel S. Saidi, Jonathan B. O’Brien, Alan M. Lytle .................................... 1079
47.1
Overview....................................................................................... 1080
47.2
Economic Aspects .......................................................................... 1085
47.3
Applications.................................................................................. 1086
47.4
Currently Unsolved Technical Problems........................................... 1093
47.5
Future Directions........................................................................... 1095
47.6
Conclusions and Further Reading ................................................... 1096
References .............................................................................................. 1096
48 Robotics in Hazardous Applications
James P. Trevelyan, Sung-Chul Kang, William R. Hamel ............................ 1101
48.1
Operation in Hazardous Environments:
The Need for a Robotics Solution .................................................... 1101
48.2
Applications.................................................................................. 1103
48.3
Enabling Technologies ................................................................... 1114
48.4
Conclusions and Further Reading ................................................... 1122
References .............................................................................................. 1123
49 Mining Robotics
Peter Corke, Jonathan Roberts, Jock Cunningham, David Hainsworth......... 1127
49.1
Background .................................................................................. 1127
49.2
Metalliferous Mining ..................................................................... 1132
49.3
Underground Coal Mining .............................................................. 1140
49.4
Surface Coal Mining ....................................................................... 1144
49.5
Conclusions and Further Reading ................................................... 1148
References .............................................................................................. 1148
50 Search and Rescue Robotics
Robin R. Murphy, Satoshi Tadokoro, Daniele Nardi, Adam Jacoff,
Paolo Fiorini, Howie Choset, Aydan M. Erkmen.......................................... 1151
50.1
Overview....................................................................................... 1152
50.2
Disaster Characteristics and Impact on Robots ................................ 1153
50.3
Robots Actually Used at Disasters ................................................... 1156
50.4
Promising Robots and Concepts ..................................................... 1161
50.5
Evaluation and Benchmarks .......................................................... 1165

----- Page 47 (native) -----
Contents
XLIX
50.6
Fundamental Problems and Open Issues ........................................ 1167
50.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ................................................... 1171
References .............................................................................................. 1171
51 Intelligent Vehicles
Alberto Broggi, Alexander Zelinsky, Michel Parent, Charles E. Thorpe.......... 1175
51.1
Why Intelligent Vehicles? ............................................................... 1175
51.2
Enabling Technologies ................................................................... 1178
51.3
Road Scene Understanding ............................................................ 1181
51.4
Advanced Driver Assistance ............................................................ 1184
51.5
Driver Monitoring .......................................................................... 1188
51.6
Automated Vehicles....................................................................... 1191
51.7
Future Trends and Prospects .......................................................... 1194
51.8
Conclusions and Further Reading ................................................... 1195
References .............................................................................................. 1195
52 Medical Robotics and Computer-Integrated Surgery
Russell H. Taylor, Arianna Menciassi, Gabor Fichtinger, Paolo Dario........... 1199
52.1
Core Concepts................................................................................ 1200
52.2
Technology ................................................................................... 1204
52.3
Systems, Research Areas, and Applications ..................................... 1209
52.4
Conclusion and Future Directions ................................................... 1217
References .............................................................................................. 1218
53 Rehabilitation and Health Care Robotics
H.F. Machiel Van der Loos, David J. Reinkensmeyer ................................... 1223
53.1
Overview....................................................................................... 1223
53.2
Physical Therapy and Training Robots............................................. 1227
53.3
Aids for People with Disabilities ..................................................... 1235
53.4
Smart Prostheses and Orthoses ...................................................... 1240
53.5
Augmentation for Diagnosis and Monitoring................................... 1242
53.6
Safety, Ethics, Access, and Economics ............................................. 1244
53.7
Conclusions and Further Readings.................................................. 1245
References .............................................................................................. 1246
54 Domestic Robotics
Erwin Prassler, Kazuhiro Kosuge............................................................... 1253
54.1
Cleaning Robots ............................................................................ 1254
54.2
Lawn-Mowing Robots.................................................................... 1271
54.3
Smart Appliances........................................................................... 1273
54.4
Smart Homes ................................................................................ 1275
54.5
Domestic Robotics: It Is the Business Case Which Matters ................ 1279
54.6
Conclusions and Further Reading ................................................... 1280
References .............................................................................................. 1280

----- Page 48 (native) -----
L
Contents
55 Robots for Education
David P. Miller, Illah R. Nourbakhsh, Roland Siegwart .............................. 1283
55.1
The Role of Robots in Education ..................................................... 1284
55.2
Educational Robot Tournaments..................................................... 1285
55.3
Education Robot Platforms............................................................. 1287
55.4
Education Robot Controllers and Programming Environments.......... 1290
55.5
Robots and Informal Learning Venues (Museums) ........................... 1292
55.6
Educational Evaluation of Robot Programs ..................................... 1296
55.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ................................................... 1298
References .............................................................................................. 1298
Part G Human-Centered and Life-Like Robotics
56 Humanoids
Charles C. Kemp, Paul Fitzpatrick, Hirohisa Hirukawa, Kazuhito Yokoi,
Kensuke Harada, Yoshio Matsumoto......................................................... 1307
56.1
Why Humanoids? .......................................................................... 1307
56.2
History and Overview..................................................................... 1310
56.3
Locomotion................................................................................... 1312
56.4
Manipulation ................................................................................ 1315
56.5
Whole-Body Activities ................................................................... 1318
56.6
Communication............................................................................. 1325
56.7
Conclusions and Further Reading ................................................... 1329
References .............................................................................................. 1329
57 Safety for Physical Human–Robot Interaction
Antonio Bicchi, Michael A. Peshkin, J. Edward Colgate............................... 1335
57.1
Motivations for Safe pHRI............................................................... 1336
57.2
Safety for Hands-Off pHRI .............................................................. 1337
57.3
Design of Intrinsically Safe Robots.................................................. 1338
57.4
Safety for Hands-On pHRI .............................................................. 1341
57.5
Safety Standards for pHRI .............................................................. 1345
57.6
Conclusions................................................................................... 1346
References .............................................................................................. 1346
58 Social Robots that Interact with People
Cynthia Breazeal, Atsuo Takanishi, Tetsunori Kobayashi ............................ 1349
58.1
Social Robot Embodiment .............................................................. 1350
58.2
Multimodal Communication........................................................... 1352
58.3
Expressive Emotion-Based Interaction ........................................... 1356
58.4
Socio-cognitive Skills..................................................................... 1360
58.5
Conclusion and Further Reading .................................................... 1365
References .............................................................................................. 1366
59 Robot Programming by Demonstration
Aude Billard, Sylvain Calinon, Rüdiger Dillmann, Stefan Schaal ................. 1371
59.1
History.......................................................................................... 1372

----- Page 49 (native) -----
Contents
LI
59.2
Engineering-Oriented Approaches.................................................. 1374
59.3
Biologically-Oriented Learning Approaches .................................... 1386
59.4
Conclusions and Open Issues in Robot PbD ..................................... 1389
References .............................................................................................. 1389
60 Biologically Inspired Robots
Jean-Arcady Meyer, Agnès Guillot............................................................. 1395
60.1
General Background ...................................................................... 1395
60.2
Bio-inspired Morphologies ............................................................ 1396
60.3
Bio-inspired Sensors ..................................................................... 1398
60.4
Bio-inspired Actuators .................................................................. 1402
60.5
Bio-inspired Control Architectures ................................................. 1408
60.6
Energetic Autonomy ...................................................................... 1412
60.7
Collective Robotics......................................................................... 1413
60.8
Biohybrid Robots........................................................................... 1415
60.9
Discussion..................................................................................... 1417
60.10 Conclusion .................................................................................... 1418
References .............................................................................................. 1418
61 Evolutionary Robotics
Dario Floreano, Phil Husbands, Stefano Nolﬁ............................................ 1423
61.1
Method......................................................................................... 1423
61.2
First Steps ..................................................................................... 1424
61.3
Simulation and Reality .................................................................. 1428
61.4
Simple Controllers, Complex Behaviors ........................................... 1429
61.5
Seeing the Light ............................................................................ 1431
61.6
Computational Neuroethology ....................................................... 1434
61.7
Evolution and Learning ................................................................. 1439
61.8
Competition and Cooperation ........................................................ 1442
61.9
Evolutionary Hardware .................................................................. 1444
61.10 Closing Remarks ............................................................................ 1447
References .............................................................................................. 1447
62 Neurorobotics: From Vision to Action
Michael A. Arbib, Giorgio Metta, Patrick van der Smagt............................. 1453
62.1
Deﬁnitions.................................................................................... 1453
62.2
Neuroethological Inspiration ......................................................... 1454
62.3
The Role of the Cerebellum ............................................................ 1462
62.4
The Role of Mirror Systems ............................................................. 1467
62.5
Extroduction ................................................................................. 1474
62.6
Further Reading ............................................................................ 1475
References .............................................................................................. 1475
63 Perceptual Robotics
Heinrich H. Bülthoff, Christian Wallraven, Martin A. Giese ......................... 1481
63.1
Overview....................................................................................... 1481
63.2
Example-Based Object Representations.......................................... 1483

----- Page 50 (native) -----
LII
Contents
63.3
Example-Based Movement Representations ................................... 1490
63.4
Example-Based Synthesis Models: From Faces to Movements .......... 1492
63.5
Conclusions and Further Reading ................................................... 1494
References .............................................................................................. 1495
64 Roboethics: Social and Ethical Implications of Robotics
Gianmarco Veruggio, Fiorella Operto ........................................................ 1499
64.1
A Methodological Note................................................................... 1501
64.2
Speciﬁcity of Robotics .................................................................... 1502
64.3
What Is a Robot? ........................................................................... 1502
64.4
Cultural Differences in Robot’s Acceptance...................................... 1503
64.5
From Literature to Today’s Debate .................................................. 1503
64.6
Roboethics.................................................................................... 1504
64.7
Ethics and Morality........................................................................ 1505
64.8
Moral Theories .............................................................................. 1505
64.9
Ethics in Science and Technology ................................................... 1506
64.10 Conditions for Implementation ...................................................... 1507
64.11 Operativeness of the Principles ...................................................... 1507
64.12 Ethical Issues in an ICT Society ....................................................... 1507
64.13 Harmonization of Principles........................................................... 1509
64.14 Ethics and Professional Responsibility ............................................ 1510
64.15 Roboethics Taxonomy.................................................................... 1511
64.16 Conclusions and Further Reading ................................................... 1519
References .............................................................................................. 1522
Acknowledgements................................................................................... 1525
About the Authors..................................................................................... 1527
Detailed Contents...................................................................................... 1555
Subject Index............................................................................................. 1591

----- Page 51 (native) -----
LIII
List of Abbreviations
A
AAAI
American Association for Artiﬁcial
Intelligence
ABA
articulated-body algorithm
ABRT
automated bus rapid transit
ACAS
airborne collision avoidance
systems
ACC
adaptive cruise control
ACM
active cord mechanism
ACM
Association of Computing
Machinery
ADAS
advanced driver assistance systems
ADL
activities of daily living
ADSL
asymmetric digital subscriber line
AGV
automated guided vehicles
AHS
advanced highway systems
AI
artiﬁcial intelligence
AIP
anterior interparietal area
AIS
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) system
AISB
artiﬁcial intelligence and simulation o
behavior
AIT
anterior inferotemporal cortex
AM
actuators for manipulation
AMA
artiﬁcial moral agents
AMD
autonomous mental development
ANSI
American National Standards Institute
AP
antipersonnel
APG
adjustable pattern generator
AR
augmented reality
ARAMIS
Space Application of Automation,
Robotics and Machine Intelligence
ASCL
adaptive seek control logic
ASD
autism spectrum disorder
ASIC
application-speciﬁc integrated circuit
ASKA
receptionist robot
ASM
advanced servomanipulator
ASN
active sensor network
ASTRO
autonomous space transport robotic
operations
ASV
adaptive suspension vehicle
AT
antitank
ATLSS
advanced technology for large structural
systems
ATR
Advanced Telecommunications Research
Institute International
AuRA
autonomous robot architecture
AUV
autonomous underwater vehicles
AV
antivehicle
B
BIOROB
biomimetic robotics
BLDC
brushless direct current
BLE
broadcast of local eligibility
BLEEX
Berkeley lower-extremity exoskeleton
BLUE
best linear unbiased estimator
BN
Bayes network
BRT
bus rapid transit
C
C/A
coarse-acquisition
CAM
computer-aided manufacturing
CAD
computer-aided design
CAE
computer-aided engineering
CALM
continuous air interface long and medium
range
CAN
controller area network
CARD
computer-aided remote driving
CASPER
continuous activity scheduling, planning,
execution and replanning
CAT
computer-aided tomography
CB
cluster bombs
CCD
charge-coupled devices
CCI
control command interpreter
CCP
coverage conﬁguration protocol
CCT
conservative congruence transformation
CCW
counterclockwise
CE
computer ethics
CEA
Commission de Energie Atomique
CEBOT
cellular robot
CF
climbing ﬁbers
CF
contact formation
CG
center of gravity
CGA
clinical gait analysis
CGI
common gateway interface
CIE
International Commission on Illumination
CIRCA
cooperative intelligent real-time control
architecture
CIS
computer-integrated surgery
CLARAty
coupled layered architecture for robot
autonomy
CLEaR
closed-loop execution and recovery
CLIK
closed-loop inverse kinematics
CMAC
cerebellar model articulation controller
CML
concurrent mapping and localization
CNC
computer numerical control
CNP
contract net protocol

----- Page 52 (native) -----
LIV
List of Abbreviations
CNT
carbon nanotubes
COG
center of gravity
CONE
Collaborative Observatory for Nature
Environments
CONRO
conﬁgurable robot
COR
center of rotation
CORBA
common object request broker
architecture
COV
characteristic output vector
CP
closest point
CP
complementarity problem
CP
cerebral palsy
CPG
central pattern generators
CPSR
computer professional for social
responsibility
CRBA
composite-rigid-body algorithm
CRLB
Cramer–Rao lower bound
CSIRO
Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and Industrial
Research Organization
CSMA
carrier sense multiple access
CT
computed tomography
CTFM
continuous-transmission
frequency-modulated
CTL
cut-to-length
CU
control unit
CVIS
cooperative vehicle infrastructure systems
CW
clockwise
D
DARPA
Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency
DARS
distributed autonomous robotics systems
DBNs
dynamic Bayesian networks
DD
differentially driven
DDF
decentralized data fusion
DeVAR
desktop vocational assistant robot
DFRA
distributed ﬁeld robot architecture
DFT
discrete Fourier transform
DGA
Delegation Generale pour L’Armement
DH
Denavit–Hartenberg
DIO
digital input-output
DIRA
distributed robot architecture
DL
description logics
DLR
Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und
Raumfahrt
DM2
distributed macro-mini actuation
DoD
Department of Defense
DOF
degree of freedom
DOG
difference of Gaussian
DOP
dilution of precision
DPN
dip-pen nanolithography
DRIE
deep reactive ion etching
DSM
dynamic state machine
DSO
Defense Sciences Ofﬁce
DSRC
dedicated short-range communications
DVL
Doppler velocity log
DWA
dynamic window approach
E
EBA
extrastriate body part area
EBID
electron-beam-induced deposition
ECU
electronics controller unit
EDM
electrical discharge machining
EDM
electronic distance measuring
EEG
electroencephalogram
EGNOS
Euro Geostationary Navigation Overlay
Service
EKF
extended Kalman ﬁlter
EM
expectation maximization
EMG
electromyography
EMS
electrical master–slave manipulators
ENSICA
Ecole Nationale Superieure des
Constructions Aeronautiques
EO
elementary operators
EOD
explosive ordnance disposal
EP
exploratory procedures
EPFL
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de
Lausanne
EPP
extended physiological proprioception
ERA
European robotic arm
ES
electrical stimulation
ESA
European Space Agency
ESL
execution support language
ETS
engineering test satellite
EVA
extravehicular activity
F
FARS
Fagg-Arbib-Rizzolatti-Sakata
FE
ﬁnite element
FESEM
ﬁeld-emission SEM
FIFO
ﬁrst-in ﬁrst-out
fMRI
functional magnetic resonance imaging
FMS
ﬂexible manufacturing systems
FNS
functional neural stimulation
FOPL
ﬁrst-order predicate logic
FPGAs
ﬁeld programmable gate array
FRI
foot rotating indicator
FSA
ﬁnite-state acceptors
FSM
ﬁnite-state machine
FSR
force sensing resistor
FST
ﬁnite-state transducer
FSW
feasible solution of wrench
FTTH
ﬁber to the home
G
GAS
global asymptotic stability
GBAS
ground-based augmentation systems
GCR
goal-contact relaxation

----- Page 53 (native) -----
List of Abbreviations
LV
GDP
gross domestic product
GenoM
generator of modules
GEO
geostationary Earth orbit
GI
gastrointestinal
GICHD
Geneva International Center for
Humanitarian Demining
GJM
generalized Jacobian matrix
GLS
Global Navigation Satellite System
Landing System
GMM
Gaussian mixture model
GMR
Gaussian mixture regression
GNS
global navigation systems
GNSS
global navigation satellite system
GP
Gaussian processes
GPR
ground-penetrating radar
GPRS
general packet radio service
GPS
global positioning system
GRACE
graduate robot attending conference
GSD
geon structural description
GSI
Gadd’s severity index
GUI
graphical user interface
GZMP
generalized ZMP
H
HAL
hybrid assisted limb
HAMMER
hierarchical attentive multiple models for
execution and recognition
HCI
human computer interaction
HD
haptic device
HDSL
high data rate digital subscriber line
HEPA
semi-high efﬁciency-particulate
airﬁlter
HF
hard-ﬁnger
HIC
head injury criterion
HIP
haptic interaction point
HJB
Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman
HJI
Hamilton–Jacobi–Isaac
HMD
head-mounted display
HMM
hidden Markov model
HMX
high melting point explosives
HO
human operator
HRI
human–robot interaction
HRTEM
high-resolution transmission electron
microscopes
HST
Hubble space telescope
HSTAMIDS
handheld standoff mine detection
system
HTML
hypertext markup language
HTN
hierarchical task network
I
I/O
input/output
I3CON
industrialized, integrated, intelligent,
construction
IA
instantaneous allocation
IAD
intelligent assist device
ICA
independent component analysis
ICBL
International Campaign to Ban
Landmines
ICE
internet communications engine
ICP
iterative closest-point algorithm
ICR
instantaneous center of rotation
ICRA
International Conference on Robotics
and Automation
ICT
information and communication
technology
IDL
interface deﬁnition language
IE
information ethics
IED
improvised explosive device
IEEE
Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers
IETF
Internet engineering task force
IFRR
International Foundation of Robotics
Research
iGPS
indoor GPS
IHIP
intermediate haptic interaction
points
IK
inverse kinematics
ILP
inductive logic programming
ILS
instrument landing system
IMTS
intelligent multimode transit
system
IMU
inertial measurement units
IOSS
input-output-to-state stability
IP
internet protocol
IPC
interprocess communication
ISO
International Organization for
Standardization
ISP
internet service provider
ISS
input-to-state stability
IST
Information Society Technologies
IST
Instituto Superior Técnico
IT
intrinsic tactile
IT
inferotemporal
ITD
interaural time difference
IxTeT
indexed time table
J
JAUS
joint architecture for unmanned
systems
JAXA
Japan space exploration agency
JDL
joint directors of the laboratories
JEMRMS
Japanese experiment module remote
manipulator system
JHU
Johns Hopkins University
JND
just noticeable difference
JPL
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
JSIM
joint-space inertia matrix
JSP
Java Server Pages

----- Page 54 (native) -----
LVI
List of Abbreviations
K
KR
knowledge representation
L
LAAS
Laboratoire d’Analyse et d’Architecture
des Systèmes
LADAR
laser radar or laser detection and ranging
LAN
local-area network
LARC
Lie algebra rank condition
LBL
long-baseline system
LCSP
linear constraint satisfaction program
LGN
lateral geniculate nucleus
LIDAR
light detection and ranging
LOS
line of sight
LP
linear program
LQG
linear quadratic Gaussian
LSS
logical sensor system
LVDT
linear variable differential transformer
LWR
locally weighted regression
M
MACA
Afghanistan Mine Action Center
MANET
mobile ad hoc network
MAP
maximum a posteriori probability
MBARI
Monterey Bay Aquarium Research
Institute
MBE
molecular-beam epitaxy
MBS
mobile base system
MC
Monte Carlo
MCS
mission control system
MDP
Markovian decision process
MST
microsystem technology
MEMS
microelectromechanical systems
MER
Mars exploration rovers
MESUR
Mars environmental survey
MF
Mossy ﬁbers
MIA
mechanical impedance adjuster
MIG
metal inert gas
MIMO
multi-input multi-output
MIR
mode identiﬁcation and recovery
MIS
minimally invasive surgery
MITI
Ministry of International Trade and
Industry
ML
maximum likelihood
ML
machine learning
MLE
maximum-likelihood estimation
MLS
multilevel surface map
MNS
mirror neuron system
MOCVD
metallo-organic chemical vapor
deposition
MOMR
multiple operator multiple robot
MOSR
multiple operator single robot
MPC
model predictive control
MPFIM
multiple paired forward-inverse models
MPM
manipulator positioning mechanism
MR
multirobot tasks
MR
multiple reﬂection
MR
magnetorheological
MRAC
model reference adaptive control
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
MRL
manipulator retention latch
MRSR
Mars rover sample return
MRTA
multirobot task allocation
MSAS
Multifunctional Satellite Augmentation
System
MSER
maximally stable extremal regions
MSM
master–slave manipulator
N
MT
multitask
MT
medial temporal
MTBF
mean time between failure
MTRAN
modular transformer
NAP
nonaccidental properties
NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Agency
NASDA
National Space Development Agency of
Japan
NASREM
NASA/NBS standard reference model
NBS
National Bureau of Standards
NCEA
National Center for Engineering in
Agriculture
NCER
National Conference on Educational
Robotics
ND
nearness diagram navigation
NDDS
network data distribution service
NEMO
network mobility
NEMS
nanoelectromechanical systems
NICT
National Institute of Information and
Communications Technology
NIDRR
National Institute on Disability and
Rehabilitation Research
NIMS
networked infomechanical systems
NIOSH
National Institute for Occupational
Health and Safety
NMEA
National Marine Electronics
Association
NN
neural networks
NPS
Naval Postgraduate School
NRM
nanorobotic manipulators
NURBS
non-uniform rational B-spline
O
OASIS
onboard autonomous science
investigation system
OBSS
orbiter boom sensor system
OCU
operator control units
ODE
ordinary differential equation

----- Page 55 (native) -----
List of Abbreviations
LVII
OH&S
occupation health and safety
OLP
ofﬂine programming
OM
optical microscope
ORB
object request brokers
ORCCAD
open robot controller computer aided
design
ORM
obstacle restriction method
ORU
orbital replacement unit
OSIM
operational-space inertia matrix
P
P&O
prosthetics and orthotics
PAPA
privacy, accuracy, intellectual property,
and access
PAS
pseudo-amplitude scan
PB
parametric bias
PbD
programming by demonstration
PC
principal contact
PC
Purkinje cells
PCA
principle components analysis
PD
proportional-derivative
PDDL
planning domain description
language
PDGF
power data grapple ﬁxtures
PEAS
probing environment and adaptive
sleeping protocol
PET
positron emission tomography
PF
parallel ﬁbers
PFC
prefrontal cortex
PFM
potential ﬁeld method
pHRI
physical human–robot interaction
PI
policy iteration
PIC
programmable interrupt controller
PIC
programmable intelligent computer
PID
proportional–integral–derivative
PIT
posterior inferotemporal cortex
PKM
parallel kinematic machine
PLC
programmable logic controller
PLD
programmable logic device
PLEXIL
plan execution interchange
language
PMD
photonic mixer device
PMMA
polymethyl methacrylate
PNT
Petri net transducers
POMDP
partially observable MDP
PPRK
palm pilot robot kit
PPS
precise positioning system
PR
photoresist
PRISMA
Projects of Robotics for Industry and
Services, Mechatronics and Automation
PRM
probabilistic roadmap method
PRN
pseudorandom noise
PRS
procedural reasoning system
PS
power source
PTP
point-to-point
PTU
pan–tilt unit
PVDF
polyvinyledene ﬂuoride
PwoF
point-contact-without-friction
PZT
lead zirconate titanate
Q
QD
quantum dot
QRIO
quest for curiosity
QT
quasistatic telerobotics
R
R.U.R.
Rossum’s Universal Robots
RAIM
receiver autonomous integrity
monitoring
RALPH
rapidly adapting lane position
handler
RAM
random-access (volatile) memory
RANSAC
random sample consensus
RAP
reactive action packages
RAS
Robotics and Automation Society
RBC
recognition-by-components
RBF
radial basis function
RC
radio-controlled
RCC
remote center of compliance
RCM
remote center of motion
RCR
responsible conduct of research
RCS
real-time control system
RERC
Rehabilitation Engineering Research
Center on Rehabilitation Robotics
RF
radiofrequency
RFID
radiofrequency identiﬁcation
RFWR
receptive ﬁeld weighted regression
RG
rate gyros
RGB
red, green, blue
RIG
rate-integrating gyros
RL
reinforcement learning
RLG
random loop generator
RMMS
reconﬁgurable modular manipulator
system
RNEA
recursive Newton–Euler algorithm
RNNPB
recurrent neural network with parametric
bias
RNS
reaction null space
ROC
receiver operating curve
ROKVISS
robotic components veriﬁcation on the
ISS
ROM
read-only memory
ROTEX
robot technology experiment
ROV
remotely operated vehicle
RPC
remote procedure call
RPI
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
RPV
remotely piloted vehicle
RRT
rapid random tree
RSS
realistic robot simulation

----- Page 56 (native) -----
LVIII
List of Abbreviations
RT
reaction time
RT
room-temperature
RTCA
Radio Technical Commission for
Aeronautics
RTD
resistance temperature device
RTI
real-time innovations
RTK
real-time kinematics
RTS
real-time system
RWI
real-world interface
RWS
robotic work station
S
SA
selective availability
SAIC
Science Applications International, Inc.
SAIL
Stanford Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Laboratory
SAN
semiautonomous navigation
SBAS
satellite-based augmentation systems
SBL
short-baseline system
SCARA
selective compliance assembly robot arm
SCI
spinal cord injury
SDK
standard development kit
SDR
software for distributed robotics
SDV
spatial dynamic voting
SEA
series elastic actuator
SEE
standard end-effector
SELF
sensorized environment for life
SEM
scanning electron microscopes
SET
single-electron transistors
SF
soft-ﬁnger
SfM
structure from motion
SFX
sensor fusion effects
SGAS
semiglobal asymptotic stability
SGUUB
semiglobal uniform ultimate boundedness
SHOP
simple hierarchical ordered planner
SIFT
scale-invariant feature transformation
SIGMOD
Special Interest Group on Management of
Data
SIPE
system for interactive planning and
execution monitoring
SIR
sampling importance resampling
SISO
single-input single-output
SKM
serial kinematic machines
SLAM
simultaneous localization and mapping
SLAMP
sheep loading animal manipulation
platform
SLICE
speciﬁcation language for ICE
SLRV
surveyor lunar rover vehicle
SMA
shape-memory alloy
SMC
sequential Monte Carlo
SNOM
scanning near-ﬁeld OM
SOI
silicon-on-insulator
SOMR
single operator multiple robot
SOSR
single operator single robot
SPA
sense–plan–act
SPDM
special-purpose dexterous manipulator
SPS
standard position system
SR
single-robot
SRMS
shuttle remote manipulator system
SSRMS
Space shuttle remote manipulator
system
ST
single-task
STM
scanning tunneling microscopes
STS
superior temporal sulcus
SVD
singular value decomposition
SWNT
single-walled carbon nanotubes
T
TA
time-extended assignment
TAP
test action pairs
TC
technical committee
TCP
transmission control protocol
TDL
task description language
TDT
tension differential type
TEM
transmission electron microscopes
tEODor
telerob explosive ordnance disposal and
observation robot
TF-IDF
term-frequency inverse document
frequency
TMS
transcranial magnetic stimulation
TOF
time of ﬂight
TPBVP
two-point boundary value problem
TSEE
teleoperated small emplacement
excavator
TSP
telesensor programming
TTI
thoracic trauma index
TTS
text-to-speech
U
UAS
unmanned aerial systems
UAV
unmanned aerial vehicles
UDP
user data protocol
UGV
unmanned ground vehicle
UML
uniﬁed modeling language
URL
uniform resource locator
US
ultrasound
USBL
ultrashort-baseline system
USV
unmanned surface vehicle
UUB
uniform ultimate boundedness
UUV
unmanned underwater vehicles
UVMS
underwater vehicle manipulator system
UWB
ultra-wideband
UXO
unexploded ordnance
V
VANET
vehicular ad-hoc network
VC
viscous injury response
VCR
videocassette recorder

----- Page 57 (native) -----
List of Abbreviations
LIX
vdW
van der Waals
VFH
vector ﬁeld histogram
VI
value iteration
VIA
variable-impedance actuation
VLSI
very-large-scale integrated
VM
virtual manipulator
VO
velocity obstacles
VOR
vestibular-ocular reﬂex
VOR
VHF omnidirectional range
VR
virtual reality
VRML
virtual reality modeling language
VVV
versatile volumetric vision
W
WABIAN
Waseda bipedal humanoid
WAM
whole-arm manipulator
WAN
wide-area network
WG
world graph
WMR
wheeled mobile robot
WMSD
work-related musculoskeletal
disorders
WTA
winner-take-all
WWW
world wide web
X
XHTML
extensible hyper text markup
language
XML
extensible markup language
Z
ZMP
zero-moment point
ZP
zona pellucida