

----- Page 1 (native) -----
105
The Mediatization of Society
A Theory of the Media as Agents  
of Social and Cultural Change
Stig Hjarvard
Abstract
Using mediatization as the key concept, this article presents a theory of the influence media 
exert on society and culture. After reviewing existing discussions of mediatization by Krotz 
(2007), Schulz (2004), Thompson (1995), and others, an institutional approach to the medi-
atization process is suggested. Mediatization is to be considered a double-sided process of 
high modernity in which the media on the one hand emerge as an independent institution 
with a logic of its own that other social institutions have to accommodate to. On the other 
hand, media simultaneously become an integrated part of other institutions like politics, 
work, family, and religion as more and more of these institutional activities are performed 
through both interactive and mass media. The logic of the media refers to the institutional 
and technological modus operandi of the media, including the ways in which media distri-
bute material and symbolic resources and make use of formal and informal rules.
Keywords: mediatization, media logic, social interaction, modernity, virtualization
Introduction
This article presents a theory of the influence media exert on society and culture. It 
attempts to answer the question: What are the consequences of the gradual and increa-
sing adaptation of central societal institutions, and the culture in which we live to the 
presence of intervening media? Thus, the article takes its point of departure in a clas-
sical question in the sociology of the media, namely, how the media affect society and 
culture. Answers to the question, however, are sought in a new social condition which 
we will label the mediatization of culture and society. Traditionally, the media have been 
conceived of as separate from society and culture; consequently, researchers tended to 
focus on the effect certain mediated messages had on individuals and institutions. For 
example: front-page headlines during an election campaign might be thought to exert 
influence on people’s voting behavior, advertisements to affect consumers’ shopping 
preferences, and film content to affect the viewer’s morals or to distract attention from 
matters of greater urgency or significance.
Contemporary society is permeated by the media, to an extent that the media may 
no longer be conceived of as being separate from cultural and other social institutions. 
Under these circumstances, the task before us is instead to try to gain an understanding 
Nordicom Review 29 (2008) 2, pp. 105-134
10.1515/nor-2017-0181

----- Page 2 (native) -----
106
Stig Hjarvard
of the ways in which social institutions and cultural processes have changed character, 
function and structure in response to the omnipresence of media. This altered under-
standing of media’s importance does not mean that traditional questions regarding as-
pects like the effects of mediated messages on public opinion or the purposes to which 
people use media, are no longer relevant. But it does mean that an understanding of the 
importance of media in modern society and culture can no longer rely on models that 
conceive of media as being separate from society and culture.
Media are not simply technologies that organizations, parties or individuals can 
choose to use – or not use – as they see fit. A significant share of the influence media 
exert arises out of the fact that they have become an integral part of other institutions’ 
operations, while they also have achieved a degree of self-determination and authority 
that forces other institutions, to greater or lesser degrees, to submit to their logic. The 
media are at once part of the fabric of society and culture and an independent institution 
that stands between other cultural and social institutions and coordinates their mutual 
interaction. The duality of this structural relationship sets a number of preconditions 
for how media messages in given situations are used and perceived by senders and 
receivers, thereby affecting relations between people. Thus, traditional questions about 
media use and media effects need to take account of the circumstance that society and 
culture have become mediatized.
The Concept of Mediatization
The concept most central to an understanding of the importance of media to culture and 
society is mediatization. The term has been used in numerous contexts to characterize the 
influence media exert on a variety of phenomena, but rather little work has been done to 
define or specify the concept itself. Only very recently have media researchers sought to 
develop the concept toward a more coherent and precise understanding of mediatization 
as a social and cultural process (Krotz, 2007; Schulz, 2004). Therefore, let us start by 
examining the various meanings the concept has been given in earlier work.
Mediatization was first applied to media’s impact on political communication and 
other effects on politics. Swedish media researcher Kent Asp was the first to speak of the 
mediatization of political life, by which he meant a process whereby “a political system 
to a high degree is influenced by and adjusted to the demands of the mass media in their 
coverage of politics” (Asp, 1986:359). One form this adaptation takes is when politicians 
phrase their public statements in terms that personalize and polarize the issues so that the 
messages will have a better chance of gaining media coverage. Asp sees media’s growing 
independence of political sources as yet another sign of mediatization in that the media 
thereby gain even more control over media content. Asp acknowledges a debt to the 
Norwegian sociologist, Gudmund Hernes’ expression, ‘media-twisted society’ (Hernes, 
1978), albeit Hernes’ perspective was broader. He argued that media had a fundamental 
impact on all social institutions and their relations with one another. Although Hernes 
did not actually use the term mediatization, his concept of ‘media-twisted society’ and 
the holistic perspective on society he applies is consonant in many respects with the 
conception of mediatization put forward here. Hernes urges us to
to ask what consequences media have for institutions as well as for individuals: the 
ways public administration, organizations, parties, schools and business function 
and how they relate to one another. In what ways do media redistribute power in

----- Page 3 (native) -----
107
The Mediatization of Society
society? [...] In short, from an institutional point of view the key question is, how 
media change both the inner workings of other social entities and their mutual 
relationships (Hernes, 1978: 181)
Hernes develops this perspective only in a relatively brief analysis of media influence 
over politics and the education sector, respectively, where he points out that media chal-
lenge both the authority and the ability of the schools and political institutions to regulate 
access to knowledge and to set political agendas. One main point Hernes makes is that 
the media have transformed society from of a situation of information scarcity to one 
of information abundance, which has rendered attention a strategic resource, for which 
anyone with a message must compete.
One finds a contemporary and fairly parallel notion in the work of Altheide and Snow 
(1979, 1988), who call for an “analysis of social institutions-transformed-through-me-
dia” (Altheide & Snow, 1979:7). Whereas traditional sociological approaches to the 
media try to isolate certain ‘variables’ for media influence, ignoring how media affect the 
overall premises for cultural life, Altheide and Snow want to show how the logic of the 
media forms the fund of knowledge that is generated and circulated in society. Although 
they time and again make reference to ‘media logic’, form and format are their principal 
concepts drawing on one of the ‘classics’ of sociology, Georg Simmel. Thus they posit 
the “primacy of form over content” (Altheide & Snow, 1988:206), where media logic 
for the most part appears to consist of a formatting logic that determines how material 
is categorized, the choice of mode of presentation, and the selection and portrayal of 
social experience in the media. In their analyses they mention other aspects of media 
logic, including technological and organizational aspects more or less incidentally, and 
because Altheide and Snow (1979, 1984) are working with North American material, 
the logic at play is essentially a commercial one. Their prime interest with regard to 
in these ‘other aspects’, is a desire to explore the extent to which and how technology 
affects communication formats, so that broader institutional change remains little more 
than an incidental interest. They devote some attention to social institutions like sports 
and religion, but their prime focus, quantitatively and qualitatively, rests on the format 
media give political communication.
Like Asp (1986, 1990), Mazzoleni and Schulz (1999) apply the concept of medi-
atization to media’s influence on politics. Considering the cases of Fernando Collar de 
Mello’s use of television in the Brazilian election campaign of 1989, Silvio Berlusconi’s 
use of the media on his way to power in Italy, and Tony Blair’s use of ‘spin’ in England, 
they demonstrate the increasing influence of mass media on the exercise of political 
power. They characterize mediatization as “the problematic concomitants or consequen-
ces of the development of modern mass media”. As to its effects, they comment that 
“mediatized politics is politics that has lost its autonomy, has become dependent in its 
central functions on mass media, and is continuously shaped by interactions with mass 
media” (Mazzoleni & Schulz, 1999:249f). But they also stress that it is not a question 
of the media having arrogated political power from the political institutions; political 
institutions like parliaments, parties, etc., continue in good measure to control politics, 
but they have become increasingly dependent on the media and have had to adapt to 
the logic of the media. 
In addition to these attempts to specify the meaning of mediatization in the poli-
tical sphere there are a number of studies where the concept is used as a conceptual 
framework for the growing influence exerted by the media over political processes.

----- Page 4 (native) -----
108
Stig Hjarvard
We have, for example, the work of Jensen and Aalberg (2007), Strömbäck (2007), and 
Cottle (2006), the latter of whom considers the mediatization of conflicts as the “active 
performative involvement and constitutive role” of the media in a variety of political 
and military conflicts (Cottle, 2006:9, original emphasis). We might also mention the 
work of a government-funded Swedish study of democratic processes, that published an 
entire book on the “Mediatization of Politics” (Amnå & Berglez, 1999). Aside from a 
reference to Asp’s use of the concept in the authors’ introduction, however, the concept 
is not applied in the individual analyses.
The concept of Mediatization has also been used to cast light on the growing role 
played by marketing and consumer culture. Jansson (2002) takes his starting point in 
the general mediatization of contemporary culture, which he describes as “the process 
through which mediated cultural products have gained importance as cultural referents 
and hence contribute to the development and maintenance of cultural communities. In 
other words, the mediatization of culture is the process that reinforces and expands the 
realm of media culture”. (Jansson, 2002:14f). Whereas culture once was either imbued 
with the hierarchy of taste that prevailed in cultural institutions or, in the case of trivial 
culture, was linked to local ways of life, the media today occupy a dominant position 
as providers of cultural products and beliefs. 
In other cases the concept of mediatization has been used to describe media’s in-
fluence over research. Väliverronen (2001) does not consider mediatization “a strict 
analytic concept, but rather an ambiguous term which refers to the increasing cultural 
and social significance of the mass media and other forms of technically mediated com-
munication” (Väliverronen, 2001:159). Seen in this light, the media play an important 
role in the production and circulation of knowledge and interpretations of science. 
Consider, for example, the number of people whose knowledge of various phases in 
the history of evolution has been formed, not so much in the classroom as by Steven 
Spielberg’s films on Jurassic Park or the BBC documentary series, Walking with Dino-
saurs. Moreover, the media also are an arena for public discussion and the legitimation 
of science. Peter Weingart (1998) sees this as a decisive element in the linkage between 
media and science:
It is the basis for the thesis of the medialization of science: With the growing 
importance of the media in shaping public opinion, conscience and perception on 
the one hand and a growing dependence of science on scarce resources and thus on 
public acceptance on the other, science will become increasingly media-oriented 
(Weingart, 1998:872, original emphasis).
Beyond using the concept to describe the media’s influence over areas like politics, 
consumer culture or science, some researchers have also related it to a broader theory 
of modernity. Sociologist John B. Thompson (1990, 1995) sees the media’s develop-
ment as an integral part of the development of modern society. Thompson speaks of a 
“mediazation of modern culture” that is, not least, a consequence of media influence. 
The invention of the printing press in the mid-fifteenth century saw the birth of a tech-
nology that made it possible to circulate information in society to an unprecedented 
extent. This revolutionary technological event institutionalized the mass media (books, 
newspapers, magazines, etc.) as a significant force in society and enabled communica-
tion and interaction over long distances and among larger numbers of people, while it 
also made it possible as never before to store and accumulate information over time. As 
a consequence, mass media helped to transform an agrarian and feudal society and to

----- Page 5 (native) -----
109
The Mediatization of Society
create modern institutions such as the state, the public sphere and science. The subse-
quent development of other media, like radio, television and the internet, have further 
accentuated this modernization process. Communication, once bound to the physical 
meeting of individuals, face-to-face, has been succeeded by mediated communication, 
where the relationship between sender and receiver is altered in decisive respects. In 
the case of mass communication, senders typically retain control over the content of 
the message, but have very little influence over how the receiver makes use of it; in the 
case of interactive media, both sender and receiver can influence the content of com-
munication, but still, the situation is not quite like that in physical, face-to-face com-
munication. Thompson (1995) sees a strong connection between mediatization and its 
cultural consequences and the emergence of very large media organizations on national 
and global levels. These corporations’ production and distribution of symbolic products 
has changed communication flows in society, both between institutions and between 
institutions and individuals.
Schulz (2004) and Krotz (2007), too, use the mediatization concept to specify the role 
of the media in social change in a broader sense. Winfried Schulz (2004) identifies four 
kinds of processes whereby the media change human communication and interaction. 
First, they extend human communication abilities in both time and space; second, the 
media substitute social activities that previously took place face-to-face. For example, 
for many, internet banking has replaced the physical meeting between banks and their 
clients. Third, media instigate an amalgamation of activities; face-to-face communica-
tion combines with mediated communication, and media infiltrate into everyday life. 
Finally, actors in many different sectors have to adapt their behavior to accommodate 
the media’s valuations, formats and routines. For example, politicians learn to express 
themselves in ‘sound-bites’ in inpromptu exchanges with reporters. Krotz (2007) treats 
mediatization as a metaprocess on a par with individualization and globalization, but 
refrains from offering a more detailed formal definition, for, he writes, “mediatization, 
by its very definition, is always bound in time and to cultural context” (Krotz, 2007:39). 
In other words, Krotz conceives of mediatization as an ongoing process whereby the 
media change human relations and behavior and thus change society and culture. That 
is, he sees it as an ongoing process that has followed human activity ever since the 
dawn of literacy.
Both Schulz and Krotz point out some similarities between mediatization theory 
and so-called medium theory, the well-known proponents of which include Walter Ong 
(1982), Marshall McLuhan (1964) and Joshua Meyrowitz (1986). The two theories both 
choose to view the impact of media in an overall perspective and focus on other aspects 
than media content and media use, which has occupied so much of mass communication 
research otherwise. Mediatization theory is thus consonant with medium theory with 
respect to taking note of the different media’s particular formatting of communication 
and the impacts on interpersonal relations it gives rise to. Krotz (2007) also points out a 
number of shortcomings in medium theory, among them a tendency toward technological 
determinism. Medium theorists typically focus on some intrinsic logics of individual 
media’s technology, so that either printing technology or television is seen to be the key 
factor to bring about a new kind of society. The interaction between technology and 
culture and the circumstance that culture also forms technology are neglected, and the 
medium is reduced to its technological ‘nature’. Krotz warns against decontextualizing 
the mediatization concept; medium theory is seldom interested in specific historical, 
cultural or social relations, but is mainly oriented toward changes on the macro level.

----- Page 6 (native) -----
110
Stig Hjarvard
By contrast, mediatization theory should be much more committed to empirical analysis, 
including the study of specific mediatization processes among different groups within 
the population, Krotz (2007) stresses.
The mediatization concept proposed in this article shares several of Schulz’ (2004) 
and Krotz’ (2007) perspectives. Extension, substitution, amalgamation and accommo-
dation are important processes in mediatization; moreover, empirical validation through 
historical, cultural and sociological analysis is required. But the theory also deviates 
from these perspectives in two principal respects. First, the present theory applies an 
institutional perspective to the media and their interaction with culture and society. 
This means that a set of sociological concepts is applied, which makes it possible to 
specify the elements comprising ‘media logic’ and to better analyze the interplay bet-
ween media and other social spheres (institutions). An institutional perspective by no 
means precludes a consideration of culture, technology or psychology, but provides a 
framework within which the interplay between these aspects can be studied. Secondly, 
the mediatization concept is applied exclusively to the historical situation in which the 
media at once have attained autonomy as a social institution and are crucially interwo-
ven with the functioning of other institutions. In this perspective, mediatization does 
not refer to each process by which the media exert influence on society and culture. 
The invention of the printing press revolutionized individuals’ relationship to the writ-
ten language and had palpable impacts on both religion and knowledge, but it did not 
imply a mediatization of either religion or knowledge. That is to say, here we use the 
concept to characterize a given phase or situation in the overall development of society 
and culture in which the logic of the media exerts a particularly predominant influence 
on other social institutions
Mediatization in Postmodern Theory
Some see mediatization as an expression of the postmodern condition, in which media 
give rise to a new consciousness and cultural order. In his discussion of tendencies in 
the postmodern art world Fredric Jameson posits that mediatization creates a system that 
imposes a hierarchy of artistic media and ascribes new self-reflective properties to them: 
“ [...] the traditional fine arts are mediatized: that is, they now come to consciousness 
of themselves as various media within a mediatic system in which their own internal 
production also constitutes a symbolic message and the taking of a position on the status 
of the medium in question” (Jameson, 1991:162, original emphasis). Although Jame-
son does not develop his concept of ‘mediatization’ any further, and while he remains 
skeptical as to whether ‘postmodernism’ is an adequate description of the changes he 
notes, his analysis indicates that the expansion of the media system has had some very 
palpable impacts on artistic institutions’ forms of expression and has made self-reflective 
commentary and positioning vis-à-vis the media a significant element in the arts.
The most radical linkage between mediatization and postmodernism is found in the 
work of Baudrillard (1994), who perceives the symbols or signs of media culture – ima-
ges, sound, advertisements, etc. – to form simulacra, semblances of reality that not only 
seem more real than the physical and social reality, but also replace it. It is like a map of 
the world that has become so vivid, so detailed and comprehensive that it appears more 
real than the world it was created to represent. In Baudrillard’s own words, the media 
constitute a ‘hyperreality’. The media are guided by a kind of semiotic logic, and their 
central influence consists in that they subject all communication and every discourse to

----- Page 7 (native) -----
111
The Mediatization of Society
one dominant code: “What is mediatized is not what comes off the daily press, out of the 
tube, or on the radio: it is what is reinterpreted by the sign form, articulated into models, 
and administered by the ‘code’” (Baudrillard, 1994:175f). This simulacrum theory leads 
Baudrillard to conclude that the symbolic world of media has replaced the ‘real’ world. 
He goes so far as to state that the Gulf War of 1990-1991 did not take place, but was 
rather a figment of media simulacra. In Baudrillard’s own words: “It is a masquerade 
of information: branded faces delivered over to the prostitution of the image, the image 
of an unintelligible distress. No images of the field of battle, but images of masks, of 
blind or defeated faces, images of falsification” (Baudrillard, 1995:40). We should not 
take Baudrillard’s statement or his theory at face value, i.e., as a denial that physical and 
social reality exists outside the media, even though some of his formulations may invite 
such an interpretation. His point is that media representations of reality have assumed 
such dominance in our society that both our perceptions and constructions of reality and 
our behavior take their point of departure in mediated representations and are steered 
by the media, so that phenomena like war are no longer what they once were. Thus, 
the media-orchestrated Gulf War was not a war as we once knew war to be because our 
perception of the war was steered by the images and symbols the media presented to us. 
Sheila Brown (2003) seconds Baudrillard’s postmodernist view of mediatization and its 
consequences, describing a new social situation in which a number of traditional distinc-
tions have disintegrated: “Above all, mediatization in the contemporary sense refers to a 
universe in which the meaning of ontological divisions is collapsing: divisions between 
fact and fiction, nature and culture, global and local, science and art, technology and 
humanity” (Brown, 2003:22, original emphasis).
There is no doubt that mediatization has complicated and blurred the distinctions bet-
ween reality and media representations of reality, and between fact and fiction, but I find 
the postmodernist understanding of mediatization at once too simple and too grand. Too 
simple, because it implies one single transformation, whereby mediated reality supplants 
experiential reality, and traditional distinctions quite simply dissolve. The concept of 
mediatization proposed in the present article does not embrace the notion that mediated 
reality reigns supreme, or the contention that conventional ontological distinctions have 
‘collapsed’. The prime characteristic of the process of mediatization, as conceived of 
here, is rather an expansion of the opportunities for interaction in virtual spaces and a 
differentiation of what people perceive to be real. By the same token, distinctions like 
that between global and local become much more differentiated as the media expand 
our contact with events and phenomena in what were once ‘faraway places’.
The postmodern concept is too grand in that it proclaims the disappearance of reality 
and the disintegration of distinctions, categorizations, that are fundamental in society 
and social cognition. It is difficult to imagine how social institutions would be able to 
continue to function were fact and fiction, nature and culture, art and science no longer 
separate entities. In contrast, we posit that society and culture have not changed in any 
of these respects as a consequence of media intervention. In science, in the media, in 
everyday life people still distinguish between fact and fiction, and vital institutions like 
the family, politics and the nation continue to be focal points in social life, for individuals 
and for society at large. Furthermore, Baudrillard’s reference to an overall and dominant 
‘code’ that ‘administers’ the circulation of symbols and signs in society, remains unclear. 
On the whole, his claims regarding media simulacra, hyperreality and the disappearance 
of reality seem exaggerated; at the least, they lack empirical confirmation. Ironically,

----- Page 8 (native) -----
112
Stig Hjarvard
they seem to rest on an antiquated assumption that prior to the postmodern epoch, phy-
sical and social reality was a straightforward and concrete entity.
The media’s construction of a new reality and its relation to the old non-mediated 
reality is more complicated and nuanced than Baudrillard and Brown suggest, but that 
hardly makes it less important to discuss and specify that relationship. One example from 
the music industry may help. Philip Auslander (1999) traces changes in the relationship 
between live and mediated musical performance over time. Earlier, mediated versions 
of music took their starting point in non-mediated performance: radio transmissions of 
music and recorded music emulated concert performances. Over the years, mediated 
versions have come into their own, in the sense that film soundtracks, CDs, music videos 
and so forth have each developed their own forms of expression and assumed positions 
of their own in the circulation of cultural artifacts. With increasing media influence the 
relationship between mediated and live music gradually reversed; concert performances 
have come to emulate mediated ones. Many road-show concerts clearly have the charac-
ter of (re)presentations of a newly released CD or video, and rock concerts, musicals and 
sporting events all are orchestrated to fit the formats of broadcast transmission and/or 
recording media (Auslander 1999; Middleton, 1990). Traditionally, the live performance 
has been considered more authentic than mediated performance, but as Auslander points 
out, the increasing interchangeability of the two challenges this perception. The issue of 
authenticity has hardly been rendered irrelevant, but authenticity has become conditional 
on an interaction between mediated and live performance:
The primary experience of the music is as a recording; the function of the live 
performance is to authenticate the sound on the recording. In rock culture, live 
performance is a secondary experience of the music but is nevertheless indispen-
sable, since the primary experience cannot be validated without it (Auslander, 
1999:160). 
The growing interdependence of mediated and live performance means that one cannot 
say that the one form is more authentic than the other. In a sociological perspective, 
mediated forms of interaction are neither more nor less real than non-mediated interac-
tion. From a physical or sensual point of view, there may be differences in the degree 
of reality of mediated and face-to-face interaction in the sense that studio announcers, 
etc., are not actually physically present in our home, even though we see and hear them 
as though they stood before us. Still, from a sociological point of view there is no point 
in trying to differentiate the reality status of the respective forms of interaction. Non-
mediated reality and forms of interaction still exist, but mediatization means that they, 
too, are affected by the presence of media. For example, personal, face-to-face com-
munication assumes a new cultural value in a mediatized society by virtue of the fact 
that non-mediated interaction tends to be reserved for certain purposes and is assigned 
special cultural significance. Also, mediated forms of interaction tend to simulate as-
pects of face-to-face interaction; thus they represent not only alternatives to face-to-face 
interaction, but also extensions of the arena in which face-to-face interaction can take 
place (Hjarvard 2002a).
Definition
The uses of the concept ‘mediatization’ in the research cited above point to a number of 
central aspects of the interaction between media and society, which also form a part of

----- Page 9 (native) -----
113
The Mediatization of Society
the definition of ‘mediatization’ proposed here. Previous uses of the concept, however, 
lack an articulated or even common definition; in addition, there are a number of aspects 
that have yet to be spelled out. In some cases (e.g., Väliverronen, 2001) ‘mediatization’ 
has been used loosely to refer more generally to the successive growth in media’s influ-
ence in contemporary society; in other cases, the intention has been to develop a proper 
theory of the ways media relate to politics (e.g., Asp, 1986, 1990). Another fuzzy spot 
is on what level or to which spheres the concept is applied. Some use ‘mediatization’ to 
describe developments in a given sector (politics, science, or consumer culture), whereas 
others use it as an overarching characteristic of a new situation in society, whether under 
modernity (Thompson, 1995) or postmodernity (Baudrillard, 1981).
Here, ‘mediatization’ is used as the central concept in a theory of the both intensified 
and changing importance of the media in culture and society. Thus, the concept is more 
than a label for a set of phenomena that bear witness to increased media influence and 
it should also relate to other, central sociological theories. Mediatization theory not 
only needs to be well-specified, comprehensive and coherent, but it must also prove 
its usefulness as an analytical tool and its empirical validity through concrete studies 
of mediatization in selected areas. Thus, a theory of mediatization has to be able to 
describe overall developmental trends in society across different contexts and, by me-
ans of concrete analysis, demonstrate the impacts of media on various institutions and 
spheres of human activity. This latter task falls outside the scope of the present article, 
but for empirical analyses of the mediatization of toys and children’s play, language, 
and religion, see Hjarvard (2004, 2007, 2008).
By the mediatization of society, we understand the process whereby society to an 
increasing degree is submitted to, or becomes dependent on, the media and their logic. 
This process is characterized by a duality in that the media have become integrated into 
the operations of other social institutions, while they also have acquired the status of 
social institutions in their own right. As a consequence, social interaction – within the 
respective institutions, between institutions, and in society at large – take place via the 
media. The term ‘media logic’ refers to the institutional and technological modus ope-
randi of the media, including the ways in which media distribute material and symbolic 
resources and operate with the help of formal and informal rules. The logic of the media 
influences the form communication takes, such as how politics is described in media 
texts (Altheide & Snow, 1979); media logic also influences the nature and function of 
social relations as well as the sender, the content and the receivers of the communication. 
The extent to which the situation amounts to actual submission or only greater depen-
dence on media will vary between institutions and sectors of society.
Mediatization is no universal process that characterizes all societies. It is primarily 
a development that has accelerated particularly in the last years of the twentieth cen-
tury in modern, highly industrialized, and chiefly western societies, i.e., Europe, USA, 
Japan, Australia and so forth. As globalization progresses, more and more regions and 
cultures will be affected by mediatization, but there may be considerable differences in 
the influence mediatization exerts. Globalization is related to mediatization in at least 
two ways: on the one hand, globalization presumes the existence of the technical means 
to extend communication and interaction over long distances and, on the other hand, it 
propels the process of mediatization by institutionalizing mediated communication and 
interaction in many new contexts.
Mediatization, it should be noted, is a non-normative concept. As noted earlier, Maz-
zoleni and Schulz (1999) associate mediatization directly with more problematic aspects

----- Page 10 (native) -----
114
Stig Hjarvard
of media influence on politics. Indeed, there is a general tendency in both research and 
public discussion to presume that institutions’ dependence on the media is essentially 
questionable. But to presume a priori that mediatization is negative poses something 
of a problem. At worst such a normative judgment can lead to a general narrative of 
decline, in which media influence becomes synonymous with a decline in the political 
public sphere or the disintegration of civil society. Habermas’ (1989) theory of structural 
change in the public sphere is a paradigmatic example of such a normative approach to 
media influence, and Habermas has since explained that his earlier views on the subject 
were too pessimistic (Habermas, 1990). Whether mediatization has positive or negative 
consequences cannot be determined in general terms; it is a concrete, analytical question 
that needs to be addressed in terms of specific contexts, where the influence of specific 
media over certain institutions is gauged. The question also requires an examination of 
the normative points of departure if we are to be able to speak of positive or negative 
consequences.
Mediatization is not be confused with the broader concept of mediation. Mediation 
refers to communication via a medium, the intervention of which can affect both the 
message and the relationship between sender and receiver. For example, if a politician 
chooses to use a blog instead of a newspaper to communicate with his constituency, the 
choice may well influence the form and content of his or her communication, while the 
communicative relationship between the politicians and the electorate will be altered. 
However, the use of a medium, whether blog or newspaper, will not necessarily have any 
notable effect on politics as a social institution. Mediation describes the concrete act of 
communication by means of a medium in a specific social context. By contrast, medi-
atization refers to a more long-lasting process, whereby social and cultural institutions 
and modes of interaction are changed as a consequence of the growth of the media’s 
influence. It should be noted, however, that some scholars – e.g., Altheide and Snow 
(1988:195) – use the term, ‘mediation’ in the sense ‘mediatization’ is used here.
In sociological theory, meanwhile, one finds a more general use of the term, ‘me-
dium’. Money can, for example, be described as a medium of exchange. Similarly, in 
linguistic or psychological contexts speech may be considered a medium of expression. 
Although useful in their respective contexts, these meanings of the term ‘medium’ are 
not relevant here, where the term, ‘media’ draw upon media and communication studies. 
As such it is used to designate technologies that allow people to communicate over space 
and/or time. Furthermore, we use the plural form. Media are not a uniform phenomenon; 
each medium has its own characteristics, and they vary in both use and content between 
cultures and societies. The consequences of mediatization, then, depend on both the 
context and the characteristics of the medium or media in question.
Within the process of mediatization, we may distinguish between a direct (strong) 
and an indirect (weak) form of mediatization (Hjarvard, 2004). Direct mediatization 
refers to situations where formerly non-mediated activity converts to a mediated form, 
i.e., the activity is performed through interaction with a medium. A simple example of 
direct mediatization is the successive transformation of chess from physical chessboard 
to computer game. Formerly dependent on the players’ physical presence around a chess 
board, chess is increasingly played with the help of software on a computer. In many 
ways, the game remains the same: the rules are the same, the chess board has the same 
appearance, and so forth. But use of a computer opens up numerous new options: you can 
play against a computer instead of another person; you can play with distant opponents via 
internet; you can store and consult earlier matches, etc., and these new options gradually

----- Page 11 (native) -----
115
The Mediatization of Society
influence the experience of playing chess as well as the cultural context in which the game 
is played. A more complicated example of direct mediatization is ‘on-line banking’ via 
internet. All kinds of banking tasks and services (payments, loans, trade in currency and 
stocks, financial analysis) can be undertaken through interaction with a computer linked 
to internet, and the medium has palpably expanded the options available to both banks 
and their customers; meanwhile, the behavior of both parties has changed.
Indirect mediatization is when a given activity is increasingly influenced with respect 
to form, content, or organization by mediagenic symbols or mechanisms. Again, let 
us consider a simple example: the burgeoning merchandising industry that surrounds 
hamburger restaurants may be taken as an instance of indirect mediatization. A visit to 
Burger King or McDonald’s is no longer simply an eating experience; it now entails 
a considerable exposure to films and cartoon animations, and as much as the oppor-
tunity to eat a hamburger, a visit to one of these restaurants may – especially for the 
youngest guests – mean an opportunity to collect dolls representing the characters in 
the films they see. Of course, you can still have your meal and not expose yourself to 
the media entertainment offered, but the cultural context surrounding the burger, much 
of the attraction of visiting the restaurant, and so forth have to do with the presence of 
media, in both symbolic and economic terms. A more complicated example of indirect 
mediatization is the development of intertextual discourse between media and other 
institutions in society. For example, Danes’ knowledge of the USA is highly indebted to 
media narratives (fact and fiction) about the country; as a consequence, Danish political 
discussions regarding the USA are interwoven with media representations of American 
culture, mores and history.
Direct and indirect forms of mediatization will often operate in combination, so 
that it is not always easy to distinguish them. The need to distinguish between the two 
primarily arises in analytical contexts. Direct mediatization makes visible how a given 
social activity is substituted, i.e., transformed from a non-mediated activity to a medi-
ated form, and in such cases it is rather easy to establish a ‘before’ and an ‘after’ and 
examine the differences. Where the media thereafter serve as a necessary interface for 
performance of the social activity, we are dealing with a strong form of mediatization. 
Indirect mediatization does not necessarily affect the ways in which people perform a 
given activity. Consequently, indirect mediatization of an activity or sphere will be of a 
more subtle and general character and relate to the general increase in social institutions’ 
reliance on communication resources. This is not to say that indirect mediatization is any 
less important or that it, viewed from a societal perspective, has less impact. Indirect 
mediatization is at least as important as the direct forms.
The Media as an Independent Institution
Mediatization, as defined here, means not only that the media play a role of their own 
determination, but that they at once have attained the status of independent institution 
and provide the means by which other social institutions and actors communicate. The 
media intervene into, and influence the activity of other institutions, such as the family, 
politics, organized religion, etc., while they also provide a ‘commons’ for society as a 
whole, that is, virtual shared fora for communication that other institutions and actors 
increasingly use as arenas for their interaction. In order to treat these social consequences 
on a theoretical level, we shall first consider mediatization in relation to sociological 
concepts regarding institutions and interaction.

----- Page 12 (native) -----
116
Stig Hjarvard
Institutions stand for the stable, predictable elements in modern society; they con-
stitute the framework for human communication and action in a given sphere of human 
life at a given time and place. Institutions provide for the reproduction of society within 
the sphere in question, giving it a certain degree of autonomy and a distinct identity 
in relation to other spheres. As an institution the family organizes a number of very 
central aspects of life, such as love, upbringing, rest/recreation and nutrition. Politics, 
another institution, creates the framework for collective discussion and decision-ma-
king concerning shared resources, norms and activities. The more detailed discussion 
of institutions that follows takes its point of departure in the sociological structuration 
theory proposed by Anthony Giddens (1984), which in contrast to macro sociological 
theory (e.g., Parsons’ or Luhmann’s system theory) or micro-sociological approaches 
(e.g., symbolic interactionism) affords the possibility to describe the dynamic interaction 
between institutions and personal interaction. As noted earlier, mediatization itself is 
characterized by a duality in that it intervenes in human interaction in many different 
contexts, while it also institutionalizes the media as an autonomous entity with its own 
logic. A sociological theory of mediatization must therefore be able to give an account 
of this duality and to describe the linkages between institution and interaction.
According to Giddens, institutions are characterized by two central features: rules and 
allocations of resources. Together, rules and resource allocations invest the institution 
with a certain autonomy in relation to the world around it. Rules may be implicit and 
practical, i.e., outgrowths of so-called tacit knowledge as to proper behavior in a range 
of situations within the institution in question. Or, they may be explicit and formal; 
they may be codified in law or take the form of stated objectives or rules of procedure 
as, for example, in a school or a firm. Institutions in modern, complex societies distin-
guish themselves by a high degree of steering by rules, both implicit and explicit. The 
existence of rules implies, furthermore, that the institutions monitor compliance and 
can apply sanctions, should the rules be broken. Even the sanctions may be of a more 
or less explicit or formal character, whereas many rules are internalized by individuals 
and remain for the most part implicit. The sanctions on violations of rules of the latter 
kind are generally feelings of embarrassment or guilt or perhaps criticism on the part 
of colleagues or family members. Informal rules often have the character of norms and 
are maintained and sanctioned by gossip, ridicule and scolding.
By virtue of formalization itself formal rules generally lead to explicit sanctions 
that are well-defined and known in advance; in some cases breaking such rules may be 
prosecuted. Like other institutions, media, too, are steered by rules. They are subject 
to numerous laws and regulations, some of which apply to other institutions, as well, 
whereas others are specifically tailored to the activity of the medium in question. Ex-
amples of the latter include editorial responsibility, freedom of the press legislation, and 
rules pertaining to libel. Media have also drafted their own codes of good practice and 
sanctioning systems such as press councils, readers’ ombudsmen, and so forth. Some 
media companies have publicly declared their guiding principles and the public role 
they strive to play. Concrete praxis in media production is largely steered by informal 
rules that are expressed in routines, habits and implicit norms of professionalism. Thus, 
news journalists obey rules when they select their stories (criteria of newsworthiness), 
when they interact with news sources, while they incorporate norms like objectivity into 
their news production as a strategic ritual (Tuchman, 1972).
As for the other prime characteristic of an institution, allocation of resources, Giddens 
distinguishes two kinds of resources: material resources and authority. Institutions can

----- Page 13 (native) -----
117
The Mediatization of Society
administer material resources in the form of, for example, raw materials, buildings and 
facilities, manpower and knowledge; a delegation of authority also takes place within 
the institution so that it is clear who within the institution is in charge of the material 
resources, who may speak on behalf of the institution, who may interact with whom, and 
so forth. If we consider the family, for example: parents generally control the family’s 
material resources, like the home and the car, and the law gives parents authority over, 
and liability for, the children (under the legal age of adulthood) in the household, as 
well. (Parental authority may also be regulated in law; some behavior toward children, 
such as physical and mental abuse, may be prohibited.) Similarly, media, too, are cha-
racterized by allocations of resources; in production the individual media company will 
allocate engineering resources, personnel, travel, etc., to the various departments, while 
on the reception side, receivers will acquire the necessary hardware and, perhaps not 
least, devote their time and attention to the media. As shall be elaborated further in the 
following, mediatization implies that other institutions to an increasing degree become 
dependent on resources that the media control, and they will have to submit to some of 
the rules the media operate by in order to gain access to those resources.
The development of the media into independent institutions should be seen as an 
instance of the increasing differentiation and division of labor that characterizes many 
spheres and aspects of modern society. Pre-modern, agrarian society was characterized 
by a low degree of specialization; most people lived in rural villages and one’s family 
and ‘birth’ largely determined the course of one’s life from the cradle to the grave. As 
nation states emerged, and with industrialization and urbanization, more and more in-
stitutions that accommodated different aspects of life split off from the undifferentiated 
‘whole’: science was divorced from religion, and the labor market developed an ever 
greater number of specialty occupations and professions. Media played an important role 
in this early modern era inasmuch as they made it possible to detach an activity from its 
local context and to create a specialized forum on a national or international level. Books 
and periodicals helped to lay the foundation for the expansion of science and technology; 
newspapers helped to create a democratic, political public sphere; and literature and 
popular magazines contributed to the development of a cultural public sphere.
But, in this phase of social development the media were yet to become independent 
institutions. Instead, they were chiefly instruments in the hands of other institutions. 
As political parties were formed in the late nineteenth century, they began to publish 
newspapers which gave rise to the system of the party press that characterized Denmark, 
where each party had its own paper in all the principal towns. Very few of these papers 
had a journalistic editorial board that operated independent of the party/owner. On the 
contrary, there were intimate bonds between parties and papers, indeed, editors were 
generally members of the party leadership. To consider a Danish example: Viggo Hørup, 
nineteenth-century Social Liberal politician and founder of the Copenhagen daily, Po-
litiken. Hørup’s political work and his work as editor of Politiken were two faces of the 
same coin. When he spoke to one or another group one day, the text of the speech was 
very likely to grace the pages of the paper the following day. Similarly, institutions in the 
fields of science, the Arts, and jurisprudence all had their own channels of publication, 
over which they exerted editorial control.
The advent of radio in the 1920s marks the point when media started to address a 
generalized public, whereupon they gradually assumed the character of cultural insti-
tutions. By this we mean that media are no longer instruments of any given institution 
or special interest, but keep an arm’s length away from the various social institutions.

----- Page 14 (native) -----
118
Stig Hjarvard
As public service broadcasting institutions radio and, later, television were to serve the 
public interest. They should make the work of other public institutions known to the 
general public and offer a balanced representation of various interests in the fields of 
politics, the Arts, science and so forth. That radio broadcasting was organized in the 
form of a monopoly had to do with the nature of the technology and characteristics 
of the medium itself, which, in the 1920s, meant that it was physically impossible to 
create the multiplicity of radio channels that characterized the press, for example. But 
monopoly was also a choice that was well in keeping with other public and national po-
licies; it was also congenial to requirements that the new medium be charged to educate 
its listeners. At about the same time, the press underwent a development in a similar 
direction. In Denmark, a process that would lead to the demise of the party press and 
the birth of independent journalistic media got under way with the reform of Politiken 
under the new Editor-in-Chief Henrik Cavling in 1905. In the interwar period numerous 
other newspapers followed Politiken’s lead, loosening their ties to political parties in 
favor of a more journalistic platform. News reporting predominated, and papers, now 
less partisan, addressed the entire spectrum of readers. ‘News’ was distinguished from 
‘views’: opinion-based genres like editorials and debate pages evolved, while the rest 
of the paper was imbued with new ideals of unbiased, non-partisan treatment of news 
material. Newspapers also gradually extended the scope of their coverage to include 
cultural life, ‘the home and family’ and hobbies and leisure activities.
The decline and ultimate demise of the party press actually extended over most of 
the twentieth century, but the point in the present context is that the press, once it adop-
ted the ‘omnibus’ concept, began its development into a cultural institution. No longer 
an instrument of other institutions, the press began treating various social institutions 
(politics, the Arts, family, etc.) and special interests from a more general and common 
perspective. The underlying dynamic in this evolutionary process differed from that be-
hind the development of broadcast media. Whereas radio and television were established 
as public institutions and given a ‘mission’ to educate and enlighten, the establishment 
of the omnibus press was a step in an essentially commercial development, where 
advertising revenues were a driving force. Be that as it may, in this concrete historical 
context the outcome was that newspapers became cultural institutions, appealing to all 
and offering something for everyone. 
Attaining the status of cultural institutions was the first step in the media’s further 
move toward independence from other institutions. It implied a gradual professionaliza-
tion of media practices, in which the establishment of journalism as a profession in its own 
right, with professional training and the development of ethical codes gave the profession 
a degree of autonomy (Kristensen, 2000). A key feature of journalists’ self-perception is 
an adversarial stance vis-à-vis political and commercial interests, which is operationalized 
in the norm of keeping an arm’s length distance from one’s news sources.
The 1980s witnessed the start of a series of structural changes in the media sector, in 
Denmark as in many other parts of Western Europe, which presaged the transition from 
the status of cultural institution to that of media institution. The end of the monopoly 
position of public service channels on the air waves, and the expansion of broadcasting 
services via satellite and cable created a more commercial and competitive climate 
in radio and television, in which market forces challenged television’s identity and 
importance as a cultural institution. The 1990s saw the deregulation of the telecommu-
nications sector, and the rapid expansion of mobile telephony and the internet suddenly 
rendered the media system much more complex. Many of the newer media are only

----- Page 15 (native) -----
119
The Mediatization of Society
loosely regulated, if at all, as to purpose and content. The press, too, has undergone con-
siderable change in response to the introduction of free sheets distributed at mass transit 
nodes. In Denmark gratis newspapers attained market leadership in the space of no more 
than a few years, and they have been very successful in many other countries, as well. 
Subscribed morning and midday papers have suffered a steady decline in circulation, 
and on the whole the traditional ‘hard copy’ press is steered by market logic to a much 
greater extent today than previously.
Thus, as a consequence of the trends of these past two decades, the media are much 
less cultural institutions, in the sense of institutions that in the public interest represent 
other institutions. A stronger market orientation has led media to focus more closely on 
servicing their own readers and audiences. This has been said to imply a greater measure of 
receiver steering of the media, in the sense that attention to receivers has taken precedence 
over deference to other social institutions. Newspapers, radio, television and internet still 
devote space and time to politics, the Arts and cultural life, but to a lesser degree on those 
institutions’ terms or from the perspective of ‘public enlightenment’. Other institutions 
have instead become the raw material for the product the media serve to their readers, 
viewers and listeners. Where media in early days were sender-steered, e.g., steered by 
particular interests in the days of the party press or by the terms of public service broad-
casting concessions, as media institutions they are in large part steered by the interests of 
their readers, viewers and listeners, their market demand and purchasing power.
This is not to say that the media have become private enterprises like any manu-
facturer of, say, furniture or bacon; they continue to perform collective functions in 
society. The media provide the communicative fora, both private and public, that other 
institutions depend on for their communication with the public and other institutions, 
and for their internal communication. The duality of having broken away from other 
institutions’ operations, yet still serve collective communication functions in society give 
the media central importance to society as a whole. Therefore, the logic that guides the 
media cannot be reduced to a logic of the market alone. Yes, the media sell products to 
consumers, but they also service their public, which includes other institutions. Thus, 
families use the media to orient themselves as to norms for their children’s upbringing 
and practical furnishing of children’s rooms, and media are used for family members’ 
communication with one another. Political parties use the media to communicate with 
other parties and the general public, and to communicate within the party, as well. 
To be able to serve these collective functions, the media still emphasize the concern 
for the public interest that imbued them in their roles as cultural institutions, and which 
continued to imbue the development of journalism as a partly autonomous profession, 
where the media could make claims of impartiality, objectivity, and so forth. But, whe-
reas in the era when the media were cultural institutions concern for the public interest 
grew out of the mission to enlighten, a project that engaged the whole of society, the 
concern today is primarily internalized as part of the sense of professionalism shared 
by journalists and their colleagues in independent media institutions. In sum, the media 
interact with all other social institutions, but from a position of greater autonomy than 
a pure market orientation would dictate.
Table 1 summarizes the institutional transformations of the media. It is a highly 
simplified account and takes no account the variations that individual media display. In 
all three periods there have been media that operate under the superintendence of other 
institutions (e.g., scientific journals), just as, ever since the 1880’s, some papers offering 
light entertainment have been primarily market-oriented.

----- Page 16 (native) -----
120
Stig Hjarvard
Means of Interaction
So far, we have defined what mediatization is and how it came to be; in the following we 
shall turn to examine the ways in which mediatization affects society. Fundamentally, 
it is a question of the media intervening into the social interaction between individuals 
within a given institution (e.g., between family members via mobile phones), between 
institutions (e.g., through telecommunications media that allow one to work from home), 
and in society at large (e.g., by publicizing and observing events of importance to the 
community, be they festive, threatening or tragic). In this section we shall consider in-
teraction on the micro-social level; in the next, we will turn to the macro-social level.
Social interaction consists of communication and action. The media, of course, are 
means of communication, i.e., an exchange of meaning between two or more parties. As 
linguistic pragmatics (Austin, 1962; Searle 1969) has shown, communication may be 
viewed as a form of action: by communicating, people exchange not only information, 
but they influence one another and their mutual relationship by, for example, promising, 
confirming, rejecting, deciding, and so forth. In addition to acts of communication, media 
also permit forms of social action that once required both parties’ physical presence: 
one can buy or sell, work or play. Media may also interact with other actions outside 
the media, such as elections or acts of terror.
The ways in which media intervene into social interaction depends on the concrete 
characteristics of the medium in question, that is, both material and technical features 
and social and aesthetic qualities. A medium’s characteristics and its relation to social in-
teraction may be illuminated in terms of perception psychologist James Gibson’s (1979) 
concept of affordances. Gibson himself does not apply the concept to media, but uses 
it in a general theory of how people and animals perceive and interact with the world 
around them. The idea is that neither human beings nor animals sense their surroundings 
passively; instead, they approach the world and the objects in it in an action-oriented 
and practical mode. Any given physical object, by virtue of its material characteristics 
(shape, size, consistency, etc.), lends itself to a set of uses. According to Gibson, the 
- 1920 
1920-1980
1980- 
Persuasion and 
agitation on the 
part of specific 
interests in the 
specific institu-
tion
Representa-
tion of various 
institutions in a 
public arena
Servicing of au-
diences, sales to 
target groups in 
a differentiated 
media system
Party press, sci-
entific journals, 
religious and arts 
publications etc.
 
Public service 
radio and televi-
sion (monopoly), 
omnibus press
Commercial and 
competitive me-
dia, satellite tv, 
Internet, mobile 
media
Steered by parti-
cular interests
Public steering
Media professio-
nalism
Media as instru-
ments of other 
institutions
Media as a cul-
tural institution
Media as an in-
dependent media 
institution
Dominant 
period
Institutional  
character 
Dominant logic
Media system
Purposes and 
objectives
Table 1.	 The Institutional Development of Media

----- Page 17 (native) -----
121
The Mediatization of Society
‘affordances’ of an object are these potential uses. For some animals a tree represents 
shade; others may feed on its leaves, birds may decide to nest in it. Some objects invite 
certain uses: a flat stone begs to be ‘skipped’ across still water; a closed door is to be 
opened. Some uses are practically prescribed, whereas others are ruled out. In sum: the 
affordances of any given object make certain actions possible, exclude others and, in 
sum, structure the interaction between actor and object. 
Furthermore, whether or not an object’s affordances are made use of depends on 
characteristics of the human or animal that interacts with the object. With the help of 
a ladder you can climb up or down, but only if you have use of your limbs. Thus, af-
fordances are also defined by the extent to which the characteristics of object and user 
‘fit’. In his study of human use of technology and other manufactured objects, Norman 
(1990) points to a third determining factor, besides the material or objective characte-
ristics of object and user. He introduces the concept of ‘perceived affordance’ in order 
to incorporate the relational aspect of affordance, where the crucial factor is the user’s 
psychological evaluation of the object in relation to his/her objectives. Thus, an object’s 
affordances are subject to the user’s motives/objectives and, in extension, to the cul-
tural conventions that surround the project, as well. In the light of Gibson’s (1979) and 
Norman’s (1990) conceptual work, we recognize media as technologies, each of which 
has a set of affordances that facilitate, limit and structure communication and action. 
For example: Radio made it possible for listeners to experience musical performances to 
an extent and with a sound quality that was unprecedented. Before radio, concert music 
was available almost exclusively to a small, urban elite. But organizational factors in the 
institution of radio also limited the amount of music and the range of genres that were 
offered, while program schedules, signal range, and the quality of one’s loudspeaker 
gave structure to the listening experience: when one listened, where and how one sat 
to listen, and so forth.
Perhaps most of all, the media make it possible for people to interact across distances, 
that is, without their having to be in the same place at the same time. An examination of 
the differences between interaction via the media and non-mediated interaction face-to-
face reveals the ways in which media alter the interaction. Thompson (1995) distinguis-
hes three types of interaction: face-to-face interaction, mediated quasi-interaction, and 
mediated interaction. In the case of face-to-face interaction, both verbal and non-verbal 
expressions are available to all parties present. Mass media, like newspapers, radio and 
television, provide what Thompson calls mediated quasi-interaction, by which he means 
that the communication addresses an unknown, unspecified group of people who, what 
is more, are unable to interact with the sender. By contrast, a telephone conversation 
is an instance of mediated interaction: the conversation takes place between identified 
individuals, all of whom can interact on an equal footing. Thus, according to Thompson, 
mediated quasi-interaction is monologic, whereas mediated interaction is dialogic.
This latter distinction is important, but Thompson’s choice of the term, “quasi-” 
(which the dictionary defines as “resembling; seemingly, but not actually”) is a bit 
unfortunate in that it allows the interpretation that a reading a newspaper article or wat-
ching a television program only seems like interaction, whereas talking on the phone or 
face-to-face is true interaction. From a sociological point of view, neither the interaction 
between reader and article nor that between viewer and television program is any less 
true or meaningful than a conversation about the article or program over the breakfast 
table the next day. The circumstance that mass communication does not allow the recei-
ver to respond immediately to the sender does not mean that no action or communication

----- Page 18 (native) -----
122
Stig Hjarvard
on the part of the receiver in relation to an article or program takes place. Exposure to 
a newspaper or a television channel itself represents an act that has social significance 
for receiver and sender alike. In the latter case, circulation statistics or ratings, which 
have tangible commercial value. Furthermore, the reader or viewer may very well store 
the message they have read or seen and relate it to others. 
In more general terms: we should bear in mind that social interaction does not ne-
cessarily imply that the opportunities to express oneself or to take action be equally 
distributed among the parties involved. This applies to non-mediated, direct interaction 
such as that between speaker and participant in a meeting or between participants in a 
court proceeding, where the opportunities for expression may be very controlled and, 
indeed, deliberately unequal. Such inequality does not render either the meeting or the 
proceeding ‘quasi’; it simply reflects the fact that in any social interaction, be it medi-
ated or direct, the parties assume social roles that confer different degrees of latitude 
with regard to personal expression and influence over the course of the interaction or its 
outcome. The media do, however, have an impact on the social roles in the interaction 
in that access to the medium itself and the modes of interaction it makes available to 
the participants, affect the respective participants’ ability to communicate and act. Since 
media play a greater role in an increasing number of contexts, social roles are also eva-
luated in terms of the access to media coverage they are able to mobilize. 
Finally, we should note that Thompson’s differentiation of three forms of interaction 
was inspired by an earlier, now bygone, media landscape. Traditional mass media like 
newspapers and radio and television channels have developed, and continue to launch, 
new means by which receivers can respond to, or even participate in, their communica-
tion – e.g., via sms, e-mail or blogs, while new interpersonal media like mobile telep-
hones, sms and e-mail also enable one sender to distribute messages to many receivers 
in a manner analogous to mass media. Rather than adopting Thompson’s terminology, 
then, it seems more satisfactory generally to distinguish between non-mediated (face-
to-face) and mediated communication and then to specify the subcategories in terms of 
parameters like one-way/two-way, interpersonal/mass, text/audio/visual, and so forth.
Media alter Interaction
Mediated interaction is neither more nor less real than non-mediated interaction, but 
the circumstance that mediated interaction takes place between individuals who do not 
share the same physical space changes the relations between the participants. If we start 
with American sociologist Erwin Goffman’s (1959) description of social interaction 
between people who are in physical proximity to one another, what differs in situations 
of mediated interaction becomes apparent. Goffman uses the metaphor of the theatre and 
describes the interaction that takes place on the stage as performance. He distinguishes 
between what takes place on the stage and what goes on backstage, i.e., action and com-
munication that is not open to the participants. In addition to their verbal and non-verbal 
(facial expressions, gestures, body language, etc.) communication participants will also 
use various accessories or ‘props’ (costumes, cigarettes, tables and chairs) and define 
territories (physical and symbolic) between them and the other participants as part of 
the interaction. Typically, participants collaborate in the interaction, trying to reach a 
common definition of the situation at hand in order to achieve a common goal. 
In contrast to face-to-face communication, media can extend interaction in time and 
space: media allow instant communication with individuals anywhere in the world.

----- Page 19 (native) -----
123
The Mediatization of Society
Mediated interaction does not require the parties to be in the same space at the same time. 
Media also change the ability of individual actors to steer how the social situation is 
defined, to steer the use of verbal and non-verbal communication and accessories, and to 
define territorial boundaries in the interaction. This has far-reaching consequences, three 
of which are of interest here: First, media make it considerably easier for individuals to 
‘act’ on several stages simultaneously; second, participants can more easily optimize the 
social interaction to their personal advantage; and third, the mutual relations between the 
participants, including norms of acceptable behavior (deference, tone, etc.) change. 
As for the first consequence, media not only enable people to interact over long dis-
tances, they also make it possible for an individual to keep several social interactions 
going at the same time: one can talk to others in the family while watching television, 
give advice to one’s children by phone from the office, and so forth. Internet has multip-
lied the possibilities in this regard; given web access, a person can keep windows open 
to any number of interactions: work, banking transactions, shopping, communicating 
online with family and friends, etc. In Goffman’s terminology, thanks to media, we can 
switch between stage and backstage in several, parallel situations. It has never been 
absolutely impossible to take part in more than one face-to-face interaction at the same 
time. Bringing children to the office is a well-known phenomenon. But it is extremely 
taxing to carry on several face-to-face interactions simultaneously, and in most cases 
to do so would violate the norm of collaboration that generally applies. Via media one 
can more easily divide one’s attention between different social scenes, in part because 
some media are designed to fade into the background while one’s attention is directed 
elsewhere: mobile phones can be made to vibrate instead of ring, you can check for sms 
at a glance during a meeting, your radio may be playing in the background while you 
work, drive your car, and so forth.
Media allow actors to optimize social interaction to their own advantage in two 
principal ways: they lighten the burden of the actor’s social relations, and they permit 
a greater measure of control over the exchange of information. They lighten the burden 
by making it possible to establish closer contact with less of a personal investment. The 
popularity of television as a pastime evenings and weekends has to do with the fact that 
the medium offers entertainment and vicarious company without requiring much in the 
way of money, attention or effort to make the situation a success. One might instead 
invite friends over for the evening, but that would require a lot more effort in the form 
of preparing food, being sociable, etc., whereas the pay-off in terms of sociability and 
entertainment is less certain. Meeting face-to-face has its perks, of course, but in most 
other respects television is a much easier and surer way to be entertained. Similarly, 
sending e-mail messages to one’s colleagues at work is often preferable to looking in 
on them, even though they may be just a few doors away. An e-mail allows you to steer 
the interaction more than is possible in a conversation, which often takes longer and 
demands some degree of courtesy, and there is always the risk that your colleague will 
want to talk about another matter entirely.
Whereas face-to-face interaction gives everyone involved the opportunity to see 
and hear everything done and said, media make it possible to manage information to 
and from the participants. For example, the sender can decide when it suits him to re-
spond to others’ messages, and he has more control over the image of himself that he 
projects to others. As Goffman points out, there is an essential imbalance between an 
individual’s ability to manage the impression that he makes on other participants, and 
the others’ ability to examine and evaluate the impression conveyed. Goffman makes a

----- Page 20 (native) -----
124
Stig Hjarvard
distinction between the impression we give and the impression we give off. Typically, 
we will try to give a favorable impression of ourselves when talking to others. But we 
also give off a number of other impressions, alongside our intended communication, 
either subconsciously or because we have failed to control our message well enough. Our 
speech may give one impression, while our body language conveys another, conflicting 
one. Goffman comments that we need to be very skilled performing artists to be able 
to manage all aspects of our self-representation. Most receivers, by contrast, are fully 
equipped to analyze and evaluate others’ behavior, to find faults or inconsistencies. It 
is in this regard that media can help us manage the impressions we project to the world 
around us and, generally speaking, the narrower the channel of communication a me-
dium offers, the easier it is to manage the communication. As a consequence, we find 
the paradoxical circumstance that even though media offer increasingly broad channels 
of communication (high definition visuals, five-channel stereo, etc.) people often choose 
to communicate through media that afford only a narrow channel of communication, 
such as sms, e-mail or web messenger.
As for the third area of impact, viz. changes in the relations and norms that prevail 
in interaction, we need first to consider the norm regulating mechanisms in face-to-face 
encounters. Goffman points out that during social interaction, the participants invest 
considerable effort in deferring to one another. When people meet face-to-face, they 
negotiate to establish the kind of social situation they are party to, whereby certain social 
roles and behaviors are considered relevant and acceptable to the situation, and others 
not. In order to avoid embarrassment (due, for example, to having misapprehended the 
situation and behaving inappropriately, which gives rise to ridicule and/or scolding) 
the participants engage in a considerable amount of facework, which has the purpose 
of preserving the participants’ dignity in the situation at hand. The purpose of facework 
is to ensure that others avoid losing face, but also, and not least, it is work individuals 
undertake to preserve their own dignity, as well. Alternatively phrased, social norms are 
reproduced in the social situation, by participants’ helping one another observe them. In 
face-to-face interactions, then, many actions and reactions only occur under particular 
circumstances or are tabu. Thus, in social interaction we try to avoid blatant violations 
of a norm that might result in a loss of face through ridicule, gossip or scolding. Ridicule 
is a form of humor that is used to set the bounds of social acceptability and to punish 
those who transgress those bounds (Billig, 2005), but it cannot be exercised without 
consequences for the cohesion of the group. To gossip about people when they are 
present in the room is not acceptable, as to gossip in itself is to challenge the dignity 
of an individual. It is, however, more acceptable to gossip about people who are not 
physically present (Bergmann, 1993). Finally, reproof (scolding in its varying degrees) 
typically represents a threat to the harmony in a group, and for that reason, reprimands, 
etc., generally take place behind closed doors, unless, of course, the objective is to set 
an example, to imprint a norm on a larger group. 
Mediated interaction extends and complicates the use of territories in the interaction, 
including the ways in which we define ourselves in relation to the other participants. 
It also regulates access to information between different territories in the interaction. 
The medium links different physical localities and social contexts in a single interactive 
space, but it does not do away with the reality of the separate physical and social con-
texts. Television, telephones and internet all bridge distances, but the users have hardly 
left their sofas or desks to enter into the interactive space. Thus, the media both link 
the participants in the interaction and, at the same time, create a distance between the

----- Page 21 (native) -----
125
The Mediatization of Society
virtual ‘stage’ of the interactive space and the participants’ respective place-bound social 
contexts, of which they remain a part. This phenomenon is particularly apparent in the 
case of television, where the sender and receiver situation are distinctly separate, but 
it is also present in interpersonal communication via internet or mobile phones, where 
lack of access to the fullness of the interpersonal exchange reminds us of the distance 
between the parties.
The de-linking or distance between place-bound social situations that surround the 
user and the simultaneous establishment of a mediated situation means that the norm-
enforcing mechanisms of ridicule, gossip and scolding can assume new forms. Because 
participants in a mediated interaction lack full access to the other participants’ behavior, 
the individual’s place-bound context may assume the character of ‘backstage’ in rela-
tion to the ongoing mediated interaction. It is not, however, a backstage in Goffman’s 
original sense since it can equally be ‘on stage’, i.e., the prime focus of the individual’s 
attention, and actually frame how he or she interacts on the virtual media ‘stage’. Sms-
communication (texting) between a group of teenagers may, for example, be instigated 
primarily for the entertainment of some of the participants, who, together with friends 
in their physical social situations, make fun of others’ contributions to the ‘conversation’ 
behind their backs, without those others knowing that the messages they send are made 
the butt of derisive comments. Similarly, television viewers can mimic the dialects or 
make fun of the appearance of people they see on the screen. Internet also lends itself 
to more insidious forms of ridicule, and even outright mobbing, via websites, sms and 
telephone cameras.
The distance or de-linking of interaction when it takes place via a medium leads to 
changes, extension and complications of the relations between the ‘stage’ and ‘backstage’ 
of the interaction and, as a consequence, norm-enforcing mechanisms can develop in 
ways that would be perceived as illegitimate and, possibly, even gross violations of 
others’ integrity, were they applied in a face-to-face situation. Whereas gossip about 
a participant in an interaction is not voiced openly in face-to-face encounters, it may 
be spread behind the person’s back ‘backstage’ (Bergmann, 1993), several media and 
media genres publish gossip: magazines, reality television and blogs shamelessly spread 
all kinds of gossip, particularly about celebrities. Moreover, in addition to filling these 
media’s columns and air time, the media’s gossip is also a legitimate topic in face-to-face 
situations, where such subjects normally would not be fitting (Hjarvard, 2002b). Use 
of norm-enforcing mechanisms in media does not make them any less effective, and in 
some case they may be even more effective because the media make ridicule, gossip or 
scolding publicly accessible. But because of the distance or de-linking that characterizes 
mediated interaction, application of the mechanisms in media seems – from the point of 
view of the viewer, reader or user, that is – less intrusive and less consequential to the 
individual than if they had been applied in a face-to-face situation.
The Interfaces between Institutions
Whereas mediatization on the microsocial level is evidenced in its structuring impacts 
on human interaction, on the macro level we find impacts on how institutions relate to 
one another due to the intervention of media. In general terms we can distinguish three 
functions that the media serve in this regard: they constitute an interface in the relations 
within and between institutions; television newscasts bring politics into people’s sitting 
rooms, and advertising is an important platform for private firms’ communication with

----- Page 22 (native) -----
126
Stig Hjarvard
potential customers. Second, the media constitute a realm of shared experience; that 
is, they offer a continuous presentation and interpretation of ‘the way things are’ and 
by doing so, contribute to the development of a sense of identity and of community. 
Finally, media help to create a political public sphere, within which institutions can 
pursue and defend their own interests and establish their legitimacy. Put another way, 
the three functions of the media on the macrosocial level are to serve as a nexus bet-
ween institutions, as an interpretive frame for understanding society, and as an arena in 
which members of a society can discuss and decide matters of common interest. As a 
consequence of these functions, the logic of the media – that is, the institutional, tech-
nological and expressive characteristics of media – will increasingly affect society. The 
extent to which and how media logic affects any given institution, the mutual interaction 
of institutions, and society as a whole will vary, but, of course, these are questions for 
empirical investigation.
As interfaces, the media are a resource that institutions make use of in their mutual 
interaction; in order to tap this resource the institution has to participate to some extent 
in a media praxis, which is evidenced by an increasing use of journalists, information 
officers, PR consultants by private companies, political parties, educational institutions, 
etc. On a theoretical level one may assess the importance of media as a shared resource 
or interface by viewing the various social institutions, media included, as fields in a 
Bourdieuan sense (Bourdieu, 1993, 2005), i.e., as social areas characterized by a certain 
autonomy and internal structure, according to which agents occupy specific positions 
vis-à-vis one another. For example, art is a field that has a certain autonomy in relation 
to other institutions and is imbued with its own, internally defined norms and hierarchies. 
No field, however, is totally autonomous; all are influenced to greater or lesser degrees 
by other fields. Art, for example, is influenced by the market, also a field, in that profes-
sional artists make their living by dealing in works of art, and by the field of politics, 
inasmuch as cultural policy affects artists’ ability to show their works and is the source 
of stipends and scholarships. Art is also dependent on the media as a field, since media 
exposure is the key to publicity and fame, which may be converted into other forms of 
value on the art market or in culture policy contexts. Bourdieu makes a distinction in 
this regard between autonomous and heteronomous poles, where the former is the site of 
the field’s immanent logic, where actors act in accordance with the field’s own values, as 
when a work of art is judged on the basis of the medium’s or genre’s criteria of quality. 
The heteronomous pole, on the other hand, is the site of other fields’ influence, e.g., the 
market’s, politicians’ or the media’s.
If we examine mediatization in the light of Bourdieu’s concepts, we find that the me-
dia occupy a prominent place in a growing number of fields’ heteronomous pole, thereby 
challenging those fields’ autonomous pole. Thus, the degree of mediatization may be 
measured according to how much the respective field’s autonomous pole has weakened; 
eventually, some fields will lose their autonomy entirely. Media, too, have autonomous 
and heteronomous poles, where the autonomous pole is the site of aspects like profes-
sionalized journalism and codes of ethics, and the heteronomous pole is the site of, say, 
the influence exerted by the advertising market. There is a tension between the poles 
in the media; in news media, for example, journalistic criteria of news value and the 
ideals of good journalism often compete with the demands of the need to sell copies, the 
influence exerted by news sources, and so forth (Schultz, 2006). Inasmuch as the media 
are influenced by other fields or institutions, we cannot always be certain that observed 
media impacts imply submission to media logic alone. Occasionally, mediatization will

----- Page 23 (native) -----
127
The Mediatization of Society
go hand in hand with commercialization or politicization, and whether mediatization is 
the most dominant force can only be determined by analysis. Any empirical analysis of 
mediatization should therefore enquire whether, and to what extent, other institutions 
(conceived of here as fields) stand to win or lose autonomy in relation to other fields.
A Realm of Shared Experience
In a historical perspective, the media’s ability to create a common horizon of experience 
across institutions has mainly acted to dissolve local cultures in favor of shared national 
realms of experience. The British sociologist, Anthony Giddens (1984) describes one 
aspect of modernity as an ongoing ‘disembedding’ of societal structures: parochial and 
traditional cultures are broken up, fall into oblivion, and are transformed through contact 
with the larger, modern world. Viewed in this light, mediatization has been a social force 
on a par with urbanization and industrialization. Just as electricity and railroads helped 
to make people more mobile, the media have contributed to a mental and communicative 
mobility. Since the mid-1800s newspapers, and later radio and television have helped to 
undermine local, traditional cultures in favor of a national culture and culture of political 
unity. Julius Bomholt, the first and very influential Minister of Culture in the Danish 
welfare state, did not mince his words in describing the modernization ‘mission’ of the 
media when he in 1964 summed up the status of Danish broadcast media:
Engrained, parochial cultural habits are, with the help of broadcasting, being 
sundered. Isolated and backward cultures have been dissolved. A shared cultural 
background has put the population on speaking terms. When credit is given for 
having eradicated the benighted peasantry and ignorant proletariat of yesteryear, 
Danmark’s Radio [Danish public service broadcasting] will have a major share 
of it (Bomholt, 1964).
Viewed in this light, then, the creation of a common experiential frame of reference is 
not just a matter of adding something new and shared; it is also a matter of eroding and 
doing away with previous experience and culture. Media’s creation of a new, shared 
national realm of experience may, to use Giddens’ terminology, be conceived of as a 
‘re-embedding’ of social interaction on a more a general and abstract level than once 
characterized erstwhile place-bound cultures.
Benedict Anderson (1991) speaks of national communities as an imagined community 
inasmuch as no one, even in the smallest of nations, can have met all its other members. 
The media are the symbolic mortar that make the individual components seem to be a 
cohesive social whole. Thus, as Jeffrey Alexander points out, the mass media are the 
symbolic equivalent of the judicial system, as they serve to produce “the symbolic pat-
terns that create the invisible tissues of society on the cultural level, just as the legal sys-
tem creates the community on a more concrete and ‘real’ one” (Alexander, 1981:18).
There is more to it than creating common experiential frames of reference. The 
media create a context, which enables the individual to observe and experience the 
whole of society from a new perspective. As Paddy Scannell (1988) characterizes the 
accomplishment of radio and television, for example: “Broadcasting brought together 
for a radically new kind of general public the elements of a culture-in-common (na-
tional and transnational) for all. In doing so, it redeemed, and continues to redeem, the 
intelligibility of the world and the communicability of experience in the widest social 
sense” (Scannell, 1988:29, original emphasis). The world presents itself at once as a

----- Page 24 (native) -----
128
Stig Hjarvard
generalized whole (such as ‘Denmark’ or ‘Copenhagen’) and as something concrete, 
tangible and ‘at hand’. With access to internet, it has also become possible for individuals 
to interact with everyone else. Once an abstraction, community has, thanks to media, 
become concrete experience.
Whereas Paddy Scannell takes a generally positive view of the media as providers 
of a common frame of experience, Nick Couldry (2003a) is more critical, not least with 
regard to this very function. Taking his point of departure in Bourdieu’s field theory, 
Couldry points out that a theory of the roles of media in society needs to do more than 
show how the media intervene into and influence various fields, like cultural life and 
politics; they need to take account of “the impacts that media might have on all fields 
simultaneously by legitimating certain categories with not just cognitive, but also social 
significance” (Couldry, 2003a:665). The influence of the media is, in other words, more 
than the sum of their influence in the respective fields. In line with Bourdieu’s concept of 
‘metacapital’, used to describe the ability of a state to project its power across different 
fields, Couldry suggests that one may also speak of a ‘media’s metacapital’ inasmuch 
as the media are able universally, across all fields, to form the categories that everyone 
uses to interpret the world. That is to say, the media have an essentially ideological 
power to describe society in a way that seems the only ‘natural’ way to comprehend it. 
Couldry (2003b) expands on and exemplifies this idea through a number of analyses, 
but now using a modified concept of ritual. Media influence on people’s experience 
consists not least of the media’s ability to present themselves as the centre of society: 
they offer an interpretive position that gives the world meaning. Media rituals deliver 
“formalised actions organised around key media-related categories and boundaries, 
whose performance frames, and suggests a connection with wider media-related values” 
(Couldry, 2003b:29). In other words, media not only describe the world, they provide 
basic categorical frameworks through which we apprehend it.
Couldry makes an important point when he highlights the power inherent in the 
privilege to define the cognitive, social and lexical categories that organize people’s 
understanding of the world around them. But, he seems not to have any appreciation of 
the potentially positive aspects that the construction of an experiential commons might 
have. Secondly, he seems to have an all too monolithic conception of media power, a 
power so pervasive that no other institution can challenge the descriptions of reality 
the media provide. Third, Couldry’s use of ritual as a concept deviates somewhat from 
standard usage in communication research (Rothenbuhler, 1998). Actually, the principal 
focus of Couldry’s critique is the ideological impact of the media, albeit he uses this 
term only sporadically. In this respect his perspective bears a resemblance to that of 
Olof Petersson’s (1994) notion of “journalism as ideology”. According to Petersson, a 
political scientist, journalism is more than a particular profession or craft; by virtue of 
their status as a social class having its own norms, education and position in society, 
journalists develop a semi-populistic ideology, according to which the most important 
division in society runs between holders of power and ordinary people. Journalists 
conceive of themselves as go-betweens who are able to speak for ordinary people. Jour-
nalism uses language in ways designed to catch people’s attention, and as other social 
institutions adopt journalistic functions to help them communicate better with the world 
around them, they will successively assimilate both the language and ideology of jour-
nalism. Regardless of whether one sides more with Scannell’s optimistic interpretation 
regarding a common world created by media, or Couldry’s and Petersson’s more critical 
views regarding the ideological consequences of this mediegenic commons, the most

----- Page 25 (native) -----
129
The Mediatization of Society
important conclusion for our present purposes is that one of the principal consequences 
of the mediatization of society is the constitution of a shared experiential world, a world 
that is regulated by media logic.
Virtualization and a New Social Geography
One general effect of mediatization is a virtualization of social institutions. Earlier, the 
institutions were more bound to specific places: politics took place in the parliament, 
city hall and meeting halls; education took place in the schools and universities; and 
art was presented on the stage and in museums and galleries. As a consequence of the 
intervention of media, individuals can take part in and partake of many different social 
institutions, irrespective of their physical location. Contact with politics occurs by 
reading the paper at the breakfast table, listening to one’s car radio, or via internet at 
the office.
Virtualization of social institutions goes hand in hand with a domestication of those 
institutions. Typically, the home and family are increasingly the point around which 
access to other institutions revolves. Newspapers, radio and television have brought 
politics and cultural expression into the home; home offices have brought paid employ-
ment into family life, and internet has made it possible to interact with entities in both 
public and private spheres from the comfort of one’s home. On the one hand, all this 
implies an enrichment of home and family as an institution in that other institutions 
are now accessible. On the other hand, the new accessibility also changes the home 
and family, as family members may be physically present in the home, yet be mentally 
attuned to other institutions entirely. The virtualization of institutions implies that the 
home loses some of its ability to regulate family members’ behavior, and it is left to 
the individual to decide in which institution he or she is taking part, and adjust his/her 
behavior accordingly. Institutional contexts are no longer defined by their locus, but are 
a matter of individual choice. Virtualization, however, is seldom total; most institutions 
still maintain physical-geographical bases as an important framework for social praxis. 
What is new is that these places and buildings now interplay with virtual places and 
spaces, and the reality and forms of interaction that take place in the virtual world will 
also have consequences for social praxis in the physical locality.
As described earlier, ever since the latter half of the nineteenth century, media have 
removed social interaction from the local level and embedded it in a national context. 
In the last decade of the twentieth century it became increasingly possible for media to 
transcend national frontiers, and media supported the globalization process. Thus, Tom-
linson (1999) speaks of the role of media in de-territorializing cultural experience and 
social interaction. With internet, satellite-TV and a growing global market for television 
series, film, music, advertising, etc., human experience is no longer bound to either the 
local or national context, but takes place in a globalized context. By the same token, 
media make it possible to interact with others across political and cultural frontiers. As a 
consequence of the media’s growing complexity and encompassing nature, society takes 
on a complex connectivity (Tomlinson, 1999): In the era of globalization the media not 
only provide channels of communication between nations and peoples, but also establish 
networks across all manner of geographical areas and actors. This development leads in 
turn to a greater cultural reflexivity. As influxes of media products and communication 
cross more and more frontiers, virtually no culture will be able to develop in isolation 
from others. Greater cultural reflexivity does not mean that influences from abroad ne-

----- Page 26 (native) -----
130
Stig Hjarvard
cessarily increase or become in any way indispensable; indeed, foreign media cultures 
may well be rejected and castigated, as some Muslim and Christian fundamentalists 
have done so emphatically. But greater cultural reflexivity has the consequence that 
cultural development no longer takes place in naive isolation from other cultures, but 
will develop with an awareness that alternative courses are available.
The great difficulty in attempting to chart the social geography of contemporary 
media trends is that they do not describe a development in any single direction. Instead, 
the trends seem to tend in many directions at once, which results in a social geography 
that is far more complex than what we have known to date. But, as we survey the new 
geography that media support, we can distinguish between two sets of opposites: first, 
homogenization versus differentiation and, second, centrifugal versus centripetal forces. 
If, in simplified terms, we might say that the media landscape of the twentieth century 
has revolved around national public spheres, recent years’ developments have remolded 
the communicative spaces of media. On the one hand, one may speak of a centrifugal 
force that has broadened national public spheres’ contact with the outside world. Trans-
national media like satellite-distributed television (CNN, Al-Jazeera, Cartoon Network, 
etc.) and internet have helped to bring about a globalized media environment, in which 
sound, images and texts flow with ease across national boundaries. With internet foreign 
newspapers and radio stations are seldom more than a click away, and not least young 
people can play games and chat with each other around the world. Meanwhile, a centri-
petal force is also at play: the media environment has more ‘introvert’ communication 
spaces in the form of neighborhood radio, local newspapers, community websites, etc.
In some respects these developments have a homogenizing effect; in others, differences 
are accentuated. The ongoing proliferation of radio and television channels means that 
there will be ever-fewer programs that we all hear and see ‘together’. Access to several 
different interactive media allows us to create different contexts in which we can com-
municate; typically, in small groups, in chat rooms, blogs, online games, and so forth. But, 
despite this segmentation, we occasionally encounter media phenomena that momentarily 
revive the great collective ‘we’. Events in the lives of national ‘royals’ have, in the case 
of Great Britain and Denmark, become national media events and broken successive 
ratings records. Reactions to immigration and globalization in general have also revived 
a nationalistic culture in many countries, and the media may be more or less explicit part 
of this process. There are also examples of homogenization on global and regional planes. 
Al-Jazeera has, for example, created supranational political and cultural public spheres in 
the Arab world (Galal, 2002), and best-selling novels and blockbuster films like Lord of 
the Rings and The DaVinci Code are the topic of conversation for millions of people.
Figure 1 represents an attempt to summarize the contradictory processes outlined 
above. The point of this model is to underline the fact that the media environment is 
expanding and developing in different directions, so that one cannot say that the media 
are moving society in any particular direction. Media do, however, play a part in the 
structuring of communication and action in a growing number of contexts: in some cases 
it means increasing globalization, often by symbolic products of Anglo-American origin, 
but it can also bring a greater degree of individualization and segmentation, as in the 
case of use of interactive media by small groups. Meanwhile, media can also facilitate 
local interaction or call attention to national phenomena. It should be borne in mind that 
these contradictory processes often are at play simultaneously. A Turkish satellite-TV 
channel beamed toward Western Europe may help to preserve emigrants’ cultural bonds 
with their homeland, but the channel is also an ingredient in an overall process of glo-

----- Page 27 (native) -----
131
The Mediatization of Society
	
Centrifugal
	
Homogenization	
Differentiation
	
Centripetal
Globalization
Al-Jazeera
Da Vinci Code
Individualization
Blogging 
On-line gaming
Nationalization
Nationalistic revival
Royal celebrities
Localization
Neighborhood radio
Local newspaper
Figure 1.	Media Facilitate and Structure Virtual Spaces for Communication and Action
balization, whereby Turkish identity, language and culture are successively transformed 
and find themselves in a new transnational context (Robins, 2003). 
As indicated in Figure 1, mediatization can facilitate quite different societal tendencies 
on both micro and macro levels. These include globalization, individualization, nationali-
zation and localization. Which tendency predominates will depend on the specific context, 
i.e., on the institution or social activity in question. The more precise consequences of 
media intervention will, however, have to be explored empirically, through examination 
of the interplay of institutions and media in a historical and cultural context.
The expanding geography that media contribute to does not have the same degree 
of cohesion as the national media systems of the past. The links between local, natio-
nal, individual-/group-oriented and the global are far less stable and resemble what 
in modern governance theory are called loose couplings. In late-modern, complex 
societies decision-making processes are not necessarily steered via linear processes 
with initial problem definition followed by analysis and policy formulation and then 
decision. Bureaucratic organizations with well-defined hierarchies and decision proces-
ses have been replaced in part by network governance, which is of a more fragmentary 
nature (Bogason, 2001). In like manner, the different social spaces may be more or less 
loosely coupled. In national media systems of yesteryear, the links between the media 
and political and cultural institutions were generally rather strong. Topics mentioned 
in print and broadcast media often had direct consequences in the political system and 
in cultural and confessional spheres – and vice versa. In globalized media systems the 
linking mechanism between media representations and social action is less pronounced. 
Topics discussed in internet chat rooms or blogs, on transnational satellite-TV channels 
or on local minority radio stations generally have only marginal influence, if any, on 
policy-making in national spaces; conversely, national policies and restrictions can be 
contradicted and rather easily circumvented by means of foreign web sites and radio 
or television channels. In short, the interplay between mediatization and globalization 
means a more complex social and cultural geography, in which individual, local, national 
and global entities can be linked in new ways.

----- Page 28 (native) -----
132
Stig Hjarvard
Modernity and Mediatization
Mediatization is an important concept in modern sociology as it relates to the overriding 
process of modernization of society and culture. The discipline of sociology was founded 
in conjunction with the study of the breakthrough of modern society. Pioneers in the field 
like Max Weber, Karl Marx, Emile Durkheim and Georg Simmel were not particularly 
interested in the role or importance of mass media, but focused instead on phenomena 
like industrialization, urbanization, secularization and individualization. Nor did later 
sociologists show very much interest in the media. Only late in his career did Pierre 
Bourdieu, for example, write about the media, and his critique of television journalism 
(Bourdieu, 1999) appears rather shallow, compared to his earlier published work. Viewed 
in a historical perspective, the lack of interest in the media among classical sociologists 
should perhaps not surprise us. Through the nineteenth century ‘media’ were not visible 
in their own right; they were specific technologies and separate cultural phenomena 
– books, newspapers, the telegraph, etc. – each of which were instruments in the hands 
of other institutions, such as literature, science, politics, commerce, etc.
Only with the expansion of mass media in the twentieth century did the media begin 
to be perceived as media in their own right, viz., as forms of communication that sha-
red certain constitutive characteristics and were of some consequence. North American 
sociology emerged in the 1930s, and there the study of mass media – films, radio and 
newspapers – played a central role for some brief decades. Central figures like Paul 
Lazarsfeld, Bernard Berelson and Robert Merton applied sociological perspectives 
to the media, but then abandoned media in favor of other objects of study. Instead, in 
North America and elsewhere specialized disciplines arose – Communication Research 
and Mass Communication Research or Media Studies – that focused singularly on the 
media and their role in culture and society. As a consequence of this specialization, 
the study of media lost contact with broader sociological perspectives. That is part of 
the reason why medium theory, the theory that most explicitly deals with the roles of 
media in society, has not been embraced by sociologists, nor have medium theorists 
shown much interest in using sociological concepts. This should not be taken to imply 
that media research has been totally isolated from sociology and other core disciplines. 
On the contrary, media scholars have frequently drawn upon other disciplines in their 
study of one or another phenomenon. For example, political theory has been used in the 
study of opinion formation, and anthropological theory has been applied to the study 
of media use. But when it comes to more fundamental sociological subjects, such as 
modernization processes, there has been little cross-fertilization.
In recent years, however, we have seen some steps toward rapprochement between the 
two disciplines. Manuel Castells’ (2001) discussion of internet and the network ­society is 
an attempt to integrate a media perspective into sociological theory. Likewise, from the 
Media Studies point of view, studies of globalization have aroused interest in sociological 
and cultural analysis (Silverstone, 2006). The theory of mediatization is an attempt to 
bring this rapprochement a step further. Mediatization is at once a societal process that 
calls for dialogue between media scholars and sociologists, and a theoretical concept that 
can only be understood through a combination of Sociology and Media Studies. Medi-
atization should be viewed as a modernization process on a par with urbanization and in-
dividualization, whereby the media, in a similar manner, both contribute to disembedding 
social relations from existing contexts and re-embedding them in new social contexts. 
Thus mediatization is a distinct late-modern process that is, to quote John B.Thompson, 
“partially constitutive of modern societies, and are partially constitutive of what is ’mod-

----- Page 29 (native) -----
133
The Mediatization of Society
ern’ about the societies in which we live in today” (Thompson, 1990:15). When classical 
sociology was in its formative years, media had not become distinct enough from other 
institutions, nor were they at all as pervasive as they are today. For contemporary sociolo-
gical inquiry into late-modern society, a theory of the importance of the media for culture 
and society is no longer an interesting possibility, but an absolute necessity.
References
Alexander, Jeffrey C. (1981) ‘The Mass News Media in Systemic, Historical, and Comparative Perspective’, in 
E. Katz & T. Szecskö, (eds.) Mass Media and Social Change. London: Sage (Sage Studies in International 
Sociology; 22).
Altheide, David L. & Snow, Robert P. (1979) Media Logic. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Altheide, David L. & Snow, Robert P. (1988) ‘Toward a Theory of Mediation’, in J.A. Anderson (red.) Com-
munication Yearbook 11: 194-223.
Amnå, Erik & Berglez, Peter (red.) (1999) Politikens medialisering [The mediatization of politics]. Stockholm: 
Liber. (SOU 1999: 126, Demokratiutredningens forskarvolym III)
Anderson, Benedict (1991) Imagined Communities. London: Verso.
Asp, Kent (1986) Mäktiga massmedier: Studier i politisk opinionsbildning [Powerful mass media: studies in 
political opinion-formation]. Stockholm: Akademilitteratur.
Asp, Kent (1990) ‘Medialisering, medielogik, mediekrati’ [Mediatization, media logic, mediacracy]. Nordicom 
Information, 4. Göteborg: Nordicom.
Auslander, Philip (1999) Liveness: Performance in a Mediatized Culture. London: Routledge.
Austin, John L (1962) How to Do Things with Words. Oxford: Clarendon.
Baudrillard, Jean (1994) Simulacra and Simulations. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Baudrillard, Jean (1995) The Gulf War Did Not Take Place. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Bergmann, Jörg R. (1993) Discreet Indiscretions: The Social Organisation of Gossip. New York: Aldine de 
Gruyter.
Billig, Michael (2005) Laughter and Ridicule. London: Sage.
Bogason, Peter (2001) Fragmenteret forvaltning: demokrati og netværksstyring i decentraliseret lokalstyre 
[Fragmented government: democracy and network governance in decentralized local government]. År-
hus: Forlaget Systime.
Bomholt, Julius (1964) Stil Ind: DR Årbogen 1963-64 [Tune in: Yearbook 1963-64 (Danmarks Radio)]. Køben-
havn: DR.
Bourdieu, Pierre (1993) The Field of Cultural Production: Essays on Art and Literature. Cambridge: Polity 
Press.
Bourdieu, Pierre (1999) On Television and Journalism. London : Pluto Press.
Bourdieu, Pierre (2005) ‘The Political Field, The Social Science Field, and Journalistic Field’, in R. Benson & 
E. Neveu (eds.) Bourdieu and the Journalistic Field. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Brown, Sheila (2003) Crime and Law in Media Culture. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Castells, Manuel (2001) The Internet Galaxy: Reflections on the Internet, Business, and Society. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press.
Cottle, Simon (2006) Mediatized Conflict. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Couldry, Nick (2003a) ‘Media Meta-capital: Extending the Range of Bourdieu’s Field Theory’, Theory and 
Society (32) 653-677.
Couldry, Nick (2003b) Media Rituals: A Critical Approach. London: Routledge.
Galal, Ehab (2002) ‘Al-Jazeera – borgerlig offentlighed i den arabiske medieverden [Al-Jazeera: Bourgeois 
Öffentlichkeit in the Arab media world], in L. Qvortrup (red.) Mediernes 11. september. København: 
Gyldendal.
Gibson, James J (1979) The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Giddens, Anthony (1984) The Constitution of Society. Cambridge: Polity.
Goffman, Erving (1959) The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Garden City, NJ: Doubleday.
Habermas, Jürgen (1989) The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Habermas, Jürgen (1990) ’Vorwort zur Neuauflage 1990’, in Strukturwandel der Öffentlichkeit, Frankfurt a.M.: 
Suhrkamp.
Hernes, Gudmund (1978) ’Det mediavridde samfunn’ [The media-twisted society], in G. Hernes (red.) For-
handlingsekonomi og blandningsadministrasjon. Bergen: Universitetsforlaget.

----- Page 30 (native) -----
134
Stig Hjarvard
Hjarvard, Stig (2002a) ‘Simulated Conversations: The Simulation of Interpersonal Communication in Elec-
tronic Media’, in A. Jerslev (red.) Realism and ‘Reality’ in Film and Media: Northern Lights 2002. Co-
penhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press.
Hjarvard, Stig (2002b) Seernes reality [The audience’s reality], in MedieKultur 34: 92-109 (April 2002).
Hjarvard, Stig (2004) ‘From Bricks to Bytes: The Mediatization of a Global Toy Industry’, in I. Bondebjerg & 
P. Golding (eds.) European Culture and the Media. Bristol: Intellect.
Hjarvard, Stig (2005) ‘Medialiseringen af religiøse forestillinger’ [The mediatization of religious beliefs], in 
M.T. Højsgaard & H.R. Iversen (red.) Gudstro i Danmark. Frederiksberg: Anis.
Hjarvard, Stig (2007) ‘Sprogets medialisering’ [The mediatization of language], in Språk i Norden 2007. Oslo: 
Nettverket for språknemndene i Norden.
Hjarvard, Stig (2008) ‘The Mediatization of Religion’, in Northern Lights 2008. Bristol: Intellect Press.
Jameson, Fredric (1991) Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. London: Verso.
Jansson, André (2002) ‘The Mediatization of Consumption: Towards an Analytical Framework of Image Cul-
ture’, Journal of Consumer Culture, 2(1): 5-31.
Jenssen, Anders T. & Aalberg, Toril (red.) (2007) Den medialiserte politikken [Mediatized politics]. Oslo: Uni-
versitetsforlaget.
Kristensen, Nete Nørgaard (2000) ‘Journalistik som profession: Om journalistens rolleplacering i et professi-
onssociologisk perspektiv’ [Journalism as a profession: On the role of the journalist in a sociological per-
spective], in Sekvens 2000: Årbog for Film- & Medievidenskab. København: Københavns Universitet.
Krotz, Friedrich (2007) Mediatisierung: Fallstudien zum Wandel von Kommunikation. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag 
für Socialwissenschaften.
Mazzoleni, Gianpietro & Schultz, Winfried (1999) ‘‚Mediatization‘ of Politics: A Challenge for Democracy?’, 
Political Communication 16: 247-261.
McLuhan, Marshall (1964) Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. London: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul.
Meyrowitz, Joshua (1986) No Sense of Place: The Impact of Electronic Media on Social Behaviour. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Middleton, Richard (1990) Studying Popular Music. Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
Norman, Donald (1990) The Design of Everyday Things. New York: Doubleday.
Ong, Walter J. (1982) Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word. London: Methuen.
Petersson, Olof (1994) ‘Journalistene som klass, journalismen som ideology’ [Journalists as a class, journalism 
as ideology]’, in T.S. Edvardsen (red.) Media og samfunnsstyring. Bergen: Fakbokforlaget.
Robins, Kevin (2003) ‘Beyond Imagined Community? Transnational Media and Turkish Migrants in Europe’, 
in S. Hjarvard (ed.) Media in a Globalized Society. København: Museum Tusculanum Press.
Rothenbuhler, Eric (1998) Ritual Communication: From Everyday Conversation to Mediated Ceremony. Lon-
don: Sage.
Scannell, Paddy (1988) ‘Radio Times: The Temporal Arrangements of Broadcasting in the Modern World’, in 
P. Drummond and R. Paterson (eds.) Television and its Audience. London: BFI.
Schultz, Ida (2006) Bagom nyhederne – værdier, idealer og praksis [Behind the news: values, ideals and prax-
is]. Frederiksberg: Forlaget Samfundslitteratur.
Schulz, Winfried (2004) ‘Reconstructing Mediatization as an Analytical Concept’, European Journal of Com-
munication 19(1): 87-101.
Searle, John R. (1969) Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Silverstone, Roger (2006) Media and Morality: On the Rise of the Mediapolis. Cambridge: Polity.
Strömbäck Jesper (2007) ‘Four Phases of Mediatization. An Analysis of the Mediatization of Politics’, Paper 
presented to the ICA Conference in San Francisco May 2007.
Thompson, John B (1990) Ideology and Modern Culture. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Thompson, John B (1995) The Media and Modernity: A Social Theory of the Media. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Tomlinson, John (1999) Globalization and Culture. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Tuchman, Gaye (1972) ‘Objectivity as Strategic Ritual: An Examination of Newsmen’s Notion of Objectivity’, 
American Journal of Sociology 77(4).
Väliverronen, Esa (2001) ‘From Mediation to Mediatization: The New Politics of Communicating Science and 
Biotechnology’, in U. Kivikuru & T. Savolainen (eds.) The Politics of Public Issues. Helsinki: Depart-
ment of Communication, University of Helsinki.
Weingart, Peter (1998) ‘Science and the Media’, Research Policy 27(8): 869-879.