

----- Page 1 (native) -----
1451
Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955
World Health Organization 2020 guidelines on 
physical activity and sedentary behaviour
Fiona C Bull  ‍ ‍ ,1,2 Salih S Al-­Ansari,3 Stuart Biddle,4 Katja Borodulin,5,6 
Matthew P Buman  ‍ ‍ ,7 Greet Cardon,8 Catherine Carty,9,10 
Jean-­Philippe Chaput  ‍ ‍ ,11 Sebastien Chastin  ‍ ‍ ,12 Roger Chou,13 
Paddy C Dempsey,14,15 Loretta DiPietro,16 Ulf Ekelund  ‍ ‍ ,17,18 Joseph Firth,19,20 
Christine M Friedenreich,21 Leandro Garcia,22 Muthoni Gichu,23 Russell Jago  ‍ ‍ ,24 
Peter T Katzmarzyk,25 Estelle Lambert  ‍ ‍ ,26 Michael Leitzmann,27 Karen Milton  ‍ ‍ ,28 
Francisco B Ortega,29 Chathuranga Ranasinghe,30 Emmanuel Stamatakis  ‍ ‍ ,31 
Anne Tiedemann,32 Richard P Troiano  ‍ ‍ ,33 Hidde P van der Ploeg,34,35 Vicky Wari,36 
Juana F Willumsen1 
Guidelines
To cite: Bull FC, Al-­
Ansari SS, Biddle S, 
et al. Br J Sports Med 
2020;54:1451–1462.
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Professor Fiona C Bull, Physical 
Activity Unit, Department of 
Health Promotion, World Health 
Organization, Geneva, GE, 
Switzerland; ​bullf@​who.​int
Accepted 7 September 2020
Published Online First 
1 December 2020
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2020. Re-­use 
permitted under CC BY. 
Published by BMJ.
ABSTRACT
Objectives  To describe new WHO 2020 guidelines on 
physical activity and sedentary behaviour.
Methods  The guidelines were developed in accordance 
with WHO protocols. An expert Guideline Development 
Group reviewed evidence to assess associations 
between physical activity and sedentary behaviour 
for an agreed set of health outcomes and population 
groups. The assessment used and systematically updated 
recent relevant systematic reviews; new primary 
reviews addressed additional health outcomes or 
subpopulations.
Results  The new guidelines address children, 
adolescents, adults, older adults and include new specific 
recommendations for pregnant and postpartum women 
and people living with chronic conditions or disability. 
All adults should undertake 150–300 min of moderate-­
intensity, or 75–150 min of vigorous-­intensity physical 
activity, or some equivalent combination of moderate-­
intensity and vigorous-­intensity aerobic physical activity, 
per week. Among children and adolescents, an average 
of 60 min/day of moderate-­to-­vigorous intensity aerobic 
physical activity across the week provides health benefits. 
The guidelines recommend regular muscle-­strengthening 
activity for all age groups. Additionally, reducing 
sedentary behaviours is recommended across all age 
groups and abilities, although evidence was insufficient 
to quantify a sedentary behaviour threshold.
Conclusion  These 2020 WHO guidelines update 
previous WHO recommendations released in 2010. 
They reaffirm messages that some physical activity is 
better than none, that more physical activity is better 
for optimal health outcomes and provide a new 
recommendation on reducing sedentary behaviours. 
These guidelines highlight the importance of regularly 
undertaking both aerobic and muscle strengthening 
activities and for the first time, there are specific 
recommendations for specific populations including for 
pregnant and postpartum women and people living with 
chronic conditions or disability. These guidelines should 
be used to inform national health policies aligned with 
the WHO Global Action Plan on Physical Activity 2018–
2030 and to strengthen surveillance systems that track 
progress towards national and global targets.
INTRODUCTION
In 2018, the World Health Assembly (WHA) 
approved a new Global Action Plan on Physical 
Activity (GAPPA) 2018–20301 and adopted a new 
voluntary global target to reduce global levels of 
physical inactivity in adults and adolescents by 
15% by 2030. As part of the WHA Resolution 
(WHA71.6), Member States requested that WHO 
update the 2010 Global Recommendations on 
Physical Activity for Health.2
Global and national guidelines on physical 
activity are a central component of a comprehen-
sive and coherent governance and policy frame-
work for public health action. WHO recommends 
all countries establish national guidelines and set 
physical activity targets. To help support popula-
tions to achieve the targets and maintain healthy 
levels of physical activity, all countries are advised 
to develop and implement appropriate national 
and subnational policies and programmes to enable 
people of all ages and abilities to be physically active 
and improve health.
Given that the most recent global estimates 
show that one in four (27.5%) adults3 and more 
than three-­quarters (81%) of adolescents4 do not 
meet the recommendations for aerobic exercise, 
as outlined in the 2010 Global Recommendations 
on Physical Activity for Health,2 there is an urgent 
need to increase priority and investment directed 
towards services to promote physical activity both 
within health and other key sectors. These data also 
reveal no overall improvement in global levels of 
participation over the last two decades and substan-
tial gender differences.3 4 Furthermore, national 
data consistently show inequalities in participation 
by age, gender, disability, pregnancy, socioeconomic 
status and geography,1 amplifying the need to inten-
sify investment in physical activity.
This paper reports on the development of new 
WHO guidelines on physical activity and sedentary 
behaviour.5 These guidelines provide evidence-­
based public health recommendations concerning 
the amount (frequency, intensity, duration) and 
types of physical activity that offer significant health 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
25 November 2020. 
10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 2 (native) -----
1452
Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955
Guidelines
benefits and mitigate health risks (for definitions see table 1). 
These guidelines have been developed for children, adolescents, 
adults, older adults and, for the first time, include specific recom-
mendations on physical activity for pregnant and postpartum 
women and people living with chronic conditions or disability. 
In addition, for the first time, these WHO guidelines address the 
health impact of sedentary behaviour. The new WHO guidelines 
update previous WHO recommendations on physical activity 
for health released in 20102 with the most recent advances in 
the evidence base for these behaviours and associated selected 
health consequences. These new guidelines, together with the 
Guidelines on Physical Activity, Sedentary Behaviour and Sleep 
for Children Under 5 Years of Age,6 provide evidence-­updated 
recommendations for physical activity and sedentary behaviour 
across the life course.
The primary audiences and users of these guidelines are policy 
makers in ministries of health, education, sport, transport, envi-
ronment, social or family welfare and related sectors, working 
in high-­income as well as low-­income and middle-­income coun-
tries (LMICs), who formulate country-­specific guidelines and 
who develop national or subnational plans and programmes to 
increase physical activity and reduce sedentary behaviours across 
the life course. Additional key users of these guidelines include 
researchers and those working in health services providing 
advice and guidance (such as community health workers, 
primary, secondary or tertiary nurses or doctors), allied health 
Table 1  Glossary of terms
Term
Definition
Aerobic physical activity
Activity in which the body’s large muscles move in a rhythmic manner for a sustained period of time. Aerobic activity—also called endurance 
activity—improves cardiorespiratory fitness. Examples include walking, running, swimming and bicycling.
Balance training
Static and dynamic exercises that are designed to improve an individual’s ability to withstand challenges from postural sway or destabilising 
stimuli caused by self-­motion, the environment or other objects.
Bone-­strengthening activity
Physical activity primarily designed to increase the strength of specific sites in bones that make up the skeletal system. Bone-­strengthening 
activities produce an impact or tension force on the bones that promotes bone growth and strength. Examples include any type of jumps, running 
and lifting weights.
Disability
From the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health, an umbrella term for impairments, activity limitations and participation 
restrictions, denoting the negative aspects of the interaction between an individual (with a health condition) and that individual’s contextual 
factors (environmental and personal factors).
Domains of physical activity
Physical activities can be undertaken in various domains, including one of more of the following: leisure, occupation, education, home and/or 
transport.
Household domain physical 
activity
Physical activity undertaken in the home for domestic duties (such as cleaning, caring for children, gardening, etc).
Leisure-­domain physical 
activity
Physical activity performed by an individual that is not required as an essential activity of daily living and is performed at the discretion of the 
individual. Examples include sports participation, exercise conditioning or training and recreational activities such as going for a walk, dancing and 
gardening.
Light-­intensity physical 
activity (LPA)
On an absolute scale, light intensity refers to physical activity that is performed between 1.5 and 3 METs. On a scale relative to an individual’s 
personal capacity, light-­intensity physical activity is usually a 2–4 on a rating scale of perceived exertion scale of 0–10. Examples include slow 
walking, bathing or other incidental activities that do not result in a substantial increase in heart rate or breathing rate.
Metabolic equivalent of task 
(MET)
The metabolic equivalent of task, or simply metabolic equivalent, is a physiological measure expressing the intensity of physical activities. One 
MET is the energy equivalent expended by an individual while seated at rest, usually expressed as mLO2/kg/min.
Moderate- intensity physical 
activity (MPA)
On an absolute scale, moderate-­intensity refers to the physical activity that is performed between 3 and <6 times the intensity of rest (METs). On a 
scale relative to an individual’s personal capacity, MPA is usually a 5 or 6 on a rating scale of perceived exertion scale of 0–10.
Moderate-­to-­vigorous 
intensity physical activity 
(MVPA)
On an absolute scale, MVPA refers to the physical activity that is performed at >3 METs (ie, >3 times the intensity of rest). On a scale relative to 
an individual’s personal capacity, MPA is usually a 5 or above on a scale of 0–10.
Multicomponent physical 
activity
Multicomponent physical activity are activities that can be done at home or in a structured group or class setting and combine all types of exercise 
(aerobic, muscle strengthening and balance training) into a session, and this has been shown to be effective. An example of a multicomponent 
physical activity programme could include walking (aerobic activity), lifting weights (muscle strengthening) and could incorporate balance 
training. Examples of balance training can include walking backwards or sideways or standing on one foot while doing an upper body muscle-­
strengthening activity, such as bicep curls. Dancing also combines aerobic and balance components.
Occupation domain physical 
activity
See work domain physical activity.
Physical activity (PA)
Any bodily movement produced by skeletal muscles that requires energy expenditure.
Physical inactivity
An insufficient physical activity level to meet present physical activity recommendations.
Recreational screen time
Time spent watching screens (television (TV), computer, mobile devices) for purposes other than those related to school or work.
Sedentary screen time
Time spent watching screen-­based entertainment while sedentary, either sitting, reclining or lying. Does not include active screen-­based games 
where physical activity or movement is required.
Sedentary behaviour
Any waking behaviour characterised by an energy expenditure of 1.5 METs or lower while sitting, reclining or lying. Most desk-­based office work, 
driving a car and watching television are examples of sedentary behaviours; these can also apply to those unable to stand, such as wheelchair 
users. The guidelines operationalise the definition of sedentary behaviour to include self-­reported low movement sitting (leisure time, occupational 
and total), TV viewing or screen time and low levels of movement measured by devices that assess movement or posture.
Transport domain physical 
activity
Physical activity performed for the purpose of getting to and from places, and refers to walking, cycling and wheeling (ie, the use of non-­motorised 
means of locomotion with wheels, such as scooters, roller-­blades, manual wheelchair, etc). In some contexts, operation of a boat for transport 
could also be considered transport-­related physical activity.
Vigorous-­intensity physical 
activity (VPA)
On an absolute scale, vigorous intensity refers to physical activity that is performed at 6.0 or more METs. On a scale relative to an individual’s 
personal capacity, VPA is usually a 7 or 8 on a rating scale of perceived exertion scale of 0–10.
Work domain physical activity
Physical activity undertaken during paid or voluntary work.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
25 November 2020. 
10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 3 (native) -----
1453
Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955
Guidelines
and exercise professionals and non-­governmental organisations. 
Communication of these guidelines to members of the public is 
essential and requires tailoring of the core messages to appro-
priate and accessible language and formats relevant to cultural 
contexts in order to be effective.
METHODS AND PROCESS FOR DEVELOPING THE WHO 
GUIDELINES
The guidelines were developed in accordance with the processes 
set out in the WHO Handbook for Guidelines Development7 
and commenced in 2019. A Guideline Development Group 
(GDG) was established comprising relevant experts from 
required disciplines as well as policy makers and end users of the 
recommendations, with regional and gender balance. Details of 
the members of the GDG are available.5
At the first meeting in July 2019, the GDG reviewed and 
finalised the scope of the guidelines and agreed on the set of 
population, intervention or exposure, comparator and outcome 
(PI/ECO) questions and critical and important outcomes to be 
assessed (table 2). The GDG did not include sleep as a behaviour 
within the scope of these guidelines but did recognise sleep as 
an important health outcome when considering the impact of 
physical activity. Between August and February 2020, the WHO 
secretariat coordinated the commissioning of literature searches 
and systematic evidence reviews and the GDG subworking 
groups met virtually to review, summarise and draft preliminary 
recommendations.
Updating searches and new evidence reviews
The WHO guidelines on physical activity and sedentary 
behaviour were developed by using, and systematically updating, 
the evidence collated for the development of other recent 
national physical activity guidelines that met the following three 
criteria: (1) the evidence reviews had been conducted according 
to standard and rigorous systematic processes that were well 
documented; (2) the assessment of the certainty of the evidence 
used the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Develop-
ment and Evaluation (GRADE) method or an equivalent meth-
odology that was clearly described and documented and (3) the 
evidence reviews addressed the populations of interest with no 
restrictions to country or country income level.
For these guidelines on children and adolescents, systematic 
reviews undertaken by Poitras et al,8 Carson et al9 and Okely et 
al10 were used and updated. For pregnant women, the system-
atic review conducted to inform the 2019 Canadian Guideline 
for Physical Activity Throughout Pregnancy11 was used and 
updated. For all other age and subpopulation groups, the scien-
tific report12 of the Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Group 
developed to inform the Physical Activity Guidelines for Amer-
icans, second edition13 was used and updated. Where gaps in 
existing evidence were identified, new umbrella reviews were 
commissioned and full details of these are available elsewhere.5
To update the systematic reviews, an agreed set of search 
terms, databases and search methods, as well as standardised data 
extraction protocols, were employed to update the evidence. 
A search for systematic reviews and pooled analyses of cohort 
studies was conducted for the period from 2017 up to September 
2019. The following databases were searched: PubMed, 
CINAHL, MEDLINE, EMBASE, PsychInfo, SportDiscus and 
Cochrane to identify reviews that were peer-­reviewed, written 
in English with no restriction on country or country income 
group and inclusive of reviews including studies using subjective 
or objectively measured physical activity or sedentary behaviour. 
Searches were limited to the English language, due to resource 
constraint and previous experience in the field indicating that 
other language searches yielded very few, if any additional 
reviews.14 Table 3 provides a summary of the health outcomes 
assessed for each subpopulation.
Reviews that examined an association (based on levels above 
or below a threshold of physical activity or sedentary behaviour), 
and also reviews that explored the dose-­response relation-
ship between these behaviours and health-­related outcomes 
were considered. In addition, six new umbrella reviews were 
commissioned to address health outcomes and populations not 
addressed by the above recent national physical activity guide-
lines; these umbrella reviews focused on the health impact of 
physical activity in people living with HIV/AIDS, osteoporosis 
and sarcopenia, the prevention of falls in older adults, the risk 
of adverse outcomes in adults and the health impacts of occupa-
tional physical activity.
The GDG reconvened in February 2020 to review the evidence 
and finalise a draft set of recommendations. They examined the 
quality of research contributing to each outcome identified in the 
PI/ECO questions and assessed the overall certainty of evidence 
(table 2) taking into consideration the risk of bias, inconsistency, 
imprecision, indirectness of the evidence and publication bias 
across each outcome, using the GRADE framework to rate the 
certainty of the evidence for each PE/ICO.15 Evidence profiles 
detailing this information for each PI/ECO are available.
The GDG considered the proposed wording of the recom-
mendations and rated the strength of the recommendations as 
strong or conditional (table 2) based on the balance of benefits 
to harms, the certainty of evidence, sensitivity to values and pref-
erences and the potential impact on gender, social and health 
equity, as well as acceptability, feasibility and resource implica-
tions. The assessment of the overall certainty of the evidence 
Table 2  Criteria for determination of the certainty of evidence (A) and interpretation of the strength of recommendations (B)
A
Criteria for determining the certainty of evidence
High
Very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect.
Moderate
Moderately confident in the effect estimate. The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a 
possibility that it is substantially different.
Low
Confidence in the effect estimate is limited. The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect.
Very low
Very little confidence in the effect estimate. The true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect.
B
Interpretation of the strength of recommendation
Strong recommendation
Strong recommendations communicate the message that the guideline is based on the confidence that the desirable effects of 
adherence to the recommendation outweigh the undesirable consequences.
Conditional recommendations
Conditional recommendations are made when there is less certainty about the balance between the benefits and harms or 
disadvantages of implementing a recommendation, or if the recommendations might not be applicable to all the population 
group.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
25 November 2020. 
10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 4 (native) -----
1454
Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955
Guidelines
Table 3  Summary of health outcomes (in alphabetical order) by population groups addressed in the 2020 global guidelines evidence reviews
5–17 years PA and SB
Adults
18–64 years
PA
Adults over 18 
years
SB
Adults over 65 
years
PA
Pregnancy and post 
partum
Chronic conditions*
Children and adults 
with disability*
Outcomes
Importance†
Adiposity—weight gain, weight change, weight control, weight 
stability, weight status and weight maintenance
Critical
Critical
Critical
Critical
Critical
Adverse events
Critical
Critical
Critical
Critical
All-­cause and cause-­specific mortality
Critical
Critical
Critical
Critical—cancer and 
cancer-­specific
Bone health
Critical
Cardiometabolic health
Critical
Cognitive outcomes
Critical
Critical
Critical
Critical—MS, PD, Stk, 
Sch, ADHD
Delivery complications
Important
Disease progression
Critical—HT, T2D, HIV
Critical—cancer 
recurrence
Falls and fall-­related injuries
Critical
Fetal outcomes
Critical
Functional ability
Critical
Gestational diabetes mellitus
Critical
Gestational hypertension/pre-­eclampsia
Critical
Health-­related quality of life
Important
Important
Critical—HT, T2D, HIV
Critical—MS, SCI, ID, 
MCD, Sch
Incidence of cancer
Critical
Critical
Critical
Incidence of CVD
Critical
Critical
Critical
Incidence of hypertension
Important
Important
Incidence of type 2 diabetes
Critical
Critical
Critical
Mental health (symptoms of anxiety and depression)
Critical
Critical
Critical
Critical
Osteoporosis
Critical
Physical fitness
Critical
Physical function
Critical—HT, T2D, HIV
Critical—MS, SCI, ID, 
PD, Stk
Prosocial behaviour
Important
Psychosocial outcomes
Important
Risk of comorbid conditions
Critical—HT, T2D, HIV
Critical—MS, SCI, ID
Sleep
Important
Important
Important
*Outcomes are for subpopulation condition as listed: HT, T2D, MS, SCI, ID, PD, Stk, Sch, ADHD, MCD.
†Critical outcome: an outcome that is critical to decision-­making. Important outcome: an outcome that is important, but not critical to decision-­making.
ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; CVD, cardiovascular disease; HT, hypertension; ID, intellectual disability; MCD, major clinical depression; MS, muscular sclerosis; PA, physical activity; PD, Parkinson’s disease; SB, sedentary behaviour; 
Sch, schizophrenia; SCI, spinal cord injury; Stk, in stroke survivors; T2D, type 2 diabetes.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
25 November 2020. 
10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 5 (native) -----
1455
Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955
Guidelines
for each population group was based on an assessment across 
all evaluated outcomes (table 2). The GDG prioritised all-­cause 
mortality and cardiovascular mortality as the most critical 
outcomes, followed by other clinical outcomes (eg, falls, depres-
sion, cognition, health-­related quality of life), then interme-
diate outcomes (eg, cardiometabolic markers, other metabolic 
markers) as well as physical activity risk and harms. Where there 
was a lack of subpopulation-­specific evidence, the evidence for 
the general population was extrapolated but downgraded due to 
indirectness, when appropriate. The GDG came to consensus on 
each recommendation as well as the strength of recommenda-
tion ratings and voting was not required.
As required by the WHO process for guideline development, 
the draft guidelines were externally reviewed by seven indepen-
dent reviewers, who provided feedback on the scientific evidence, 
its interpretation and the content of the guidelines. In addition, 
the draft guidelines and the evidence profiles were made avail-
able to the public and stakeholders, and feedback was sought 
through a global online consultation conducted between March 
and April 2020 and that received over 400 contributions. These 
inputs from scientists, practitioners and the general public were 
collated and used by the GDG to finalise the guidelines. These 
were approved by the WHO Guidelines Review Committee in 
August 2020.
THE 2020 GUIDELINES ON PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND 
SEDENTARY BEHAVIOUR
The final recommendations on physical activity and sedentary 
behaviour for each population group are summarised in table 4. 
For all populations, doing some physical activity is better than 
doing none. If individuals are not currently meeting these recom-
mendations, doing some physical activity will bring benefits to 
health. Individuals should start with small amounts of physical 
activity and gradually increase frequency, intensity and dura-
tion over time. The GDG concluded that the benefits of doing 
physical activity and limiting sedentary behaviour outweighed 
the potential harms. Any potential harms may be managed by a 
gradual increase in the amount and intensity of physical activity.
Pre-­exercise medical clearance is generally unnecessary. Indi-
viduals who are not currently regularly active and have no 
contraindications can be recommended to commence and grad-
ually increase levels and intensity of physical activity without 
a medical clearance. An individual who is habitually engaging 
in moderate-­intensity activity can gradually increase to vigorous 
intensity activity without needing to consult a healthcare 
provider. Those who develop new symptoms when increasing 
their levels of activity should consult a healthcare provider. 
These guidelines are for the general population and do not 
address the benefits and harms experienced by athletes under-
taking the types and amounts of activity necessary to improve 
performance-­related fitness for participation in competition.
The evidence supporting each of the updated or new recom-
mendations is summarised for each group. Further details, 
including a more detailed narrative summary of evidence and 
the evidence profile tables summarising the evidence used for all 
recommendations, are available from WHO.5
Recommendations for children and adolescents (5–17 years)
The evidence affirmed that physical activity in children and 
adolescents is associated with improved physical, mental and 
cognitive health outcomes. Many of the benefits of physical 
activity are observed with an average of 60 min of moderate-­
to-­vigorous physical activity (MVPA) daily, although physical 
activity beyond 60 min of MVPA daily provide additional health 
benefits. There was insufficient evidence to determine whether 
specific health benefits vary by type or domain of physical activity. 
The evidence showed clearly that increased time in aerobic 
MVPA increases cardiorespiratory fitness and that increased 
muscle-­strengthening activities increases muscular fitness, with 
some evidence showing incremental benefits of doing both. 
One notable update from the 2010 guidelines was evidence to 
support changing from ‘at least’ 60 min to ‘an average of’ 60 min 
of MVPA per day as this was deemed to more closely reflect the 
body of evidence and the way MVPA has been measured. The 
physical activity recommendation was rated as strong based on 
overall moderate certainty evidence. The evidence indicated that 
greater time spent in sedentary behaviour is related to adverse 
health outcomes. The association between sedentary behaviour 
and adverse health outcomes is generally stronger for television 
viewing or recreational screen time as the specific exposure vari-
able than for total sedentary time in youth. There was, however, 
insufficient evidence to set a precise threshold (or ‘cut-­off’) for 
the amount of sedentary or recreational screen time. The seden-
tary behaviour recommendation was rated as strong based on 
low certainty evidence.
Recommendations for adults (18–64 years)
The evidence reaffirms that all adults should regularly under-
take physical activity and that some physical activity is better 
than none. The adult guidelines include strong recommenda-
tions based on overall moderate-­certainty evidence on weekly 
volumes of aerobic and muscle-­strengthening physical activity. 
Many of the benefits of physical activity are observed within 
average weekly volumes of 150–300 min of moderate intensity 
or 75–150 min of vigorous intensity, or an equivalent combi-
nation of MVPA. The weekly range of recommended aerobic 
activity volume is a notable difference compared with the 2010 
WHO recommendations that only specified minimum weekly 
thresholds. MVPA bouts of any duration now count towards 
these recommendations, reflecting new evidence to support 
the value of total physical activity volume, regardless of bout 
length.16 This recommendation differs from the requirement of 
bouts of at least 10 min in the previous WHO 2010 guidelines.
There is moderate-­certainty evidence of a curvilinear dose-­
response association between physical activity volume and some 
health outcomes, such as all-­cause and cardiovascular disease 
(CVD) mortality, and incident cancer and diabetes. Health bene-
fits occur with levels of physical activity below the recommen-
dations, supporting the statement that some physical activity 
is better than none. More physical activity is better, although 
the relative benefits tend to diminish at higher levels of phys-
ical activity. However, it is not possible to specify the physical 
activity levels where diminishing returns begin. For this reason, 
the new recommendation that aerobic physical activity volumes 
higher than 300 min of moderate-­intensity activity per week, 
or 150 min of vigorous-­intensity activity per week have addi-
tional health benefits, is rated as conditional. Beyond aerobic 
physical activity, additional health benefits will occur through 
participation in muscle-­strengthening activities at moderate or 
greater intensity on 2 or more days a week, a strong recommen-
dation supported by moderate-­certainty evidence. There was 
no evidence to support a dose-­response association with higher 
volumes of muscle-­strengthening activities.
There was insufficient evidence to determine whether specific 
health benefits vary by type or domain of physical activity. 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
25 November 2020. 
10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 6 (native) -----
1456
Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955
Guidelines
Table 4  Summary of the WHO Guidelines on physcial activity and sedentary behaviour.
These public health guidelines are for all populations across the age groups from 5 years of age and above, irrespective of gender, cultural background or 
socioeconomic status and are relevant for people of all abilities. Those with chronic medical conditions and/or disability and pregnant and postpartum women 
should try to meet these recommendations where possible and as able.
Physical activity
Sedentary behaviour
Children and adolescents
(aged 5–17 years), including 
those living with disability
In children and adolescents, physical activity confers benefits for the following 
health outcomes: physical fitness (cardiorespiratory and muscular fitness), 
cardiometabolic health (blood pressure, dyslipidaemia, glucose and insulin 
resistance), bone health, cognitive outcomes (academic performance, executive 
function) and mental health (reduced symptoms of depression) and reduced 
adiposity.
It is recommended that:
►
►Children and adolescents should do at least an average of 60 min/day of 
moderate-­to-­vigorous intensity, mostly aerobic, physical activity, across the 
week;
►
►Vigorous-­intensity aerobic activities, as well as those that strengthen muscle 
and bone should be incorporated at least 3 days a week.
Strong recommendation
In children and adolescents, higher amounts of sedentary 
behaviour are associated with detrimental effects on the 
following health outcomes: fitness and cardiometabolic 
health, adiposity, behavioural conduct/pro-­social behaviour 
and sleep duration.
It is recommended that:
►
►Children and adolescents should limit the amount of 
time spent being sedentary, particularly the amount of 
recreational screen time.
Strong recommendation
Adults
(aged 18–64 years) including 
those with chronic conditions 
and those living with 
disability
In adults, physical activity confers benefits for the following health outcomes: all-­
cause mortality, cardiovascular disease mortality, incident hypertension, incident 
type 2 diabetes, incident site-­specific cancers,mental health (reduced symptoms of 
anxiety and depression), cognitive health and sleep ; measures of adiposity may 
also improve.
It is recommended that:
►
►All adults should undertake regular physical activity;
►
►Adults should do at least 150–300 min of moderate-­intensity aerobic physical 
activity, or at least 75–150 min of vigorous-­intensity aerobic physical activity, 
or an equivalent combination of moderate-­intensity and vigorous-­intensity 
activity throughout the week for substantial health benefits;
►
►Adults should also do muscle-­strengthening activities at moderate or greater 
intensity that involve all major muscle groups on 2 or more days a week, as 
these provide additional health benefits.
Strong recommendation
►
►Adults may increase moderate-­intensity aerobic physical activity to >300 min, 
or do >150 min of vigorous-­intensity aerobic physical activity, or an 
equivalent combination of moderate-­intensity and vigorous-­intensity activity 
throughout the week for additional health benefits (when not contraindicated 
for those with chronic conditions).
Conditional recommendation
In adults, higher amounts of sedentary behaviour are 
associated with detrimental effects on the following 
health outcomes: all-­cause mortality, cardiovascular 
disease mortality and cancer mortality and incidence of 
cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes and cancer.
It is recommended that:
►
►Adults should limit the amount of time spent being 
sedentary. Replacing sedentary time with physical 
activity of any intensity (including light intensity) 
provides health benefits;
►
►To help reduce the detrimental effects of high levels of 
sedentary behaviour on health, adults should aim to 
do more than the recommended levels of moderate-­to-­
vigorous physical activity.
Strong recommendation
Older adults
(aged 65 years and older) 
including those with chronic 
conditions and those living 
with disability
In older adults, physical activity also helps prevent falls and falls-­related injuries 
and declines in bone health and functional ability.
It is recommended that:
As for adults, plus
►
►As part of their weekly physical activity, older adults should do varied 
multicomponent physical activity that emphasises functional balance and 
strength training at moderate or greater intensity on 3 or more days a week, 
to enhance functional capacity and to prevent falls.
Strong recommendation
As for adults
Strong recommendation
Pregnant and postpartum 
women
In women, physical activity during pregnancy and the postpartum period confers 
benefits for the following maternal and fetal health outcomes: reduced risk of pre-­
eclampsia, gestational hypertension, gestational diabetes, excessive gestational 
weight gain, delivery complications and postpartum depression and no increase in 
risk of stillbirth, newborn complications or adverse effects on birth weight.
It is recommended that all pregnant and postpartum women without 
contraindication should:
►
►undertake regular physical activity throughout pregnancy and post partum;
►
►do at least 150 min of moderate-­intensity aerobic physical activity throughout 
the week for substantial health benefits;
►
►incorporate a variety of aerobic and muscle-­strengthening activities. Adding 
gentle stretching may also be beneficial.
In addition:
Women who, before pregnancy, habitually engaged in 
vigorous-­intensity aerobic activity or who were physically 
active can continue these activities during pregnancy and 
the postpartum period.
Strong recommendation
►
►Pregnant and postpartum women should limit the 
amount of time spent being sedentary. Replacing 
sedentary time with physical activity of any intensity 
(including light intensity) provides health benefits.
Strong recommendation
Continued
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
25 November 2020. 
10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 7 (native) -----
1457
Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955
Guidelines
Physical activity accrued at work, leisure, home or during trans-
portation count towards the recommended amounts.
The reviewed evidence on sedentary behaviour and health 
outcomes in adults provided support that all adults should 
limit the amount of time spent sedentary. There was moderate-­
certainty evidence that the relationship of sedentary behaviour 
with all-­cause and CVD mortality varies by amount of physical 
activity. For other outcomes, the evidence was insufficient. New 
evidence on the interdependent relationship between sedentary 
behaviour and physical activity underpinned the additional guid-
ance that recommends increased levels of MVPA in the context 
of high levels of sedentary time. However, there was insuffi-
cient evidence to specify quantitative thresholds of sedentary 
behaviour, to determine whether specific health benefits vary by 
type or domain of sedentary behaviour or to determine the influ-
ence of frequency and duration of breaks in sedentary behaviour 
on health outcomes.
Recommendations for older adults (65 years and above)
The evidence reviewed on physical activity and sedentary 
behaviour for adults also applied to older adults for the common 
set of critical health outcomes (table  3), because the majority 
of studies employed no upper age limit and therefore included 
adults over the age of 65 years. Additional health-­related 
outcomes were reviewed because of their significant importance 
to older adults: 1) falls; 2) fall-­related injuries; 3) physical func-
tion; 4) frailty and 5) osteoporosis.
New high-­certainty evidence demonstrates an inverse dose-­
response relationship between volume of aerobic physical 
activity and risk of physical functional limitations in older adults. 
High-­certainty evidence demonstrates that balance and func-
tional exercises reduce the rate of falls and that engaging in a 
range of different types of physical activity can help to improve a 
wide range of elements of physical function. Moderate-­certainty 
evidence indicates that the risk of fall-­related injury may be 
reduced with multicomponent physical activity (combinations 
of balance, strength, endurance, gait and physical function 
training). As such it is recommended that as part of their weekly 
physical activity, older adults should do varied multicomponent 
physical activity at moderate or greater intensity on 3 or more 
days a week in order to enhance functional capacity and prevent 
falls. One notable update from the previous 2010 guidelines 
is that regular participation in this type of physical activity is 
recommended for all older adults rather than specifically those 
with poor mobility. Moderate-­certainty evidence indicates that 
programmes involving multiple exercise types probably have 
significant effects on bone health and osteoporosis prevention. 
Because the evidence reviewed for sedentary behaviour in adults 
included those over the age of 65 years, the adult recommenda-
tions were deemed to also apply for this population group.
Recommendations for pregnant and postpartum women
There is high-­certainty evidence that physical activity during 
pregnancy is associated with reduced gestational weight gain and 
reduced risk of gestational diabetes mellitus in pregnant women 
with overweight or obesity. There is high-­certainty to moderate-­
certainty evidence that the incidence of gestational hypertension 
is no different between pregnant women who exercise and those 
receiving standard antenatal care.
Among pregnant women with overweight or obesity, there 
is low-­certainty to moderate-­certainty evidence to suggest no 
increased risk of low birth weight, small for gestational age 
or large for gestational age babies between women who are 
physically active and those in standard antenatal care. There is 
These public health guidelines are for all populations across the age groups from 5 years of age and above, irrespective of gender, cultural background or 
socioeconomic status and are relevant for people of all abilities. Those with chronic medical conditions and/or disability and pregnant and postpartum women 
should try to meet these recommendations where possible and as able.
Physical activity
Sedentary behaviour
Additional explanatory and practical notes:
Some physical activity is better than none.
If not currently meeting these recommendations, doing some physical activity will bring benefits to health. Start with small amounts of physical activity and gradually increase 
frequency, intensity and duration over time. Pre-­exercise medical clearance is generally unnecessary for individuals without contraindications prior to beginning light-­intensity or 
moderate-­intensity physical activity not exceeding the demands of brisk walking or everyday living.
It is important to provide all children and adolescents with safe and equitable opportunities and encouragement to participate in physical activities that are appropriate for their 
age and ability, that are enjoyable, and that offer variety.
Older adults should be as physically active as their functional ability allows and adjust their level of effort for physical activity relative to their level of fitness.
When not able to meet the recommendations, adults with chronic conditions should aim to engage in physical activity according to their abilities. Adults with chronic conditions 
may wish to consult with a physical activity specialist or healthcare professional for advice on the types and amounts of activity appropriate for their individual needs, abilities, 
functional limitations/complications, medications and overall treatment plan.
If pregnant and postpartum women are not currently meeting these recommendations, doing some physical activity will bring benefits to health. They should start with small 
amounts of physical activity and gradually increase frequency, intensity and duration over time. Pelvic floor muscle training may be performed on a daily basis to reduce the risk of 
urinary incontinence.
Additional on safety considerations when undertaking physical activity for pregnant women are:
►
►Avoid physical activity during excessive heat, especially with high humidity;
►
►Stay hydrated by drinking water before, during and after physical activity;
►
►Avoid participating in activities which involve physical contact, pose a high risk of falling or might limit oxygenation (such as activities at high altitude, when not normally 
living at altitude);
►
►Avoid activities in supine position after the first trimester of pregnancy;
►
►Pregnant women considering athletic competition or exercising significantly above the recommended guidelines should seek supervision from a specialist healthcare provider;
►
►Pregnant women should be informed by their healthcare provider of the danger signs for when to stop, or limit physical activity and to consult a qualified healthcare provider 
immediately if they occur.
Return to physical activity gradually after delivery and in consultation with a healthcare provider in the case of delivery by caesarean section.
There are no major risks to people living with disability engaging in physical activity when it is appropriate to an individual’s current activity level, health status and physical 
function and the health benefits accrued outweigh the risks. People living with disability may need to consult a healthcare professional or other physical activity and disability 
specialist to help determine the type and amount of activity appropriate for them.
Table 4  Continued
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
25 November 2020. 
10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 8 (native) -----
1458
Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955
Guidelines
moderate-­certainty evidence of a small, but significant, reduced 
risk of preterm birth in mothers who engaged in vigorous phys-
ical activity. Similarly, among pregnant women with overweight 
or obesity there was no significant difference in the risk of 
preterm birth between those who were physically active and 
those in standard antenatal care. Available evidence from inter-
vention trials combining both aerobic and muscle-­strengthening 
physical activity support the recommendation for regular 
strength training to be included for pregnant and postpartum 
women.
No direct evidence was reviewed on sedentary behaviour for 
this subpopulation; however, the GDG reviewed the evidence for 
general populations and concluded it was applicable. Therefore, 
the sedentary behaviour recommendations for adults are extrap-
olated to pregnant and postpartum women and the certainty of 
the evidence downgraded for indirectness.
Recommendations for people living with chronic conditions
Physical activity is considered safe for adults living with the 
selected chronic conditions without contraindications, and the 
benefits generally outweigh the risks. Evidence was reviewed for 
the following chronic conditions: cancer, hypertension, type 2 
diabetes and HIV. Greater physical activity is related to improved 
health outcomes in people living with coronary heart disease. 
Among adults with type 2 diabetes, there is high-­certainty 
evidence that physical activity is associated with decreased risk 
of CVD mortality and decreased levels of haemoglobin A1c, 
blood pressure, body mass index and lipids. Among adults with 
hypertension, there is high-­certainty evidence that physical 
activity decreases risk of progression of cardiovascular disease 
and reduces blood pressure, while there is moderate-­certainty 
evidence that physical activity reduces the risk of CVD mortality. 
High-­certainty evidence shows that physical activity performed 
postcancer diagnosis is related to lower risks of mortality from 
all causes and mortality from cancer in female breast cancer 
survivors and colorectal cancer survivors.
Given that large numbers of people are currently living 
with HIV and that antiretroviral therapy has become effective 
and widely available, HIV is now considered a chronic condi-
tion. Thus, evidence on people living with HIV are included 
in these guidelines for the first time. There was moderate-­
certainty evidence that in people living with HIV, physical 
activity enhances health-­related quality of life, maximal oxygen 
consumption, exercise tolerance, general health and physical 
functioning. There was moderate-­certainty to high-­certainty 
evidence that regular physical activity did not result in signifi-
cant change in viral load, CD4+ count or disease progression, 
and as such, persons living with HIV are not adversely affected 
by physical activity.
There was moderate-­certainty to high-­certainty evidence that 
physical activity decreased symptoms of anxiety and depres-
sion. In addition, there was moderate-­certainty to high-­certainty 
evidence that physical activity was associated with a reduction in 
body fat percentage and an increase in lean body mass, but not 
waist circumference or body mass index.
Although there was no direct evidence on sedentary 
behaviour for these subpopulations, the GDG considered 
and concluded that the evidence for general populations was 
applicable. Therefore, the sedentary behaviour recommenda-
tions for adults were extrapolated to adults living with these 
chronic diseases and the certainty of the evidence downgraded 
for indirectness.
Recommendations for people living with disability
Evidence was reviewed for the following health conditions: 
multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury, intellectual disability, 
Parkinson’s disease, stroke, major clinical depression, schizo-
phrenia and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). 
The following health outcomes were examined: comorbidity, 
physical functioning, cognition and quality of life, but not all 
outcomes were assessed for each condition. This evidence 
was considered together with the evidence for those without 
disability and the resulting recommendations were extrapolated 
to be applicable to people with disability in general.
Physical activity is considered safe and beneficial for people 
living with disability without contraindications, and there are 
no major risks when it is appropriate to an individual’s current 
activity level, health status and physical functioning level. Adults 
living with disability may need to consult a healthcare profes-
sional or other physical activity and disability specialist to help 
determine the type and amount of activity appropriate for them.
In people with spinal cord injury, low-­certainty and moderate-­
certainty evidence suggests physical activity reduces shoulder 
pain and improves vascular function in paralysed limbs. Insuf-
ficient evidence was available to determine the relationship 
between physical activity and comorbid conditions in individuals 
with intellectual disability or multiple sclerosis. There is high-­
certainty evidence showing that physical activity can improve 
functioning in people with multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury 
and a history of stroke. For people with intellectual disability 
or Parkinson’s disease, this evidence is of low certainty and 
high certainty, respectively. Limited evidence was available for 
the relationship between physical activity and quality of life in 
people with multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury and intellectual 
disability. However, for people with schizophrenia and major 
clinical depression there was moderate-­certainty evidence for 
beneficial effects on quality of life. Moderate-­certainty evidence 
indicates that physical activity can have beneficial effects on 
cognition in people with multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, 
a history of stroke, ADHD and major clinical depression. For 
people with schizophrenia this evidence was of high certainty.
The evidence on the associations between sedentary behaviour 
and health outcomes in children, adolescents and adults living 
with disability was derived from literature reviewed for the 
general populations. The GDG concluded that these recommen-
dations could be extrapolated to children, adolescents, adults 
and older adults living with disability, according to their specific 
ability, but downgraded the certainty of the evidence due to indi-
rectness. The GDG agreed that benefits accrued from reducing 
sedentary time and gradually increasing physical activity where 
possible, depending on ability. In the case of those living with 
disability, especially wheelchair users or those with low mobility, 
it is important to note that it is possible to avoid sedentary 
behaviour while sitting or lying by doing light-­intensity or high-­
intensity activities that do not involve the lower extremities.
DISCUSSION
The updated WHO 2020 Guidelines on Physical Activity and 
Sedentary Behaviour5 provide clear, evidence-­based, recommen-
dations on how much physical activity provides health benefits 
for different population groups and on the potential risks of 
sedentary behaviours. These guidelines should be used to inform 
global, regional and national policy actions and investment, 
as well as to guide and strengthen national health behaviour 
surveillance systems that track progress towards national 
and global targets.1 The development of these new guidelines 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
25 November 2020. 
10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 9 (native) -----
1459
Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955
Guidelines
identified important areas requiring further research and thus 
also identified research priorities for the academic and research 
community.
What remains the same?
The evidence confirms the value of participating in regular 
physical activity to achieve health benefits across all ages and 
abilities. Further it supports key messages that some physical 
activity is better than none and that more is better for optimal 
health outcomes. More specifically, the evidence reaffirms all 
adults should undertake regular physical activity and should aim 
to achieve at least 150 min of moderate-­intensity, or 75 min of 
vigorous-­intensity aerobic physical activity per week, or some 
equivalent combination of moderate-­intensity and vigorous-­
intensity aerobic physical activity. Among children and adoles-
cents, an average of 60 min/day of moderate-­to-­vigorous 
intensity physical activity across the week (most of which should 
be aerobic), leads to health benefits. Furthermore, the guide-
lines continue to reinforce the value of muscle-­strengthening 
activity for all adults and children. The key physical activity-­
specific recommendations above remain largely unchanged from 
2010 and are consistent with other recently developed physical 
activity guidelines from several countries.13 17–22
What is new?
There are a few important differences in the new guidelines that 
should be highlighted for each age group. First, in adults, the 
previous stipulation that physical activity should be accumu-
lated in at least 10 min bouts has been removed. This change 
reflects the accumulated evidence from cohort studies, which 
shows physical activity of any bout duration is associated with 
improved health outcomes, including all-­cause mortality.16 23 
Second, these updated guidelines for adults now specify a target 
range of 150–300 min of moderate-­intensity and 75–150 min of 
vigorous-­intensity physical activity, compared with the previous 
guidelines that focused on achieving at least 150 min of moderate-­
intensity or 75 min of vigorous-­intensity activity per week. This 
change acknowledges that there is a range of physical activity 
which captures the maximal risk reductions for health outcomes 
associated with physical activity and going beyond this range 
does not appreciably further decrease the risk of major outcomes 
such as all-­cause or CVD mortality. Third, with respect to older 
adults, the recommendation regarding multicomponent physical 
activity that emphasises functional balance and strength training 
to enhance functional capacity and prevent falls now applies to 
all older adults rather than specifically those with poor mobility. 
This change acknowledges the large volume of evidence demon-
strating unequivocal beneficial effects of this physical activity 
type on the functional capacity and risk of falls in older people 
with a range of functional abilities.
There was also one key change in the new recommendations 
for children and adolescents. Specifically, the updated recom-
mendation is now to do at least an ‘average of 60 min/day’ of 
MVPA rather than the previously stated ‘accumulate 60 min of 
physical activity daily’. Although this might appear to be a subtle 
difference, the change better reflects the scientific evidence as 
most studies reported associations between an average daily 
value of physical activity rather than an accumulation of 60 min 
on each and every day of the week.
The new recommendation that sedentary behaviour should 
be limited across all groups is an important addition to these 
new global guidelines since 2010 and is in line with other 
recent country-­level guidelines19 20 that generally support the 
notion of moving more and reducing sedentary time (‘sitting 
less’ for ambulatory people). Although specifying a quantitative 
threshold on the amount of sedentary behaviour was strongly 
considered, there was insufficient evidence. Furthermore, varia-
tions in how sedentary time was measured, and that a threshold 
would likely vary by health outcome, by level of physical activity 
and by population subgroups, made quantifying upper time 
limits difficult to ascertain.
The recommendation to limit sedentary behaviour was qual-
ified with an acknowledgement that replacing sedentary time 
with any intensity of physical activity (including light intensity) 
has health benefits. This recommendation was based first on the 
juxtaposed evidence of lower levels of time spent in sedentary 
behaviours being beneficial for health even among those with 
modest levels of MVPA, and on the emerging, largely cross-­
sectional evidence, from ‘replacement’ studies (ie, isotemporal 
substitution) demonstrating these effects more directly. Second, 
there was evidence of effect modification between sedentary 
time and MVPA, which supported the development of a second 
recommendation emphasising the benefits of undertaking more 
than the recommended levels of MVPA to help reduce the 
detrimental effects of high levels of sedentary behaviour. The 
important practical application of this recommendation is to 
encourage the promotion of multiple approaches to limiting the 
negative health outcomes associated with high levels of sedentary 
time. This includes recommending individuals reduce their time 
spent in sedentary behaviours or increase their MVPA to help 
offset the negative impact, or some combination of both strate-
gies. Given that time spent in sedentary behaviours at work, for 
transport or for recreation appears to be overtaking time spent in 
more healthy physical activity behaviours during waking hours, 
the GDG deemed it important to attend to both physical activity 
and sedentary time and, therefore, to recommend a ‘balance’ 
of these behaviours for better health. Although the evidence 
on health benefits of ‘breaking up’ sedentary time and types of 
sedentary behaviours was reviewed, the GDG considered that 
there was insufficient evidence to provide specific quantified 
recommendations.
An additional issue related to the sedentary recommendations 
was the decision to opt specifically for the use of the term ‘seden-
tary behaviour’ instead of ’sitting’, which has been commonly 
used in several national guidelines. This wording choice was 
deliberate and made to reflect the overarching agenda of these 
new guidelines to be inclusive of people living with disability 
and therefore to emphasise options for reducing sedentary 
behaviour among wheelchair users and those with low mobility, 
where prolonged sitting may be unavoidable. For such people, 
sedentary time can be minimised through physical activity while 
remaining seated.
Guidelines for special groups—key considerations
The development of recommendations on physical activity and 
sedentary behaviours specifically for key populations, namely, 
people living with disability and chronic conditions, as well as 
for pregnant and postpartum women, addressed important gaps 
in global health policy. These new recommendations affirm that 
physical activity is feasible for these groups; and provides for 
the first-­time global science-­based recommendations to inform 
the development of population-­based initiatives to improve 
health outcomes for these population groups. In particular, these 
recommendations for people living with chronic disease and 
disability should stimulate increased attention in policy, surveil-
lance, investment and research aligned to the agenda of inclusion 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
25 November 2020. 
10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 10 (native) -----
1460
Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955
Guidelines
as called for in the sustainable development goals24 as well as in 
the convention on the rights of people living with disability.25
In undertaking this new work there were however several 
limitations. Specifically, the association between physical activity 
and health outcomes was only reviewed for selected chronic 
conditions and disabilities and there was limited evidence to 
inform on the optimal type, frequency or duration of activity 
by health condition. Due to the lack of direct evidence, consid-
erable extrapolation was needed to develop the recommenda-
tions on physical activity and the recommendations on sedentary 
behaviour relied entirely on the evidence from the general popu-
lation. Nonetheless, the GDG concluded the strong recommen-
dations for this population reflect the balance between desirable 
and undesirable consequences and send an important message to 
support the inclusion of people living with disability in physical 
activity population health initiatives.
Using these guidelines
Developing global guidelines is not an end in itself. The 2020 
WHO guidelines provide a set of evidence-­based physical activity 
and sedentary behaviour recommendations that national govern-
ments can adopt, thus removing the need for countries to use 
limited resources to undertake their own scientific reviews and 
expert consensus process. This issue is particularly important 
for LMICs where resources may be limited. During adoption of 
these global guidelines, national policymakers are encouraged 
to consider their national context and factors such as culture, 
ethnic diversity, existing social norms and the current provision 
for physical activity promotion within healthcare services as well 
as primary prevention, to inform adaptations and dissemination 
of the guidelines.
The existence of guidelines, in isolation, is unlikely to lead 
to increases in population levels of physical activity. It is crit-
ical that they are supported by coordinated dissemination to key 
audiences and a sustained national public education communi-
cation strategy. Furthermore, communication activities must be 
combined with implementation of setting specific policy actions 
to support behaviour change. How to optimise the impact of 
physical activity guidelines through effective communication 
strategies is explored in a separate paper in this issue.26
In 2018, the new GAPPA 2018–2030 set a target to reduce 
physical inactivity by 15% by 2030 and outlined 20 recom-
mended policy actions and interventions.1 These included 
recommending all countries combine sustained national public 
education and awareness campaigns with the integration of phys-
ical activity counselling programmes into primary and secondary 
healthcare. Other recommendations included the creation of 
appropriate and supportive environments for physical activity 
for all population groups and increasing opportunities for phys-
ical activity in schools, workplaces, cities and communities and 
as a form of safe and sustainable transport.
These 2020 global guidelines provide focus to the overall 
goal of national policy and support expanding the scope of 
actions to include additional groups, such as people living with 
disability, chronic conditions and women who are pregnant or 
post partum. National policy will need to offer a route to the 
development of appropriate programme delivery and practice 
that recognises community needs and the diversity of groups 
and contexts and seeks to reduce existing disparities in access 
to and engagement in physical activity. The inclusion of global 
recommendations on muscle strengthening activities is not new 
in these updated guidelines, but the GDG implicitly recognised 
their increasing importance due to an expanding evidence base. 
Promotion of muscle strengthening and falls prevention activi-
ties have been largely forgotten or ignored in the past27 28 and in 
most countries a much greater focus on this is now required for 
policy and practice.
Implications of these guidelines for health surveillance
These updated guidelines have several implications for future 
population monitoring and research. First, currently used 
surveillance instruments and/or protocols will need adaptation 
to align with the key changes made in these updated guidelines. 
Second, national population surveillance systems will need to be 
extended to include and track trends in key populations such 
as children aged 5–10 years, pregnant and postpartum women, 
older adults and persons living with disability or chronic condi-
tions. Third, monitoring systems should be strengthened to track 
trends in muscle-­strengthening exercises, which are of increasing 
importance with an ageing demographic in many countries. 
Fourth, as many countries are reliant on self-­reported methods, 
which have well-­established limitations,29 there is a need to accel-
erate advancements in sensor technology to ensure it provides a 
practical and affordable approach to assessing physical activity 
and sedentary behaviours. The potential of the new guidelines 
for advancing surveillance as well as the need for development 
Key messages
►
►These new 2020 WHO Guidelines on Physical Activity and 
Sedentary Behaviour provide evidence-­based public health 
recommendations concerning the amount and types of 
physical activity that offer significant health benefits and 
mitigate health risks.
►
►They update and replace the previous 2010 WHO 
recommendations on physical activity.
►
►The guidelines address children over the age of 5 years, 
adults, older adults and, for the first time, include specific 
recommendations for pregnant and postpartum women and 
people living with chronic conditions or disability.
►
►For all populations, the benefits of doing physical activity and 
limiting sedentary behaviour outweighed the potential harms.
►
►Risks can be managed by gradual increase in the amount and 
intensity of physical activity.
►
►Some physical activity is better than none for those not 
currently meeting these recommendations, individuals should 
start with small amounts of physical activity and gradually 
increase frequency, intensity and duration over time.
►
►Countries are encouraged to adopt and disseminate these 
new global guidelines to key audiences, and use them as the 
basis for sustained national public education communication 
campaigns responding to their national context and factors 
such as culture, ethnic diversity and social norms.
►
►These new guidelines should inform national policy and 
actions to promote physical activity and reduce sedentary 
behaviours as well as to align national health behaviour 
surveillance systems that track progress towards national and 
global targets.
►
►Important evidence gaps remain and more research is needed 
on the dose-­response relationship between volume and/or 
intensity of physical activity and health outcomes, particularly 
in people living with disability, and further evidence 
from low-­income and middle-­income, disadvantaged or 
underserved communities.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
25 November 2020. 
10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 11 (native) -----
1461
Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955
Guidelines
of device-­based approaches to inform a new generation of guide-
lines is discussed by Troiano et al.30
Key knowledge gaps
Despite the large quantity of data relating physical activity, and 
increasingly sedentary behaviours, to health outcomes across 
the life-­span, the GDG discussions revealed important evidence 
gaps, which should be prioritised to inform future guidelines. 
The most common need cited is more research on the dose-­
response relationship between volume and/or intensity of phys-
ical activity and health outcomes. Such information is key to 
establishing minimal effective doses and maximum safety thresh-
olds of physical activity for different population subgroups. 
There also remains limited evidence from LMICs and econom-
ically disadvantaged or underserved communities and many 
studies are not designed or powered to test for effect modifica-
tion by various sociodemographic factors. Such information is 
important for making more specific public health recommenda-
tions and reducing health disparities in more vulnerable sectors 
of the population. Further details on the research gaps arising 
from these new guidelines can also be found elsewhere.31
CONCLUSIONS
These new, updated WHO guidelines on physical activity and 
sedentary behaviour, together with the WHO guidelines for 
under 5 years of age,6 provide recommendations on physical 
activity and sedentary behaviour for individuals across the whole 
age spectrum and address a long-­lasting gap with the inclusion of 
key populations for the first time. Collectively, the recommen-
dations affirm the importance of regular aerobic and muscle-­
strengthening physical activity and reduction in sedentary 
behaviours. Benefits accrue from doing any amount of physical 
activity and this applies to people of all ages and abilities. There 
are significant health gains and cost savings to health systems if 
countries adopt these guidelines and direct efforts and resources 
to implementation of programmes and policy to enable achieve-
ment of the 2030 GAPPA target set out in the global action plan 
on physical activity.1 Benefits extend also beyond the health 
sector as mounting evidence across diverse fields shows the inter-
connected social, economic and environmental impacts of more 
physically active populations. Now, it is time to work to ensure 
and support the adoption and implementation of these new 
global guidelines for a healthier, more active future worldwide.
Author affiliations
1Physical Activity Unit, Department of Health Promotion, World Health Organization, 
Geneva, Switzerland
2School of Human Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Western 
Australia, Australia
3Health Promotion Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
4Centre for Health Research, University of Southern Queensland, Toowoomba, 
Queensland, Australia
5Age Institute, Helsinki, Finland
6Public Health Evaluation and Projection Unit, Finnish Institute for Health and 
Welfare, Helsinki, Uusimaa, Finland
7College of Health Solutions, Arizona State University, Phoenix, Arizona, USA
8Department of Movement and Sports Sciences, Ghent University, Belgium
9Institute of Technology Tralee, Tralee, Co Kerry, Ireland
10UNESCO Chair of Transforming the Lives of People with Disabilities, their Families 
and Communities, Through Physical Education, Sport, Recreation and Fitness
11Healthy Active Living and Obesity Research Group, Children’s Hospital of Eastern 
Ontario Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada
12School of Health and Life Sciences, Glasgow Caledonian University, Glasgow, UK
13Departments of Medicine, and Medical Informatics & Clinical Epidemiology, Oregon 
Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon, USA
14MRC Epidemiology Unit, School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK
15Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia; Diabetes 
Research Centre, University of Leicester, Leicester General Hospital, Leicester, UK
16Department of Exercise and Nutrition Science, Milken Institute School of Public 
Health, The George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA
17Department of Sport Medicine, Norwegian School of Sport Science, Oslo, Norway
18Department of Chronic Diseases and Ageing, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, 
Oslo, Norway
19NICM Health Research Institute, Western Sydney University, Penrith, New South 
Wales, Australia
20Division of Psychology and Mental Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, 
UK
21Department of Cancer Epidemiology and Prevention Research, CancerControl 
Alberta, Alberta Health Services, Calgary, Alberta, Canada
22Centre for Public Health, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, UK
23Department of Non-­Commuicable Diseases, Ministry of Health, Nairobi, Kenya
24Centre for Exercise, Nutrition & Health Science, School for Policy Studies, University 
of Bristol, Bristol, UK
25Population and Public Health Sciences, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA
26Research Centre for Health through Physical Activity, Lifestyle and Sport, Division 
of Exercise Science and Sports Medicine, Department of Human Biology, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa
27Department ofEpidemiology and Preventive Medicine, University of Regensburg, 
Germany
28Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwich Medical School, University of 
East Anglia Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, UK
29PROFITH (PROmoting FITness and Health through physical activity) research group, 
Department of Physical Education and Sports, Faculty of Sport Sciences, Research 
Institute of Sport and Health, University of Granada, Spain
30Sports and Exercise Medicine Unit and Department of Allied Health Sciences, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo, Colombo, Sri Lanka
31Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney, School of Health Sciences, Faculty 
of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia
32Institute for Musculoskeletal Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia
33Epidemiology and Genomics Research Program, National Cancer Institute, 
Bethesda, Maryland, USA
34Department of Public and Occupational Health, Amsterdam Public Health Research 
Institute, Amsterdam Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
35Prevention Research Collaboration, School of Public Health, The University of 
Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
36National Department of Health, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea
Twitter Matthew P Buman @mbuman, Ulf Ekelund @Ulf_Ekelund, Estelle 
Lambert @vickilambert, Karen Milton @karenmilton8, Emmanuel Stamatakis @M_
Stamatakis and Anne Tiedemann @AnneTiedemann1
Acknowledgements  The work and contributions to support this work from the 
following are gratefully acknowledged: the systematic reviews of evidence prepared 
for 2018 US Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee Scientific Report 
to the Secretary of US Department of Health and Human Services were updated 
thanks to additional literature searches conducted by Kyle Sprow (National Cancer 
Institutes, National Institutes of Health, Maryland, USA). Summaries of evidence and 
GRADE tables were prepared by Carrie Patnode and Michelle Henninger (The Kaiser 
Foundation Hospitals, Center for Health Research, Portland, Oregon, USA). Additional 
reviews of evidence were led by C Sherrington (Institute for Musculoskeletal Health, 
School of Public Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia; S Mabweazara 
(Research Centre for Health through Physical Activity, Lifestyle and Sports Medicine, 
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa) and 
L Leach (Department of Sport, Recreation and Exercise Science, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of the Western Cape, Cape Town, South Africa); E Verhagen and 
P Coenen (Department of Public and Occupational Health at Amsterdam University 
Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). Erin Dooley (National Cancer 
Institutes, National Institutes of Health, Maryland, USA) kindly provided support for 
the referencing and proof-­reading of the manuscript. The many research assistants 
that supported members of the GDG in reviewing the evidence and preparation of 
draft evidence summaries.
Contributors  All authors were involved in conceptualising the paper, drafting, 
revisions and editing and final review. FB led the overall development of the 
paper. JW and FB led the drafting of the method section. All authors reviewed and 
approved the final paper.
Funding  The Public Health Agency of Canada and the Government of Norway 
provided financial support, without which this work could not have been completed.
Competing interests  None declared.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
25 November 2020. 
10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 12 (native) -----
1462
Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955
Guidelines
Patient and public involvement  Patients and/or the public were involved in the 
design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research. Refer to the 
’Methods’ section for further details.
Patient consent for publication  Not required.
Ethics approval  This study was approved by the WHO Guidelines Review 
Committee in August 2020.
Provenance and peer review  Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Data availability statement  All data relevant to the study are included in 
the article. Further details, including the evidence profile tables summarising the 
evidence used for all recommendations, are available from WHO.
Open access  This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Unported (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits 
others to copy, redistribute, remix, transform and build upon this work for any 
purpose, provided the original work is properly cited, a link to the licence is given, 
and indication of whether changes were made. See: https://​creativecommons.​org/​
licenses/​by/​4.​0/.
ORCID iDs
Fiona C Bull http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0001-​8035-​4973
Matthew P Buman http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0002-​5130-​3162
Jean-­Philippe Chaput http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0002-​5607-​5736
Sebastien Chastin http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0003-​1421-​9348
Ulf Ekelund http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0003-​2115-​9267
Russell Jago http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0002-​3394-​0176
Estelle Lambert http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0003-​4315-​9153
Karen Milton http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0002-​0506-​2214
Emmanuel Stamatakis http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0001-​7323-​3225
Richard P Troiano http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0002-​6807-​989X
REFERENCES
	 1	 World Health Organization. Global action plan on physical activity 2018-2030: more 
active people for a healthier world. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2018.
	 2	 World Health Organization. Global recommendations on physical activity for health. 
Geneva: World Health Organization, 2010.
	 3	 Guthold R, Stevens GA, Riley LM, et al. Worldwide trends in insufficient physical 
activity from 2001 to 2016: a pooled analysis of 358 population-­based surveys with 
1·9 million participants. Lancet Glob Health 2018;6:e1077–86.
	 4	 Guthold R, Stevens GA, Riley LM, et al. Global trends in insufficient physical activity 
among adolescents: a pooled analysis of 298 population-­based surveys with 1·6 
million participants. Lancet Child Adolesc Health 2020;4:23–35.
	 5	 World Health Organization. Guidelines on physical activity and sedentary behaviour. 
Geneva: World Health Organization, 2020.
	 6	 World Health Organization. Guidelines on physical activity, sedentary behaviour and 
sleep for children under 5 years of age. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2019.
	 7	 World Health Organization. Who Handbook for Guideline development -. 2nd ed. 
Geneva: World Health Organization, 2014.
	 8	 Poitras VJ, Gray CE, Borghese MM, et al. Systematic review of the relationships 
between objectively measured physical activity and health indicators in school-­aged 
children and youth. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 2016;41:S197–239.
	 9	 Carson V, Hunter S, Kuzik N, et al. Systematic review of sedentary behaviour and 
health indicators in school-­aged children and youth: an update. Appl Physiol Nutr 
Metab 2016;41:S240–65.
	10	 Okely AD, Ghersi D, Loughran SP, et al. Australian 24-­hour movement guidelines for 
children (5-12 years) and young people (13-17 years): an integration of physical 
activity, sedentary behaviour, and sleep — research report: Australian government, 
department of health, 2019.
	11	 Mottola MF, Davenport MH, Ruchat S-­M, et al. 2019 Canadian guideline for physical 
activity throughout pregnancy. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:1339–46.
	12	 Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee. 2018 physical activity guidelines 
Advisory Committee scientific report. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and 
Human Services, 2018.
	13	 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Physical activity guidelines for 
Americans. 2nd edition. Washington, DC: U.S: Department of Health and Human 
Services, 2018.
	14	 Nussbaumer-­Streit B, Klerings I, Dobrescu AI, et al. Excluding non-­English publications 
from evidence-­syntheses did not change conclusions: a meta-­epidemiological study. J 
Clin Epidemiol 2020;118:42–54.
	15	 Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al. Grade: an emerging consensus on rating quality 
of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008;336:924–6.
	16	 Jakicic JM, Kraus WE, Powell KE, et al. Association between bout duration of physical 
activity and health: systematic review. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2019;51:1213–9.
	17	 Weggemans RM, Backx FJG, Borghouts L, et al. The 2017 Dutch physical activity 
guidelines. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2018;15:58.
	18	 Department of Health & Social Care. UK Chief Medical Officers’ Physical Activity 
Guidelines, 2019. Available: https://​assets.​publishing.​service.​gov.​uk/​government/​
uploads/​system/​uploads/​attachment_​data/​file/​832868/​uk-​chief-​medical-​officers-​
physical-​activity-​guidelines.​pdf
	19	 Australian Government, The Department of Health. Australian 24-­hour movement 
guidelines for children (5-12 years) and young people (13-17 years): an integration of 
physical activity, sedentary behavior, and sleep, 2019. Available: https://www.​health.​
gov.​au/​internet/​main/​publishing.​nsf/​Content/​ti-​5-​17years
	20	 Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology (CSEP). Canadian 24-­hour movement 
guidelines for children and youth (ages 5-17 years): an integration of physical activity, 
sedentary behaviour and sleep. Ottowa, Ontario, CANADA, 2016.
	21	 Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology. Canadian 24-­hour movement guidelines: 
an integration of physical activity, sedentary behaviour, and sleep, 2017. Available: 
https://​csepguidelines.​ca [Accessed 2 May 2020].
	22	 Commonwealth of Australia. Australia’s Physical Activity and Sedentary Behavior 
Guidelines, 2014. Available: https://​www1.​health.​gov.​au/​internet/​main/​publishing.​
nsf/​content/​F01F​9232​8EDA​DA5B​CA25​7BF0​001E720D/$​File/​brochure%​20PA%​
20Guidelines_​A5_​18-​64yrs.​PDF [Accessed 2 May 2020].
	23	 Ekelund U, Tarp J, Steene-­Johannessen J, et al. Dose-­Response associations 
between accelerometry measured physical activity and sedentary time and 
all cause mortality: systematic review and harmonised meta-­analysis. BMJ 
2019;366:l4570.
	24	 United Nations. Transforming our world: the 2030 agenda for sustainable 
development. New York: United Nations, 2015.
	25	 United Nations. The convention on the rights of persons with disabilities. New York: 
United Nations Headquarters, 2006.
	26	 Milton K, Bauman A, G F, et al. Maximising the impact of global and national 
physical activity guidelines - the critical role of communication strategies. Br J Sports 
Med2020.
	27	 Strain T, Milton K, Dall P, et al. How are we measuring physical activity and sedentary 
behaviour in the four home nations of the UK? A narrative review of current 
surveillance measures and future directions. Br J Sports Med 2019. doi:10.1136/
bjsports-2018-100355. [Epub ahead of print: 22 May 2019].
	28	 Milton K, Varela AR, Strain T, et al. A review of global surveillance on the muscle 
strengthening and balance elements of physical activity recommendations. J Frailty 
Sarcopenia Falls 2018;3:114–24.
	29	 Wijndaele K, White T, Andersen LB, et al. Substituting prolonged sedentary time and 
cardiovascular risk in children and youth: a meta-­analysis within the International 
children’s Accelerometry database (ICAD). Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2019;16:96.
	30	 Troiano RP, Stamatakis E, Bull F. How can global physical activity surveillance adapt 
to evolving physical activity guidelines? needs, challenges, and future directions. Br J 
Sports Med2020.
	31	 DiPietro L, Al-­Ansari S, Biddle S, et al. Advancing the global physical activity agenda: 
recommendations for future research by the 2020 who physical activity and sedentary 
behavior guidelines development group. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. In Press 2020.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
25 November 2020. 
10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as