

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Public Health Nutrition: 2(3a), 411–418
411
The inﬂuence of physical activity on mental well-being
Dr Kenneth R Fox*
Department of Exercise and Health Sciences, University of Bristol, Priory House, Woodlands Rd, Bristol, UK
Accepted: 7 May 1999
Abstract
Objective: The case for exercise and health has primarily been made on its impact on
diseases such coronary heart disease, obesity and diabetes. However, there is a very
high cost attributed to mental disorders and illness and in the last 15 years there has
been increasing research into the role of exercise a) in the treatment of mental health,
and b) in improving mental well-being in the general population. There are now
several hundred studies and over 30 narrative or meta-analytic reviews of research in
this ﬁeld. These have summarised the potential for exercise as a therapy for clinical or
subclinical depression or anxiety, and the use of physical activity as a means of
upgrading life quality through enhanced self-esteem, improved mood states, reduced
state and trait anxiety, resilience to stress, or improved sleep. The purpose of this
paper is to a) provide an updated view of this literature within the context of public
health promotion and b) investigate evidence for physical activity and dietary
interactions affecting mental well-being.
Design: Narrative review and summary.
Conclusions: Sufﬁcient evidence now exists for the effectiveness of exercise in the
treatment of clinical depression. Additionally, exercise has a moderate reducing effect
on state and trait anxiety and can improve physical self-perceptions and in some cases
global self-esteem. Also there is now good evidence that aerobic and resistance
exercise enhances mood states, and weaker evidence that exercise can improve
cognitive function (primarily assessed by reaction time) in older adults. Conversely,
there is little evidence to suggest that exercise addiction is identiﬁable in no more than
a very small percentage of exercisers. Together, this body of research suggests that
moderate regular exercise should be considered as a viable means of treating
depression and anxiety and improving mental well-being in the general public.
Keywords
Physical activity
Exercise
Sport
Mental health
Depression
Anxiety
Affect
Emotion
Stress
Sleep
Cognitive ability
Self-esteem
Physical self-perceptions
Body image
Addiction
Eating disorders
Anorexia
Bulimia
Obesity
Key messages
X There is growing evidence demonstrating that
exercise can be effective in improving the mental
well-being of the general public, largely through
improved mood and self-perceptions.
X There is good evidence to demonstrate that exercise
is effective as a treatment for clinical depression and
anxiety.
X Together
this adds to the already convincing
literature
that
exercise
reduces
morbidity
and
mortality from coronary heart disease, diabetes,
obesity and some cancers.
X The interactive effect of diet and exercise and
mental well-being has not been systematically
studied.
Introduction
The case for exercise and physical health is now
widely accepted by medical authorities across the
world1,2. Sedentary living doubles the risk of morbidity
and mortality from coronary heart disease and stroke3,4
which is comparable with the risk associated with
hypertension and hyperlipidaemia and not far behind
that of smoking. In addition, low activity levels are
thought to be a major cause of obesity5 and contributor
to the rising incidence of diabetes and some cancers.
The incidence of inactivity is also high in many
developed
countries
where
technology
is
slowly
removing exercise from lifestyles and is estimated
at around 40% of the middle aged and elderly in
the UK6. The public health burden of inactivity is
therefore problematic and expensive7 and activity
promotion could provide a cost-effective strategy for
improvement8.
While
physical
activity
can
indirectly
improve
subjective well-being and life quality by keeping
disease and premature death at bay, there has recently
been an increasing interest in its direct role in the
prevention and treatment of mental health problems.
Mental illness and disorders are widespread and
possibly on the increase. The 1995 Health Survey
for England9, for example, showed that 20% of women
q 1999 Nutrition Society
*Corresponding author: Tel: þ44/117 928 8810, Email: K.R.Fox@bristol.ac.uk
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980099000567 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 2 (native) -----
412
Kenneth R Fox
and 14% of men have at some time suffered mental
health problems. Up to 20% of children will suffer
mild and 7–10% moderate to severe mental health
problems that hinder normal development10 and there
is evidence of a worsening trend, particularly in socially
disadvantaged populations11. Depression is the most
widespread disorder affecting 5–10% of the popula-
tions of most developed countries12 with 20% of
those presenting in primary care in Britain having
recognizable degrees of symptomology13. The cost is
therefore high with the British Department of Health14
estimating 17% of expenditure in health services spent
on mental illness and disorders through hospitalization,
drug
therapy
and consultations. Other
costs are
incurred through social services provision, sickness
and invalidity beneﬁts, and loss of work productivity,
with 15% and 26% of days of certiﬁed incapacity in men
and women respectively being caused by mental
disorders.
Human suffering is high. Mental illness is socially
debilitating and associated with suicide ideation and
attempts, drug and alcohol abuse and homelessness.
For every serious case, however, there are also many
more individuals who suffer a general malaise of
low mental well-being characterized by emotional
distress, low self-esteem, poor body image, sense of
hopelessness, chronic stress and anxiety. This is often
not clinically diagnosed and so its incidence is difﬁcult
to accurately assess but it has major implications for
other problems such as heavy drinking, smoking,
absenteeism from work, family breakdown, physical
violence and abuse, and quality of life. These problems
seem to be present in westernized countries regardless
of the stability of economic or political climate.
Physical activity can be viewed from four different
perspectives regarding its direct contribution to solving
mental health problems:
1 Treatment of mental illness and disorders;
2 Prevention of mental illness and disorders;
3 Improvement of mental and physical well-being of
those with mental illness;
4 Improvement of mental well-being of the general
population.
The study of exercise and mental health is not new.
The ‘‘feeling good’’, ‘‘warm glow’’, or ‘‘exercise high’’
phenomenon that is widely reported anecdotally, has
received increasing research attention in the past
decade. In 1987 the US National Institute of Mental
Health consensus workshop statements regarding the
contribution
of
exercise
to
mental
health
were
published15. Since that time there have been several
books dedicated to the topic16,17,18 along with scores of
published
narrative
and
meta-analytical
reviews.
Recently, a literature review was commissioned and a
national consensus conference held in Britain by
Somerset Health Authority. In Belgium19, psychomotor
therapy to treat depression and anxiety is already
offered
through
the
state
health
provision.
The
literature focuses on the impact of physical activity on
depression, anxiety and stress, emotion, mood and
well-being, self-esteem and self-perceptions, sleep
quality, and the negative effects of exercise.
The effects of physical activity on mental health
Depression
Mild depression is characterized by a period of frequent
episodes of unhappiness. It is relatively common and
often not diagnosed. However, clinical depression is
determined against diagnostic criteria through ques-
tionnaires such as the Beck Depression Inventory20
or interviews such as DSM-III21 or Research Diagnostic
Criteria22. There is evidence from four prospective
epidemiological studies that those who become or
remain active or ﬁt are less likely to suffer clinical
depression. Odds ratio over a period of 9 years for
those who remained low in activity was 1.22 and for
those became inactive was 1.61 against a baseline of
high activity on both occasions23. Paffenbarger, Lee,
and Leung24 recorded a dose response relationship for
men over a 23–27 year period, with those engaged in
high activity (>2500 kcals/week) at 28% reduced risk,
and moderate activity (1000–2499 kcals/week) at 17%
risk for becoming depressed compared to those low in
activity. Farmer et al.25 found twice the risk of clinical
depression in women low in exercise over an 8-year
period.
Caution needs to be applied to such studies where
both variables provide plausible causal explanations of
the relationship between them, however the existence
of
a
dose
response
for
exercise
on
depression
reduction over time is convincing.
Two recent reviews have focused on the effect of
exercise on clinical depression. Mutrie26 summarized
10 key randomised controlled studies. Craft and
Landers27 conducted a meta-analysis on all available
studies where an exercise therapy for clinical depres-
sion had been used and produced a large mean effect
size of −0.72. Mutrie concluded:
X Physical activity is associated with decreased risk of
developing clinical depression.
X Experimental studies show that aerobic and resistance
exercise are effective in treating depression.
X The effect is of the same magnitude as psychothera-
peutic interventions.
This is strong evidence that exercise can help prevent
and treat this common cause of mental illness and
threat to mental well-being.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980099000567 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 3 (native) -----
413
Physical activity and mental well-being
Anxiety and stress reactivity
Several narrative
and meta-analytic reviews have
been conducted in this area such as Calfas and
Taylor28 with adolescents, McDonald and Hodgdon29,
Petruzzello et al.30 and Taylor31. Research has taken
three approaches. First, the effect of a single bout of
exercise on state anxiety (acute or right now feelings)
as been
addressed.
This
literature
has
indicated
moderate effects for reductions in anxiety post exercise
with most studies testing the effects of aerobic forms
of exercise such as running. Second, the effects of
engaging in several weeks of an exercise programme
on both state and trait anxiety (predisposition to react
nervously) have been investigated. Similarly, exercise
has been shown to provide moderate reductions in
state and trait anxiety. Third, the effect of single
exercise sessions and exercise programmes has been
tested on the psychosocial and psycho-physiological
reactivity to a subsequent psychological stressor such
as a complex mental task or public speaking. This
literature has provided equivocal results with only half
the studies showing a beneﬁt from exercise training or
improved ﬁtness although this may be as much due to
the difﬁculties associated with measurement as lack of
effect.
Subjective well-being, emotion and mood
The ability of physical activity to ‘‘energise’’ and
produce more positive mood is reported widely. At
least 20 reviews of studies in the area of affect
have been published. Stephens32 summarised epide-
miological evidence that showed a clear association
between activity and several indices of subjective
well-being. Biddle33 has recently conducted a review
of
reviews
on
the
literature
and
concluded
the
following.
X Large scale surveys in several countries using
different methods and criteria conﬁrm a moderate
association between physical activity and indices of
subjective well-being.
X Experimental studies support a positive effect on
mood for moderate intensity exercise.
X Affective beneﬁts are more likely to be experienced
if participants focus on personal improvement goals.
Both survey and experimental research therefore
provide support to the well publicised statement that
‘‘exercise makes you feel good’’.
Self-esteem and self-perceptions
Self-esteem is important when studying mental well-
being because of (a) its close association with emotional
stability and adjustment, (b) low self-esteem features in
many forms of mental illness and (c) low self-esteem is
associated with poor health behaviours. It is therefore
regarded as both an indicator of well-being and as a
marker for recovery. Some psychologists would go so
far as to say that self-esteem is the core of mental health
as it represents our self-rating of overall worth.
Fox34 and Spence and Poon35 recently reviewed
studies to establish the impact of exercise on self-esteem.
Both reviews concluded that there is an inconsistent
and weak relationship between physical activity and
global self-esteem. The meta analysis of Spence
revealed a weak mean effect size of 0.22. Fox identiﬁed
36 randomized controlled studies and 44 controlled
studies since 1971 and found that approximately 50%
indicated positive changes in self-esteem. However,
this ﬁnding is in line with theoretical reasoning that
would suggest that self-esteem is a stable construct and
not easily changed by success in a single life domain.
Self-esteem theory and measurement has advanced
considerably in the last decade and more recent studies
are focusing on the physical self36 which consists of
self-ratings of the body, its appearance, its capabilities
and worth. Physical self-worth
has been shown
through its associations with measures of emotional
adjustment, independent of global self-esteem and
socially desirable responding, to have mental well-
being properties in its own right37. There is clear
evidence that exercise can change people’s perceptions
of their physical self and identity in a positive way. For
some people, in some circumstances, particularly those
who are initially low in self-esteem, this extends to
more generalized changes in self.
Cognitive performance
There has been some interest in the role of exercise in
improving mental agility, particularly in older people,
the view being that declines might be preventable.
Boutcher38 and Etnier et al.39 recently reviewed the
impact of exercise on cognitive function (reaction time,
memory, and ﬂuid intelligence) in older people.
Boutcher concluded that though cross sectional studies
show that ﬁt older adults display better cognitive
functioning than unﬁt older adults, the evidence
from experimental studies remains equivocal with 5
intervention studies demonstrating improvements but
9 not showing signiﬁcant change. Etnier’s et al. meta
analysis which focused on the relationship between
ﬁtness and cognitive performance in older adults
showed a weak but signiﬁcant overall effect size. It
appears that the view that exercise into old age keeps
you alert and spritely has yet to be substantiated fully.
There are insufﬁcient numbers of well-conducted
studies in younger adults and children to draw
conclusions.
Sleep quality
Insomnia affects approximately a third of the adult
populationandisassociatedwithpoorworkperformance
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980099000567 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 4 (native) -----
414
Kenneth R Fox
and psychological dysfunction40. The interest in the
effect of exercise has grown with the acceptance that
sleeping pills have undesirable side effects including
increased risk of mortality and dependence. Epidemio-
logical evidence demonstrates that daylight exercise is
the behaviour most closely related to sleep quality.
Youngstedt41 recently produced a meta analysis of 38
studies on the effects of a single bout of exercise on
subsequent sleep of good sleepers. A number of
conclusions were drawn:
X Exercise had no effect on the time it took to fall
asleep.
X Exercise produced small increases in the amount of
sleep time and slow-wave sleep.
X Exercise reduced rapid eye movements (REM) and
increased the time before onset.
The effect of exercise programmes on the sleep quality
of poor sleepers was assessed in two well designed
randomized controlled studies and exercise has been
shown to have a moderate positive effect although as
yet it is not clear if exposure to bright light through
exercise is a contributing mechanism. This appears to
be a fruitful area of research but current evidence
would suggest that exercise in bright light, with
emphasis on duration rather than intensity, regardless
of ﬁtness level will improve sleep, regardless of usual
sleep quality.
Negative effects of physical activity
There have been frequent efforts in the media to ﬁnd
negative aspects of exercise and the concept of exercise
addiction is often targeted. Szabo42 recently addressed
the literature to examine the existence of negative
effects. He concluded that exercise dependence exists
as a psychopathological disorder but is extremely
rare. He suggested that exercise dependence is often
confused with a high degree of exercise commitment
and outlined clear distinctionsbetween the twobased on
positive versus negative motivation and the degree of
centrality of exercise in life. He cautioned that there are a
signiﬁcant number of people with eating disorders who
use exercise to promote weight loss but these can be
distinguished from highly committed exercisers by their
motivational proﬁle. Female athletes, particularly those
in sports where slenderness is required for performance
and aesthetics, are at higher risk for developing eating
disorders43. Similarly those who seek high level athletic
performance and/or body building are probably more
likely to take banned substances42.
Summary
Evidence is convincing that exercise can be useful in
treating and avoiding depressive illnesses, and can
be used as a means of reducing stress and anxiety
on a daily basis. In addition, there is sufﬁcient
evidence to show that single bouts of activity can
improve mood and sleep quality and that people
who are more active are much more likely to rate
themselves and their sense of mental well-being
more positively. The feeling good effect of exercise
therefore seems to be substantiated by research. In
addition, regular exercise appears to offer a vehicle
for more deep-seated change through improvements
in the way we view our physical selves, and this has
potential to generalize to higher self-esteem and
identity change. Any negative mental effects from
exercise seem to affect only a small percentage of
participants.
Mechanisms for mental health improvement
Although there has been considerable progress in the
past decade on establishing the effect of exercise on
elements of mental health and well-being, the speciﬁc
mechanisms and the conditions under which they
operate
have
not
yet
been
determined.
Several
candidates have been identiﬁed and to varying degrees
these are undergoing research. Mechanisms fall under
three
categories;
biochemical,
physiological,
and
psycho-social.
Biochemical mechanisms
Considerable media attention has arisen from the
discovery of endogenous opioid peptides in blood
during and after exercise. The view was that these
substances, primarily plasma b-endorphin, produced a
feeling of euphoria or ‘‘runners high’’. Subsequent
analysis has not supported this as a widespread effect
as few exercisers report these sensations. It is likely
to require high levels of exercise output, and further
studies
have
not
found
a
correlation
between
endorphin levels and mood. Measurement, control
and isolation difﬁculties make this a challenging area
of research and there has been little systematic
progress since the early 1990s44. Dishman45 recently
summarized the evidence for norepinephrine as a
trigger for anxiety and depression reduction and
reported similar difﬁculties.
There
has
been
recent
attention
paid
to
the
interaction
between
physical
activity
and
central
serotonin (5-hydoxytryptamine [5-HT]) as a mood
enhancer46. Animal and human studies have supported
increases in brain 5-HT synthesis and metabolism with
acute exercise but the extent to which this is a trigger
for improved mood remains unknown.
Physiological mechanisms
There is a close relationship in adults between
participation in aerobic activity and cardiovascular
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980099000567 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 5 (native) -----
415
Physical activity and mental well-being
ﬁtness. Therefore, epidemiological studies that have
used ﬁtness or activity measures have often produced
similar relationships with measures such as subjective
well-being. However, in experimental studies, physical
ﬁtness change rarely produces more than a weak
association with either reduction in depression 26,27 and
anxiety or increases in mood and self-perceptions34,35.
It appears from these data that increased ﬁtness may
not be the trigger for change although it may eventually
accompany it. Process factors associated with regular
participation
in
exercise
rather
than
change
in
functional status seem to be more salient to mental
well-being change.
Thermogenesis or increased body core temperature
through acute exercise has also been suggested as a
trigger of increased relaxation and improved mood.
To date, ﬁndings have been inconsistent47. Other
suggested
mechanisms
that
have
received
some
support have included increased muscle relaxation,
cerebral blood ﬂow and neurotransmitter efﬁciency.
Psychosocial mechanisms
Four areas are being investigated. Improvements
in perceptions of competence and self-efﬁcacy or
conﬁdence about the body and its capabilities may be
increased through regular exercise and this may
generalize to global self-esteem and other elements of
well-being. This may be particularly important for older
people or individuals recovering from illnesses and
injury48.
Body image is more closely related to self-esteem
than any other single element of self, particularly for
females36,43,49. It is often so central that it inﬂuences
daily habits, patterns of food choice, choice in clothes,
conﬁdence in public, and for many carries frequent
emotional signals that can inﬂuence mood. Physical
activity offers a means of improving body image
through fat loss and improved muscle ﬁtness. However,
there is a complex of constructs involved including
body satisfaction and acceptance and some studies
indicate (often with females high in obsessiveness and
neuroticism) that exercise raises body awareness and
expectations and is counterproductive to satisfaction
and self-esteem43.
One of the potentially fruitful areas of research is
the contribution of mastery and self-determination to
self-esteem
and
mental
well-being.
Exercise
can
provide a medium for slowly taking command over
health behaviour and body appearance that may trigger
a general sense of autonomy. The important effect
may not so much be perceived change but the
empowerment that achieving the change provides36.
Finally there has been less of a focus on the social
beneﬁts of exercise than is warranted. Social afﬁliation
and signiﬁcance are related to self-esteem49 and social
apathy is an established corollary of depression. The
social interaction that activity can provide through
sport participation and joining exercise groups may
provide social support for improving self-esteem and
life satisfaction. In older people, activity may increase
mobility
and
independence
and
promote
social
interaction.
In
summary,
the
mechanisms
underpinning
improved well-being and alleviation of distressing
mental illness have been difﬁcult to isolate and establish.
It is likely that multiple mechanisms are effective in any
one situation. The dominance of any one mechanism
will be determined by exercise characteristics such as
intensity and duration, characteristics of the individual,
and environmental factors surrounding the exercise.
Currently the evidence suggests that factors associated
with the process of exercise rather than the physiolo-
gical
adaptations
resulting
from
regular
exercise
training are primarily responsible for improvements in
short and long-term well-being.
Activity and dietary interactions
There is no body of knowledge speciﬁcally directed at
the interaction between diet and exercise in mental
health. In the latest book summarizing research in
physical activity and mental health18 diet and nutrition
are not listed in the index. There is a general absence of
systematic
research
into
the
conjoint
effects
of
nutrition, dieting and exercise and sport participation
and this applies to issues in sport and exercise
performance, as well as physical and mental health
outcomes. This suggests that joint forums are required
to generate new ideas, hypotheses, and research
collaboration between the two academic bodies.
There are some key areas where interactive effects
are being researched or requiring multidisciplinary
attention.
Exercise and anorexia
Starvation and excessive exercising coexist in anorexics
who are obsessive-compulsive and/or who have a high
degree of neuroticism. Recent animal studies have
indicated that when deprived of food and given the
opportunity to exercise on a running wheel they will
increase physical activity50. This would intuitively be
the opposite behaviour expected for self-preservation.
Although in the early stages of research, a mechanism
has been hypothesized which involves the interactive
effects of starvation and increased exercise on 5-HT
(serotonin)51.
Exercise and food intake
Although not directly related to mental health but
implicated through its effect on obesity development
and weight management attempts, are the interactive
effects of energy intake and energy expended through
exercise. Recently, Blundell and King52 addressed several
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980099000567 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 6 (native) -----
416
Kenneth R Fox
key issues in this area and concluded: Exercise produces
a reduction in appetite. However this is relatively short
lived and lasts in most cases less than an hour.
There is no evidence of tight coupling between
energy deﬁcit created through exercise and subsequent
energy intake. This suggests that exercise for weight
loss is not futile as there is not a strong physiological
link to stimulate compensatory eating.
There is stronger regulation of carbohydrate and
protein than fat in response to exercise. This suggests
that hunger following exercise is more likely to be
driven by need for carbohydrate repletion in the
muscles and protein for synthesis. Post exercise meals
low in fat would therefore promote successful weight
management.
Clearly this is an important area of research as mental
health is often inﬂuenced by guilt, low self-efﬁcacy or
futility regarding maintenance of a lean body.
Exercise and sustained weight loss
There have been a series of studies from different
research groups showing that those who maintain
exercise following a weight loss programme, are
much more likely to sustain their weight loss. This
cannot be fully explained by the increased energy
expended by the exercise. The view exists therefore
that psychological mechanisms such as increased self-
esteem, conﬁdence and control developed through the
exercise is promoting more successful management of
energy intake53. The relative inﬂuence of exercise and
eating behaviour and their interactive effects on long
term weight management success is an important issue
as it affects large numbers of individuals.
Other issues
Other areas of dietary/exercise interaction of potential
importance include:
X The interactive effect of low food intake, low blood
sugar and high activity on mood and mental and
physical performance at school and work.
X The interaction between macronutrient intake and
exercise intensity and duration on acute and chronic
mental well-being indicators.
Issues and recommendations
Research issues
Physical activity and mental health remains an under-
researched and under-invested area compared to other
ﬁelds of health service research. For example, the work
on exercise and self-esteem amounts to little more than
one randomized controlled study per year for the last
30 years.
Most studies have been conducted by academics in
the ﬁeld of exercise, sport and health science and
evidence-based-health
principles
have
not
been
adopted
widely.
For
example,
intention
to
treat
statistics are rarely included in intervention studies.
There is also little evidence that cost effectiveness
has been considered, and criteria for randomized
controlled studies have only rarely been fully satisﬁed.
As with most behavioural studies, ﬁndings are
limited to consenting volunteers who can tolerate the
exercise session and/or who adhere to the exercise
programme. Whereas this may be acceptable for the
design of a health service intervention, more research is
needed on those who dropout or avoid programmes so
that future work might address mediating factors which
prevent mental health beneﬁts.
The area suffers from a ‘‘so what’’ syndrome. It is not
often clear what the practical and clinical signiﬁcance
of improvements in some constructs such as subjective
well-being, self-perceptions, and mood actually are.
This is particularly the case where well-being of the
general public who are not mentally ill is being
addressed.
Studies
are
required
that
investigate
change alongside reduction in GP visits, reliance on
medication and other indicators of well-being such as
emotional adjustment, social functioning and life
satisfaction.
This article has clearly outlined the scope for
collaborative research between nutritionists and exer-
cise scientists to investigate interactive effects of food
intake and activity on mental health.
Exercise and health promotion
Exercise should be promoted regardless of its impact
on mental health as it carries signiﬁcant reduction in
risks for a range of diseases and disorders for all sectors
of society. The body of literature summarized in this
article also supports the need for exercise promotion in
the general public as it could prove to be a cheap and
available vehicle for improving self-perceptions, mood,
life satisfaction, social interaction and quality of
life. However, there is also sufﬁcient evidence to
support the use of exercise in the treatment of
depression, anxiety and stress. Treatment interventions
should be tried and tested for cost effectiveness in ﬁeld
settings.
There is no deﬁnitive exercise recommendation for
all elements of mental health promotion as it is likely
that different formulas of frequency, intensity and
duration of exercise apply for different mechanisms
and perhaps different populations. However, the
current general message of 30 minutes or more of
moderate activity such as brisk walking on 5 or 6 days
each week is supported by the literature. Longer may
be better, resistance exercise should also be considered
and
certainly
for
those
already
ﬁt
and
active,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980099000567 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 7 (native) -----
417
Physical activity and mental well-being
participation in vigorous exercise and sport may well
bring further beneﬁts in mental well-being.
Acknowledgements
This overview has drawn upon recent work com-
missioned by Somerset Health Authority, UK, directed
by Trudy Grant of the Somerset Physical Activity
Group. Thanks go to colleagues Stuart Biddle, Steven
Boutcher, Nanette Mutrie, Attila Szabo, and Adrian
Taylor for enabling me in my task of summarising this
broad area of research literature.
References
1
WHO. Exercise for health. WHO/FIMS Committee on
Physical Activity for Health. Bulletin of the World Health
Organisation 1995; 73(2): 135–6.
2
US Department of Health and Human Services (PHS).
Physical activity and health. A report of the Surgeon General
(Executive Summary), 1996. Pittsburgh, PA: Superintendent
of Documents.
3
Berlin JA, Colditz GA. A meta-analysis of physical activity in
the prevention of coronary heart disease. Am. J. Epidemiol.
1990; 132: 612–28.
4
Powell KE, Thompson PD, Casperson CJ, Kendrick JS.
Physical activity and the incidence of coronary heart disease.
Ann. Rev. Pub. Health 1987; 8: 253–87.
5
Prentice AM, Jebb S. Obesity in Britain: Gluttony or sloth. Br.
Med. J. 1995; 311: 437–9.
6
Sports Council/HEA. Allied Dunbar National Fitness Survey:
Main ﬁndings. 1992; London: Sports Council and HEA.
7
Powell KE, Blair S. The public health burdens of sedentary
living habits: theoretical but realistic estimates. Medicine
and Science in Sports and Exercise 1994; 26: 851–6.
8
Morris J. Exercise in the prevention of coronary heart
disease: Today’s best buy in public health. Medicine and
Science in Sports & Exercise 1994; 26: 807–14.
9
Prescott-Clarke P, Primatesta P, eds. Health Survey for
England 1995: ﬁndings: A survey carried out on behalf of
the Department of Health. 1997; London: The Stationary
Ofﬁce.
10
Kurtz Z. With health in mind. 1992; London: Action for Sick
Children.
11
Rutter M, Smith DJ, eds. Psychosocial disorders in young
people: Time trends and their causes. 1995; New York: John
Wiley.
12
Weismann MM, Klerman GL. Depression: Current under-
standing and changing trends. Ann. Rev. Pub. Health 1992;
13: 319–39.
13
Paykel ES, Priest RG. Recognition and management of
depression in general practice: A consensus statement. Br.
Med. J. 1992; 305: 1198–202.
14
Department of Health. NHS Executive. Burdens of disease: a
discussion document. 1996; London: Department of Health.
15
Morgan WP, Goldston SE, eds. Exercise and mental health
1987; Washington DC: Hemisphere.
16
Biddle SJH, Mutrie N. Psychology of physical activity and
exercise. 1991; London: Springer-Verlag.
17
Leith LM. Foundations of exercise and mental health. 1994;
Morgantown, WW: Fitness Information Technology.
18
Morgan WP, ed. Physical activity and mental health. 1997;
Washington, DC: Taylor and Francis.
19
Van de Vliet P, Knapen J, Joos S, Van Coppenolle H, Pieters
G. Psychomotor therapy for depressive psychiatric patients:
Effects on the mood and self. Proceedings of the European
Congress on Sport Psychology, 1999, Prague, July. (part 2)
pp. 271–3.
20
Beck AT, Ward CH, Mendelsohn M, Mock J, Erbaugh H. An
inventory for measuring depression. Archives and General
Psychiatry 1961; 4: 561–71.
21
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (4th edn) 1994; Washington, DC:
APA.
22
Spitzer RL, Endicott J, Robins E. Research diagnostic criteria.
Archives of General Psychiatry 1978; 35: 773–82.
23
Camacho TC, Roberts RE, Lazarus NB, Kaplan GA, Cohen
RD. Physical activity and depression. Evidence from the
Alameda County Study. Am. J. Epidemiol. 1991; 134: 220–31.
24
Paffenbarger RS, Lee I-M, Leung R. Physical activity and
personal characteristics associated with depression and
suicide
in
American
college
men.
Acta
Psychiatrica
Scandinavia 1994; 89 (S377): 16–22.
25
Farmer ME, Locke BZ, Moscicki EK, Dannenberg AL, Larson
DB, Radloff LS. Physical activity and depressive symptoms:
The NHANES I Epidemiological Follow-Up Study. Am. J.
Epidemiol. 1988; 128: 1340–51.
26
Mutrie N. The relationship between physical activity and
clinically deﬁned depression. In: Biddle SJH, Fox KR,
Boutcher SH (eds) Physical activity and psychological
well-being. London: Routledge (in press).
27
Craft LL, Landers DM. The effect of exercise on clinical
depression and depression resulting from mental illness: A
meta analysis. J. Sport Exercise Psychol. 1998; 20(4): 339–57.
28
Calfas KJ, Taylor WC. Effects of physical activity on
psychological variables in adolescents. Pediatric Exercise
Sci. 1994; 6(4): 406–23.
29
McDonald DG, Hodgdon JA. Psychological effects of aerobic
ﬁtness training, 1991; London: Springer-Verlag.
30
Petruzzello SJ, Landers DM, Hatﬁeld BD, Kubitz KA, Salazar
W. A meta-analysis on the anxiety-reducing effects of acute
and chronic exercise. Outcomes and mechanisms. Sports
Medicine 1991; 11(3): 143–82.
31
Taylor A. Physical activity stress and anxiety: A review. In:
Biddle SJH, Fox KR, Boutcher SH (eds) Physical activity and
psychological well-being. London: Routledge (in press).
32
Stephens T. Physical activity and mental health in the United
States and Canada: Evidence from four population surveys.
Preventive Medicine 1988; 17: 35–47.
33
Biddle SJH. Emotion, mood and physical activity. In: Biddle
SJH, Fox KR, Boutcher SH (eds) Physical activity and
psychological well-being. London: Routledge (in press).
34
Fox KR. The effects of exercise on self-perceptions and self-
esteem. In: Biddle SJH, Fox KR, Boutcher SH (eds) Physical
activity and psychological well-being. London: Routledge
(in press).
35
Spence JC, Poon P. The effect of physical activity on self-
concept: A meta-analysis. Alberta Centre for Well-Being:
Research Update 1997; 4(3): 4.
36
Fox KR. The physical self and processes in self-esteem
development. In: Fox KR, ed. The physical self: From
motivation to well-being Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
1997; 111–40.
37
Sonstroem RJ, Potts SA. Life adjustment correlates of
physical self-concepts. Med. Sci. Sports Exercise 1996; 28:
619–25.
38
Boutcher SH. Cognitive performance, ﬁtness and ageing. In:
Biddle SJH, Fox KR, Boutcher SH (eds) Physical activity and
psychological well-being. London: Routledge (in press).
39
Etnier JL, Salazar W, Landers DM, Petruzzello SJ, Han M,
Nowell P. The inﬂuence of physical ﬁtness and exercise
upon cognitive
functioning:
A meta-analysis. J. Sport
Exercise Psychol. 1997; 19: 249–74.
40
National Commission on Sleep Disorders Research. Wake up
America: A national sleep alert. Executive summary and
executive report. 1993; 1–76.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980099000567 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 8 (native) -----
418
Kenneth R Fox
41
Youngstedt SD, O’Connor PJ, Dishman RK. The effects of
acute exercise on sleep: A quantitative synthesis. Sleep 1997;
20(3): 203–14.
42
Szabo A. Physical activity and psychological dysfunction. In:
Biddle SJH, Fox KR, Boutcher SH (eds) Physical activity and
psychological well-being. London: Routledge (in press).
43
Davis C. Body image, exercise and eating behaviours. In:
Fox KR ed. The physical self: From motivation to well-being
Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics. 1997: 143–74.
44
Hoffman P. The endorphin hypothesis. In: Morgan WP ed.
Physical activity and mental health. Washington DC: Taylor
& Francis 1997: 163–78.
45
Dishman RK. The norepinephrine hypothesis. In: Morgan
WP ed. Physical activity and mental health Washington DC:
Taylor & Francis 1997: 199–212.
46
Chaouloff F. The serotonin hypothesis. In: Morgan WP ed.
Physical activity and mental health Washington DC: Taylor
& Francis. 1997: 179–98.
47
Koltyn KF. The thermogenic hypothesis. In: Morgan WP ed.
Physical activity and mental health. Washington DC: Taylor
& Francis. 1997: 213–26.
48
McAuley E, Mihalko SL. Measuring exercise-related self-
efﬁcacy. In: Duda JL ed. Advances in sport and exercise
psychology measurement Morgantown, WV: Fitness Infor-
mation Technology. 1998: 371–92.
49
Harter S. Causes, correlates, and the functional role of global
self-worth: A lifespan perspective. In: Sternberg RJ and
Kolligian J. eds Competence considered. New York: Vail-
Ballou. 1990: 67–97.
50
Epling WF, Pierce WD. Activity-based anorexia in rats as a
function of opportunity to run on an activity wheel.
Nutrition and Behavior 1984; 2: 37–49.
51
Davis C, Kaptein S, Kaplan AS, Olmsted MP, Woodside DB.
Obsessionality in anorexia nervosa: The moderating inﬂuence
of exercise. Psychosomatic Medicine 1998; 60: 192–7.
52
Blundell JE, King NA. Effects of exercise on appetite control:
loose coupling between energy expenditure and energy
intake. Int. J. Obesity 1998; 22 (Suppl 2): S22–9.
53
Biddle SJH, Fox KR. Motivation for physical activity and
weight management. Int. J. Obesity 1998; 22 (Suppl 2): S39–
47.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980099000567 Published online by Cambridge University Press