

----- Page 1 (native) -----
HAL Id: hal-02566873
https://hal.umontpellier.fr/hal-02566873v1
Submitted on 7 May 2020
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
An Oﬀicial American Thoracic Society/European
Respiratory Society Statement: Update on Limb Muscle
Dysfunction in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
François Maltais, Marc Decramer, Richard Casaburi, Esther Barreiro, Yan
Burelle, Richard Debigaré, P N Richard Dekhuijzen, Frits Franssen, Ghislaine
Gayan-Ramirez, Joaquim Gea, et al.
To cite this version:
François Maltais, Marc Decramer, Richard Casaburi, Esther Barreiro, Yan Burelle, et al.. An Oﬀicial
American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society Statement: Update on Limb Muscle Dys-
function in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical
Care Medicine, 2014, ￿10.1164/rccm.201402-0373ST￿. ￿hal-02566873￿

----- Page 2 (native) -----
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY
DOCUMENTS
An Ofﬁcial American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society
Statement: Update on Limb Muscle Dysfunction in Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease
François Maltais, Marc Decramer, Richard Casaburi, Esther Barreiro, Yan Burelle, Richard Debigar ´e,
P. N. Richard Dekhuijzen, Frits Franssen, Ghislaine Gayan-Ramirez, Joaquim Gea, Harry R. Gosker, Rik Gosselink,
Maurice Hayot, Sabah N. A. Hussain, Wim Janssens, Micheal I. Polkey, Josep Roca, Didier Saey, Annemie
M. W. J. Schols, Martijn A. Spruit, Michael Steiner, Tanja Taivassalo, Thierry Troosters, Ioannis Vogiatzis, and
Peter D. Wagner; on behalf of the ATS/ERS Ad Hoc Committee on Limb Muscle Dysfunction in COPD
THIS OFFICIAL STATEMENT OF THE AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY (ATS) AND THE EUROPEAN RESPIRATORY SOCIETY (ERS) WAS APPROVED BY THE ATS BOARD OF
DIRECTORS, NOVEMBER 2013, AND BY THE ERS EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, SEPTEMBER 2013
Background: Limb muscle dysfunction is prevalent in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and it has important clinical
implications, such as reduced exercise tolerance, quality of life,
and even survival. Since the previous American Thoracic Society/
European Respiratory Society (ATS/ERS) statement on limb
muscle dysfunction, important progress has been made on the
characterization of this problem and on our understanding of its
pathophysiology and clinical implications.
Purpose: The purpose of this document is to update the 1999
ATS/ERS statement on limb muscle dysfunction in COPD.
Methods: An interdisciplinary committee of experts from the ATS
and ERS Pulmonary Rehabilitation and Clinical Problems assemblies
determined that the scope of this document should be limited to
limb muscles. Committee members conducted focused reviews of the
literatureonseveraltopics.Alibrarianalsoperformedaliteraturesearch.
An ATS methodologist provided advice to the committee, ensuring that
the methodological approach was consistent with ATS standards.
Results: We identiﬁed important advances in our understanding
of the extent and nature of the structural alterations in limb muscles
in patients with COPD. Since the last update, landmark studies
were published on the mechanisms of development of limb muscle
dysfunction in COPD and on the treatment of this condition. We
now have a better understanding of the clinical implications of limb
muscle dysfunction. Although exercise training is the most potent
intervention to address this condition, other therapies, such as
neuromuscular electrical stimulation, are emerging. Assessment of
limb muscle function can identify patients who are at increased risk
of poor clinical outcomes, such as exercise intolerance and premature
mortality.
Conclusions: Limb muscle dysfunction is a key systemic
consequence of COPD. However, there are still important gaps in our
knowledge about the mechanisms of development of this problem.
Strategies for early detection and speciﬁc treatments for this
condition are also needed.
Overview
Limb muscle dysfunction is an important
systemic consequence of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) because of its
impact on physical activity, exercise
tolerance, quality of life, and even survival in
this disease. Although some mechanisms
underlying the development of limb muscle
dysfunction have been identiﬁed (e.g.,
deconditioning), much needs to be learned
about the impact of other potential
contributors to this clinical manifestation in
COPD. Limb muscle dysfunction can be
prevented and improved, in part, with
exercise training, but it is clear that novel
therapies are needed to better address this
problem.
The purpose of this document is to update
the 1999 American Thoracic Society/European
Respiratory Society (ATS/ERS) statement
on limb muscle dysfunction. We intend to
provide researchers and clinicians with the
recent advances in this ﬁeld, with emphasis
on the following areas: (1) structural and
metabolic alterations found in limb muscles,
(2) consequences and clinical evaluation of
F.M. holds a CIHR/GSK Research Chair on COPD at Universit ´e Laval. R.C. holds the Grancell/Burns Chair in the Rehabilitative Sciences. E.B.’s contribution to
this statement was supported by CIBERES, FIS 11/02029, 2009-SGR-393, SEPAR 2010, FUCAP 2011, FUCAP 2012, and Marat ´o TV3 (MTV3-07-1010)
(Spain) and by the ERS COPD Research Award 2008. M.I.P.’s contribution to this statement was supported by the NIHR Respiratory Disease Biomedical
Research Unit at the Royal Brompton and Hareﬁeld NHS Foundation Trust and Imperial College London, who partially fund his salary.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med Vol 189, Iss 9, pp e15–e62, May 1, 2014
Copyright © 2014 by the American Thoracic Society
DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201402-0373ST
Internet address: www.atsjournals.org
American Thoracic Society Documents
e15

----- Page 3 (native) -----
limb muscle dysfunction, (3) mechanisms
of development of this comorbidity, and
(4) treatment approaches of limb muscle
dysfunction in COPD. Future research
directions are also discussed. To be consistent
with the 1999 statement, this document focuses
speciﬁcally on limb muscles, recognizing that
the issues related to respiratory muscles
should be treated separately.
Major conclusions of the statement
include:
d Limb muscle dysfunction is prevalent in
COPD. Muscle atrophy and weakness carry
important consequences, such as difﬁculties
in engaging in physical activity, exercise
intolerance, poor quality of life, and
premature mortality. Metabolic alterations
in relation to lower limb muscle structural
changes within the lower limb muscle are
also involved in exercise limitation.
d Lower limb muscle function is further
compromised during episodes of COPD
exacerbations. Patients experiencing
exacerbations may be targeted for
rehabilitative interventions aiming at
preserving limb muscle function.
d Assessment of limb muscle function
should be encouraged.
d Knowledge of the biochemical regulation
of muscle mass will likely lead to the
development of speciﬁc therapy for
muscle atrophy in COPD.
d Although physical inactivity is involved
in the development of limb muscle
dysfunction development in COPD,
other mechanisms, such as inﬂammation,
oxidative stress, nutritional imbalance,
and hypoxemia, likely play a role.
d The most potent currently available
treatment option for limb muscle
dysfunction in COPD is exercise
training, a key component of integrated
management of COPD.
d Neuromuscular electrical stimulation
is emerging as a useful training modality
in patients severely impaired by COPD
and during exacerbations.
We hope that this statement will raise
further awareness toward this important
problem in COPD and that research in this
area will result in the development of
speciﬁc therapies and in better care for
patients with COPD.
Introduction
Limb muscle dysfunction is a major
systemic consequence of COPD. Strong
scientiﬁc and clinical evidence support
a role of limb muscle in exercise intolerance
in this disease. Furthermore, limb muscle
dysfunction may be associated with
increased mortality, poor quality of life,
and increased health care use. Although
some mechanisms underlying the
development of limb muscle dysfunction
have been identiﬁed (e.g., deconditioning),
much needs to be learned about the
impact of other potential contributors
to limb muscle dysfunction in COPD
(e.g., inﬂammation, malnutrition,
oxidative stress, hypoxemia). Limb muscle
dysfunction can be improved in part with
exercise training, but it is obvious that
novel therapies will have to be developed
to better address this problem.
In 1999, Drs. Richard Casaburi and
Rik Gosselink led a group of scientists to
produce a Statement of the ATS and
ERS on limb muscle dysfunction in COPD
(1). This document was most useful in
establishing the state-of-the art knowledge
on this topic and in increasing the
awareness of the scientiﬁc and medical
community about its importance. However,
this document was produced at a time
when our understanding of limb muscle
dysfunction was in its infancy. Since then,
the amount of science related to limb
muscle dysfunction in COPD has exploded,
thanks to the effort of several research
groups throughout the world. Members
of the Pulmonary Rehabilitation and
Clinical Problems assemblies of the ATS
and ERS believe that it is timely to update
this Statement to incorporate the large
amount of knowledge that has been gained
in the intervening years.
The primary objective of this document
is to update the current scientiﬁc and clinical
knowledge on this topic and to provide
guidance on future research directions. As
such, our document will be useful not
only to scientists involved in the area but
also to clinicians, for whom we wish to
Contents
Overview
Introduction
Methodology
Scope and Deﬁnition
Normal Muscle Structure
and Function
Normal Motor Structure
Determinants of Muscle Strength
Normal Mitochondrial Function
Determinants of Muscle
Endurance
Regulation of Muscle Mass
Limb Muscles in Clinically Stable
COPD
Muscle Atrophy in COPD
Structural Alterations of Limb
Muscle in COPD
Mitochondrial Function of Limb
Muscle in COPD and
Bioenergetics
Oxidative Damage in COPD
Limb Muscle Function in COPD
Limb Muscle Function and
Exacerbation of COPD
Consequences of Limb Muscle
Dysfunction in COPD
Implications for Exercise
Intolerance
Etiology of Limb Muscle Dysfunction
in COPD
Disuse versus Myopathy
Mechanisms of Limb Muscle
Dysfunction in COPD
Mechanisms of Muscle
Susceptibility to Fatigue in
COPD
Assessment of Limb Muscle Function
in COPD
Assessment of Muscle Mass
Assessment of Limb Muscle
Strength
Assessment of Limb Muscle
Endurance
Assessment of Muscle
Oxygenation Using Near-
Infrared and Magnetic
Resonance Spectroscopy
Effects of Interventions on Limb
Muscle Function in COPD
Exercise Training
Neuromuscular Stimulation
Oxygen Therapy
Nutritional Supplementation
Testosterone and Other Anabolic
Steroids
Growth Hormone and Its
Secretagogues
Other Anabolic Drugs and
Bioactive Nutrients
Antioxidants
Vitamin D Supplementation
Suggestions for Future Research
Conclusions
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e16
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 4 (native) -----
raise the level of awareness regarding the
clinical relevance of limb muscle dysfunction
in patients with COPD. It can be legitimately
believed that a more thorough understanding
and treatment of limb muscle dysfunction
in COPD will improve the outcome of
patients with COPD.
Methodology
The present document is intended to belong
to the Clinical Statement category. The
chair and the co-chair initially identiﬁed
a group of 25 scientists on the basis of
their speciﬁc expertise and with a variety
of academic backgrounds (clinicians,
physiologists, basic scientists, nutritionists,
exercise specialists). We met on three
occasions from December 2011 to September
2012. Each member was responsible for the
review of the literature and for writing
the ﬁrst draft of his/her attributed section(s).
Each speciﬁc section was circulated and
discussed among all members of the
committee to produce a preliminary version
of the document. A librarian was consulted
to perform a search of the literature
using PubMed, Embase, and CINAHL
according to the following strategy: “Pulmonary
disease, Chronic Obstuctive”[Majr] or
“Pulmonary emphysema”[Majr:NoExp]
and (((((“Muscle, Limb”[Mesh]) or “Muscle
Strength”[Mesh:NoExp]) or “Muscle
Tonus”[Mesh]) or “Muscle Fatigue”[Mesh]) or
“Muscle Weakness”[Mesh]) or “Muscular
Atrophy”[Mesh] and “Oxidative Stress”[Mesh]
and (muscle or muscles or muscular)
and “Myositis”[Mesh:NoExp] OR
(“Inﬂammation”[Mesh] and (muscle or
muscles or muscular)). We also received
advice from a methodologist to ensure
that the methodological process was
consistent with the approved methodology
of the ATS documents development and
implementation committee. A working draft
of the document was circulated among
members in the spring of 2012 and, based on
their comments, it was extensively revised
by the co-chairs and submitted again for
agreement on the scientiﬁc content. The
document was then fully edited by one
committee member (R.C.). All members of
the committee agreed with the content of
the ﬁnal document, which was intended
for online publication only. This online
document provides a thorough review of
limb muscle dysfunction in COPD,
whereas the published document
summarizes the most critical aspects of the
entire document.
Scope and Deﬁnition
This document focuses on limb muscles,
as the committee members believed that
respiratory muscles are a separate topic.
The term limb muscle was preferred over
peripheral muscles, which is less speciﬁc
and may have a different interpretation
to various individuals. Limb muscle
dysfunction is used to reﬂect the
morphological and functional changes
that are seen in limb muscles in patients
with COPD, with no implications as to
the underlying mechanisms. The most
commonly studied limb muscle is the
quadriceps, because of its role in ambulation
and because it is easily accessible. Other limb
muscles from the upper extremity or the
distal lower limb have also received
some attention. They will be speciﬁcally
mentioned when appropriate. The reader
should also be aware that most studies
on limb muscle function in patients with
COPD have involved patients with severe
to very severe COPD (Global Initiative
for Obstructive Lung Disease [GOLD]
spirometry classes 3–4). Muscle atrophy
indicates a small muscle mass in
comparison with healthy standards. This
situation is different from cachexia, which
implies an ongoing and dynamic loss of
muscle mass (2). Very few longitudinal
studies exist on the evolution of muscle
mass in COPD (3, 4) and, in most cases,
patients with low muscle mass instead
of “true” cachectic patients were studied.
Whether or not patients in these studies
were actively losing muscle mass is
uncertain.
Normal Muscle Structure
and Function
Normal Motor Structure
Limb muscles are composed of functional
units (motor units) consisting of
a motoneuron and the muscle ﬁbers it
innervates. The motor unit is the ﬁnal
functional element that produces force.
Based on contractile speed, motor units
are classiﬁed as either slow-twitch (S) or
fast-twitch (F) (5). The fast-twitch motor
units are further subdivided into fast-twitch
fatigue-resistant (FR), fast-twitch fatigue-
intermediate (Fint), and fast-twitch
fatigable (FF) (6–8). Data on motor unit
organization and characteristics in human
muscles are scarce. Enoka was the ﬁrst to
report data on motor unit properties of
human muscles (9). He estimated that the
extensor hallucis brevis muscle contains
approximately 56 motor units and at least
two types of motor units. In comparison,
the human medial gastrocnemius contains
about 550 motor units (10) and three
types of motor units (S, FR, FF) (11),
similar to cat gastrocnemius.
Within a muscle, each motor unit is
composed of muscle ﬁbers of a given type
with the classiﬁcation of S, FR, FInt, and
FF motor unit types corresponding well
with the muscle ﬁber classiﬁcation based
either on myoﬁbrillar ATPase staining
(I, IIa, IIx, and IIb) or on myosin heavy
chain (MHC) immunoreactivity
(MHCslow, MHC2A, MHC2X, and
MHC2B). This has been shown for the
human medial gastrocnemius, where the
physiological characteristics of the motor
unit types were in agreement with the
histological typing of their constituent
muscle ﬁbers (11). Because human muscle
ﬁbers formerly identiﬁed as type IIb ﬁbers
by histochemistry express the IIx MHC
isoform rather than the IIb isoform,
we will refer to type IIx ﬁbers for the
remainder of the document (12).
In limb muscles, graded contractions
are achieved by either changes in the ﬁring
rate of the individual motor units or by
recruitment of additional motor units
within the same muscle. In addition,
recruitment order follows the size principle,
with S units being recruited ﬁrst followed
by FR, FInt, and FF units (13). This size
principle has been conﬁrmed in humans
during voluntary isometric contractions for
several muscles, including the ﬁrst dorsal
interosseus (14, 15), the masseter and
temporalis (16), and the tibialis anterior
(17). Finally, motor units of lower limb
muscles in humans are also recruited in
a task-dependent manner (18). In the
standing position, the soleus motor units
are continuously active (19), whereas the
medial gastrocnemius has an irregular
pattern of activation that is mainly due
to recruitment of motor units (20).
Motor unit characteristics can be
altered by several processes, such as aging
and reduced physical activity and training.
In humans, aging is associated with
a loss of motoneurons, especially the larger
ones with higher recruitment thresholds
(21). This results in a decreased number
of muscle ﬁbers (21), with many of them
losing their innervation, beginning to
atrophy, and ceasing to function together
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e17

----- Page 5 (native) -----
(22). In fact, signiﬁcantly reduced cross-
sectional areas of both type I and II ﬁbers
are seen in the elderly compared with
younger adults (23), although type II ﬁbers
appear to be preferentially affected by
age-related atrophying process (24, 25).
Some ﬁbers are reinnervated by neighboring
motoneurons (26), but the capacity for
motoneuron sprouting is limited with age
(27). The size principle of motor unit
recruitment seems to be preserved in
older adults (28). Reduced physical activity
leads to a decline in median frequency of
vastus lateralis muscle stimulation that is
in line with the concurrent reduction of
muscle ﬁber conduction velocity (29).
Interestingly, short-term (14 d) bed rest
reduces the muscle ﬁber conduction
velocity of individual motor units from the
vastus lateralis, vastus medialis, and tibialis
anterior muscles without a signiﬁcant
effect on muscle force (30). On the other
hand, 6 to 8 weeks of hand or limb
immobilization is associated with
a decrease in the motoneuron ﬁring rate
of the adductor pollicis and ﬁrst dorsal
interosseous muscles (31–33). This
effect is already present after 1 week of
immobilization (34), and its magnitude is
much greater after 3 weeks of immobilization
(33). The size order recruitment of the motor
unit is maintained during immobilization
(32). Finally, exercise training also alters
motor unit characteristics. Thus, integrated
and root mean square surface EMG
values increase signiﬁcantly with strength
training, particularly during the ﬁrst 3 to
4 weeks, and motor unit ﬁring frequency
is enhanced after high-resistance strength
training (35). With resistance training,
motor unit recruitment threshold
decreases and motor unit discharge
rates increase (36).
Determinants of Muscle Strength
Because limb muscles have the capacity
to generate force, they are essential to the
ability to move the body during daily
activities, exercise, and sports. Basically,
the amount of force developed is determined
by velocity of shortening and the type of
contraction as well as by number, size,
rate, and type of motor units activated.
The force–velocity and the length–tension
curves illustrate the importance of the velocity
of the contraction and the length of
sarcomeres in determining muscle strength.
There is an optimal length of each ﬁber
for which there is optimal overlap of actin
and myosin ﬁlaments, thus maximizing
cross-bridge interaction (37). When a
sarcomere is fully stretched or shortened,
little force can be developed because there is
little cross-bridge interaction. Muscle force
generation also depends on the velocity
of muscle contraction. During concentric
(shortening) contractions, maximal force
development decreases progressively with
the velocity. In contrast, during eccentric
(lengthening) contractions, maximal force
development increases progressively with the
velocity (38).
The force generated by a motor unit
depends on three interrelated factors: (1)
the innervation ratio of the unit (i.e., the
number of muscle ﬁbers innervated by
a motoneuron), (2) total functional cross-
sectional area of all muscle ﬁbers within the
unit, and (3) speciﬁc force of the muscle
ﬁbers (i.e., the force per cross-sectional
area).
The number and type of motor
units recruited as well as the rate and
synchronization of ﬁring grade the intensity
of a muscle contraction (39). The number
of motor units varies according the muscle.
For example, in the large muscles of the
lower limb, motor units range in size
from approximately 500 to 1,000 ﬁbers.
This gives the muscles their capacity for
very forceful and rapid contractions.
Importantly, all the muscle ﬁbers of
a motor unit are of the same ﬁber type,
determining the mechanical and fatigue
properties of the muscles (6). In most
muscles, the Fint and FF motor units
generate greater force per unit of area
compared with S and FR units (40). The
importance of the neural activation to
muscle strength is elegantly demonstrated
during deconditioning. During bed rest
experiments, only 50% of the reduction
of muscle strength is explained by
reduction in muscle mass, the other part
being due to impaired neural activation, as
demonstrated by EMG (41). Alternatively,
during the ﬁrst weeks of muscle training
most of the progression in strength is
explained by enhanced muscle activation.
The force generated by single limb
muscle ﬁbers is determined primarily by
the level of activation, the intracellular Ca21
concentration (iCa21), and the force per
cross-sectional area of muscle (speciﬁc
force). As the frequency of neural activation
increases, the force generated by muscle
ﬁbers increases in a sigmoidal fashion. In
motor unit studies, it has been shown
that the force/frequency relationship of
S motor units is shifted leftward compared
with FF motor units (42). Thus, at a given
frequency of submaximal neural
activation, S motor units generate a greater
percentage of their maximal force. This
difference in the force/frequency
relationship of motor units could relate to
the amount of Ca21 released from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum at a given
frequency of activation, to differences in
excitation–contraction coupling (43–46),
to differences in sarcoplasmic reticulum
Ca21 reuptake (47), or to differences in
the Ca21 sensitivity of myoﬁbrillar
proteins (48–52).
A number of studies have examined
the force/Ca21 relationship in single
permeabilized limb muscle ﬁbers, where
iCa21 can be clamped at different levels.
Generally, muscle ﬁbers expressing the
MHCslow isoform have greater Ca21
sensitivity than do ﬁbers expressing fast
MHC isoforms, so that slow ﬁbers generate
a greater fraction of their maximal force
for a given iCa21. Accordingly, the force/
Ca21 relationship of slow muscle ﬁbers is
shifted leftward compared with fast ﬁbers
(50–54).
Although other variables, such as
pennation, neuromuscular recruitment
contraction velocity, and angular position
may also account for differences in strength
over that of size alone (55), muscle cross-
sectional area has a strong relationship
with muscle strength (56–58). Maximum
speciﬁc force in single limb muscle ﬁbers is
dependent on the number of cross bridges
per half sarcomere, the average force per
cross bridge, and the fraction of cross
bridges in the force-generating state.
Despite some controversies (59), ﬁber type
differences in speciﬁc force have been
reported in human limb muscles (60–62),
and it was suggested that the lower force
produced by slow ﬁbers may be due to
less force per cross bridge compared with
fast ﬁbers (63). In addition, differences
in mitochondrial volume densities
may contribute to ﬁber type differences
in speciﬁc force (54). The higher
mitochondrial volume densities of ﬁbers
expressing the MHCslow and MHC2A
isoforms would presumably be at the
expense of a correspondingly lower
myoﬁbrillar volume density, lower MHC
content, and, hence, fewer cross bridges
in parallel for a given ﬁber cross-sectional
area.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e18
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 6 (native) -----
In cross-sectional studies, muscle mass
has been found to correlate with sex, age,
and training status. Compared with women,
men have more muscle mass both in
absolute values and as percentage of the total
body weight (64, 65). Although absolute
muscle strength is therefore larger in
men, relative muscle strength (force per
cm2) is not different between men and
women (57).
Generally beginning at age 30 years
(64), the rate of decline in muscular
strength appears greater in the lower body
than the upper body (66). Both strength
and speed of contraction were found to
decline with age (64). Aging affects muscle
function, and, after the age of 50 years,
muscle mass (65), ﬁber area (mainly type II
[24, 25]), and the number of muscle ﬁbers
decrease (21, 67). The proportion of
type I ﬁber increases with age (25).
Additionally, there is a slowing of motor
unit ﬁring rates, a decrease in the pennation
angle of the muscle ﬁbers, and reduced
tendon stiffness (68).
In the elderly, higher levels of
customary physical activity have been found
to be associated with signiﬁcantly higher
muscle strength (69), but it is still unclear
whether men and women derive similar
beneﬁts (70, 71).
Normal Mitochondrial Function
Maintenance of mitochondrial integrity is
crucial to the preservation of cellular
homeostasis. Mitochondria play a central
role in ATP production through oxidative
phosphorylation, particularly in energy-
demanding tissues, including limb muscle.
They actively participate in cellular Ca21
dynamics through their capacity to take up
and release Ca21 (72–74). They generate
metabolic outputs, which can modulate
multiple signaling cascades, and nuclear
gene expression programs through genetic
and epigenetic (relevant modiﬁcations to
the genome not involving changes in the
nucleotide sequence) mechanisms (75).
They constitute one of the main sources
of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which
can participate in cell signaling or cell
dysfunction/death under physiological and
pathological conditions, respectively (see
section on oxidative damage for further
discussion of this cascade) (76, 77). Finally,
in response to stress-induced signaling
events converging on the mitochondria,
or to intrinsic dysfunctions within
mitochondria caused by acute or chronic
pathological conditions, these organelles
can trigger apoptotic and necrotic cell death
through permeabilization of their double-
membrane system (78, 79). This event
can occur through opening of the
permeability transition pore (PTP) and/or
formation of channels by proapoptotic
members of the B-cell lymphoma 2 family
of proteins (78, 80).
In healthy limb muscle, the
volume–density and the functions of
mitochondria can change according to ﬁber
type and in response to physiological
cues such as exercise or inactivity (81, 82).
In addition, defective organelles are the
primary cause of numerous mitochondrial
genetic disorders (83) and may also play
a role in the pathogenesis of chronic
conditions affecting multiple physiological
systems (84).
Determinants of Muscle Endurance
Endurance can be deﬁned as the ability
to sustain a speciﬁc physical task. The
determinants of endurance performance
depend on whether a whole body or local
muscle task is considered. In healthy
humans, oxygen delivery and extraction
rather than ventilatory function limit
maximal whole-body exercise performance.
For submaximal performance (where
exercise is performed below critical
power and a steady state exists where
V
:
O2 is constant and meets the energy
requirements of the task), the constraints
to continuing work will depend on
substrate availability, thermoregulation,
and motivation (85–87). At the muscle
level, this means that the energy
requirements of muscle contraction can
be met from oxidative sources without
signiﬁcant lactate accumulation or adenine
nucleotide loss.
Fatigue, in a physiological sense, is
deﬁned as a failure of force generation
after loaded muscle contractions that is
reversible by rest (88). Undertaking a task to
the point of failure may be associated with
fatigue, or even cause fatigue, but the
reverse is not true; physical performance
may continue in the presence of low-
frequency fatigue (88). Two types of fatigue
are generally recognized: central and
peripheral. Central fatigue occurs when task
failure is manifest but additional force can
be generated by nerve stimulation; this
implies a contractile reserve of the muscle.
In peripheral muscle fatigue, there are at
least two different mechanisms by which
repeated contractions may cause
impairment: the “transmission mechanism”
involving the neuromuscular junction,
muscle membrane, and/or endoplasmic
reticulum and the “contractile mechanism”
involving the muscle ﬁlaments (89–93).
Although high-frequency fatigue is
a recognized physiological entity, its clinical
signiﬁcance remains uncertain and is not
considered further here (94). In normal
humans there is a complex interplay
between peripheral and central fatigue, so
that the presence of peripheral fatigue leads
to central inhibition in limb muscles (95),
preventing the development of further
peripheral fatigue.
Muscle endurance performance
involves a complex interplay between the
availability and extraction of oxygen and
the incorporation of substrate into
mitochondria. Adequate muscle oxygen
supply is determined by cardiac output,
local muscle perfusion, and blood oxygen
content. In turn, muscle capillarity,
mitochondrial density, and muscle enzyme
concentration inﬂuence oxygen extraction.
The energy for muscle contraction is
released by the dephosphorylation of ATP
by adenylate kinase. Intramuscular ATP
stores are sufﬁcient to sustain contraction
for only a few seconds and, if work is to
continue, ATP stores must be replenished
from other sources. ATP can be formed by
the breakdown of phosphocreatine (PCr)
to creatine and phosphate. Although this
system provides energy for high-intensity
exercise and during the early stages of
contraction, it is rapidly exhausted.
Glycolysis leads to the formation of pyruvate
and oxidative phosphorylation, allowing the
products of carbohydrate, protein, or fat
metabolism to enter the mitochondria,
where they are metabolized to water and
carbon dioxide and thereby provide most
of the ATP required for sustained muscle
contractions. Once formed, pyruvate is
metabolized to lactate by glycolysis or enters
the mitochondria to form acetyl coenzyme
A and fuel oxidative phosphorylation.
At higher exercise intensities, pyruvate
accumulation exceeds its uptake by the
mitochondria, and it must be broken down
to form lactate. It has long been assumed
that lactate formation is the result of
inadequate mitochondrial oxygen
concentrations. However, although oxygen
delivery is a requirement for oxidative
energy production, signiﬁcant lactate can be
produced despite the presence of adequate
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e19

----- Page 7 (native) -----
oxygen supplies, and factors other than
oxygen are crucial to the integration of
oxidative and glycolytic metabolism (96).
Lactate accumulation is likely to be
determined by the balance of pyruvate
production and oxidation in the
mitochondria. In this respect, the role of
the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex
(PDC) appears to be pivotal (97). This
enzyme is situated on the mitochondrial
membrane and regulates the irreversible
entry of pyruvate into mitochondria, where
the Krebs cycle operates. PDC can be
activated pharmacologically by infusing
dichloroacetate (98), and this has been
shown to attenuate lactate accumulation
and increase maximal work rates in
healthy subjects (99). The expansion of
intermediates of the Krebs cycle (known
as anapleurosis) is another potential
stimulator of oxidative phosphorylation.
However, artiﬁcial expansion of the Krebs
cycle intermediate pool by the infusion of
glutamine does not result in an increase in
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.
These ﬁndings suggest that pyruvate
availability through the activity of PDC is
the principal regulator of mitochondrial
oxidative metabolism rather than
anapleurosis (100).
Regulation of Muscle Mass
Homeostasis in muscle tissue is ensured
by a tight and complex balance between
protein synthesis and degradation
(Figure 1). The regenerative capacity of
muscle tissue is also involved in this
equation (101–103). At the molecular level,
cachexia is characterized by an increased
muscle proteolysis with the activation of
the ubiquitin proteasome (UbP) pathway
(104). In this pathway, proteins are initially
marked for degradation by ubiquitination
and are subsequently recognized and
processed by the proteasome, the catalytic
core of the pathway. An increase in
messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA)
encoding for key enzymes and proteins of
this pathway is a hallmark of cachexia in
several animal models (104–108). A major
advance in the understanding of the
regulation of muscle proteolysis was the
identiﬁcation of two muscle-speciﬁc E3
ligases, muscle ring ﬁnger protein 1
(MuRF1) and atrogin-1, which are directly
involved in several atrophying conditions
(109, 110). These E3 ligases act as the
substrate recognition component of the
ubiquitination system, therefore preventing
nonspeciﬁc protein degradation by the
proteasome complex. Of note, the UbP
pathway is unable to degrade native and intact
contractile structures (111). Preliminary
steps aimed at disrupting the myoﬁbrillar
assembly are necessary before contractile
protein degradation can be initiated.
Calcium-dependent pathways (m- and
u-calpains) (112), autophagy/lysosomal
pathways (113), and cysteine proteases
(caspase-3) (114) have all been demonstrated
to be able to disrupt myoﬁber organization,
thus providing substrates for the UbP system.
Among them, the autophagy/lysosomal
pathway is receiving a great deal of
attention, because it may be the most
important proteolytic pathway in some
experimental models of muscle atrophy
(115), although this issue is still disputed
(116). Autophagy, which involves the
formation of vesicles (autophagosomes)
that transport their content for degradation
by lysosomes, is also constitutively active
in human limb muscle (117). There
is insufﬁcient information to make
conclusions regarding the relative
contribution of the UbP pathway and of
autophagy to the muscle atrophying
process in humans and more speciﬁcally
in COPD.
The activation of the muscle-speciﬁc E3
ligases is under the control of various
pathways: (1) the forkhead box O (FOXO)
class of transcription factors enhances the
nuclear transcription of MuRF1 and
atrogin-1 unless they are phosphorylated
and inactivated by AKT (118). Conversely,
depressed AKT activity and reduced
FOXOs phosphorylation will allow FOXOs
nuclear translocation and the induction of
MuRF1 and atrogin-1. The role of the
FOXOs in the protein degradation process
is reinforced by the involvement of FOXO-
3 in the regulation of autophagy (113, 117);
(2) proinﬂammatory cytokines can activate
the nuclear factor-kB (NF-kB), which, in
turn, can activate MuRF1 (116, 119); (3) the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
pathway has been implicated in the
activation of the UbP pathway and in the
initiation of the cachectic process in rodent
and cell models of muscle atrophy (115,
120). Among the various members of the
MAPK family, p38 MAPK is of interest
because it stimulates the expression of
muscle-speciﬁc E3 ligases, whereas its
inhibition prevents muscle atrophy (115).
JNK MAPK has also been implicated in the
atrophying process in some experimental
models of hind limb suspension (121) and
sepsis-induced diaphragmatic dysfunction
(122), although its role is less convincing in
comparison to p38 (120). Myostatin,
a negative regulator of muscle mass, is able
to halt muscle growth by direct inhibition
of the kinase activity of AKT (123, 124) or
by inhibiting satellite cell replication and
differentiation by blocking the activity of
myogenic differentiation factor D (MyoD)
(125), a key protein involved in regulating
muscle differentiation. Myostatin is also
able to enhance the proteasomal-dependent
degradation of contractile protein by
increasing the transcriptional activity of
FOXO-1 (126).
Activation of the atrophic cascade is
opposed by the hypertrophic response.
In this regard, the importance of the
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1)
pathway to promote muscle growth has
been appreciated for some years (127).
The protein synthesis response to IGF-1
is mediated through AKT. After being
phosphorylated itself, AKT phosphorylates
several proteins whose activation
(mammalian target of rapamycin [mTOR]
[128] and 70-kD ribosomal S6 protein
[p70S6] kinase) or inhibition (glycogen
synthase kinase-3b [GSK3b]) will enhance
protein synthesis (116, 118, 128). IGF-1
may also suppress protein degradation
by down-regulating atrogin-1 and by
promoting FOXOs phosphorylation and
entrapment in the cytoplasm, where it
cannot enhance the nuclear transcription
of E3-ligases (118).
Limb Muscles in Clinically
Stable COPD
Several structural changes of the limb
muscles have been reported in patients
with COPD. They are described in this
section and summarized in Figure 2. Most
of these structural changes have been
reported in the quadriceps, although some
abnormalities have also been found in
distal lower limb muscles. The upper limb
muscles are relatively preserved from
these structural changes.
Muscle Atrophy in COPD
Although the World Health Organization
states that a body mass index (BMI) less
than 18.5 kg/m2 deﬁnes underweight,
a cut-off value of 21 kg/m2 is often used
in COPD, as it corresponded to less than
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e20
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 8 (native) -----
90% ideal body weight in the Metropolitan
Life Insurance Tables (129, 130). Using
the World Health Organization criteria,
the prevalence of underweight in COPD
was found to increase with disease severity,
especially in women, up to 30% in patients
with GOLD class 4 disease (131). A key
message is that the BMI classiﬁcation does
not consider body composition, such as fat
mass (FM), fat-free mass (FFM), and bone
mass or bone mineral density. Moreover,
changes or shifts in body composition—
which are frequently associated with
COPD—remain unrevealed by BMI alone,
and additional methods are required, as
discussed elsewhere in this statement (see
Assessment of Muscle Mass). This makes
it important to consider the assessment
of body composition in chronic diseases
such as COPD. Along those lines, several
criteria have been proposed to deﬁne low
muscle mass (see Assessment of Muscle
Mass). For example, an FFM index (FFMI)
less than 16 kg/m2 for men and less than
15 kg/m2 for women (132), or an FFMI less
than the 10th (131) or 25th (133) percentile
of the general population, have all been
used. Irrespective of the criteria, muscle
atrophy is common in COPD, with
a prevalence rate of 4 to 35% (131, 134,
135). Using the 10th percentile criterion,
the prevalence of low FFMI in COPD
increases with disease severity, especially
in women, amounting to 50% in patients
with GOLD 4 COPD (131). Moreover,
a low FFMI has been reported in 26% of
patients with COPD with a normal BMI,
underscoring the importance of assessing
body composition to precisely quantify
muscle atrophy (131). Even in the COPD
population with a normal BMI, a low FFMI
is a strong predictor of mortality, as
strong as in the underweight COPD
population (132). Another important
notion is that the lower limb muscles are
particularly vulnerable to the atrophying
process in COPD (3, 136, 137). The
observation that the magnitude of loss of
Figure 1. Regulation of muscle mass. The maintenance of muscle mass is the result of a tight equilibrium between hypertrophic and atrophic signaling
pathways. A major advance in the understanding of the regulation of muscle proteolysis was the identiﬁcation of two muscle-speciﬁc E3 ligases, atrogin-1
and Muscle Ring Finger protein 1 (MuRF1), that are directly involved in several atrophic conditions. These E3 ligases act as the substrate recognition
component of the ubiquitination system, therefore preventing nonspeciﬁc protein degradation by the proteasome complex. Of note, the ubiquitin-
proteosome (UbP) is unable to degrade native and intact contractile structures. Preliminary steps aimed at disrupting the myoﬁbrillar assembly are
necessary before contractile protein degradation can be initiated. Among them, the autophagy/lysosomal pathway is receiving a great deal of attention,
because it may be the most important proteolytic pathway in some experimental models of muscle atrophy. The activation of the muscle-speciﬁc E3
ligases is under the control of various pathways: (1) the Forkhead box O (FOXO) class of transcription factors enhances the nuclear transcription of MuRF1
and atrogin-1 unless they are phosphorylated and inactivated by AKT. Conversely, depressed AKT activity and reduced FOXOs phosphorylation will
allow FOXOs nuclear translocation and the induction of MuRF1 and atrogin-1; (2) proinﬂammatory cytokines can activate the nuclear factor (NF)-kB, which
in turn can also induce atrophy through the activation of MuRF1; (3) the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) pathway can be triggered by reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and has been implicated in the activation of the UbP pathway and in the initiation of the cachectic process in rodent and cell
models of muscle atrophy. Among the various members of the MAPK family, p38 MAPK has received considerable attention because it stimulates
the expression of atrogin-1, whereas its inhibition prevents muscle atrophy. JNK MAPK has also been implicated in the atrophying process in some
experimental models, although its role is less convincing compared with p38. Myostatin, a negative regulator of muscle mass, is able to halt muscle growth
by direct inhibition of the kinase activity of AKT or, through the SMAD signaling pathway, by inhibiting satellite cell replication and differentiation by blocking
the activity of myogenic differentiation factor-D (MyoD). Myostatin is also able to enhance the proteasomal-dependent degradation of contractile
protein by increasing the transcriptional activity of FOXO-1. Activation of the atrophic cascade is opposed by the hypertrophic response. In this regard, the
importance of the insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) pathway to promote muscle growth has been appreciated for some years. The protein synthesis
response to IGF-1 is mediated through AKT. On phosphorylation, AKT phosphorylates several proteins whose activation (mammalian target of rapamycin
[mTOR] and 70-kD ribosomal S6 protein [p70S6] kinase) or inhibition (glycogen synthase kinase-3b [GSK3b]) will enhance protein synthesis. IGF-1
may also suppress protein degradation by down-regulating atrogin-1 again via the PI3K/AKT pathway as well as FOXOs phosphorylation and entrapment
in the cytoplasm.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e21

----- Page 9 (native) -----
thigh muscle mass is relatively greater
than that of whole body weight indicates
a preferential loss of muscle tissue over
other body tissues in patients with COPD
(138).
The prevalence of overweight and
even obesity is increasing in COPD. In a U.
S. cohort, the prevalence of obesity was
54% in mild COPD versus 22% in the
general population (139). In a Dutch
population, the prevalence of obesity
amounted to 24% in mild COPD versus
11% in the general population (140).
The prevalence of overweight is higher
in chronic bronchitis (blue bloater)
patients, whereas underweight is
typically associated with emphysema
(pink puffer) (141). The distribution of
fat accumulation is also important to
consider. The accumulation of abdominal
fat, a highly active tissue involved in the
production of several proinﬂammatory
mediators, is a strong risk factor for
cardiovascular and metabolic diseases
(142–146). COPD has been associated
with increased risk of abdominal
obesity (147, 148). Although a high
BMI has been paradoxically associated
with improved survival in advanced
COPD (131, 149, 150), overweight and
obesity, particularly in their visceral
forms, may not be beneﬁcial in milder
forms of COPD, as they may mask muscle
wasting and be associated with
cardiovascular and metabolic
complications (151, 152).
The prevalence of osteoporosis and
osteopenia is also increased in COPD,
amounting to 9 to 69% and 27 to 67%,
respectively (153–155). Disease severity and
systemic corticosteroids are associated with
the risk of osteoporosis (156). Because the
prevalence of osteoporosis is associated
with a low FFM (157), it can be speculated
that loss of bone and muscle mass share
common mechanisms (158–160).
To our knowledge, only one
longitudinal study has assessed the changes
in body composition in COPD (4). During
the 7-year follow-up, FFM declined faster
than the FM, indicating the progressive
occurrence of sarcopenia in this
population. However, these changes were
comparable between patients with COPD
and healthy subjects (4). This study
also showed that baseline BMI and FFM
were similarly low in patients with COPD
and smokers with normal lung function
as compared with lifetime nonsmokers,
suggesting that a common insult,
occurring earlier in life and related to
smoking, may contribute to muscle
atrophy.
Figure 2. Morphological and structural alterations reported in limb muscles in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). CS = citrate
synthase; HADH = 3-hydroxyacyl CoA dehydrogenase.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e22
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Structural Alterations of Limb Muscle
in COPD
Muscle ﬁber shift and atrophy. A shift in
ﬁber type distribution of the quadriceps,
from type I ﬁbers in favor of type IIx ﬁbers,
is a typical feature of advanced COPD
(137, 161–165). This ﬁnding is inconsistent
with normal aging, which is not associated
with a shift toward type II ﬁbers (67,
166). The proportion of type I ﬁbers
correlates inversely with disease severity
and proportionally with BMI (161, 164),
a ﬁnding further supported by the absence
of modiﬁcation in the different ﬁber types
in milder COPD (167). The shift in ﬁber
type distribution reported in the quadriceps
and tibialis anterior (101) muscles is not
observed in upper extremity muscles
such as the deltoid (168), indicating that
muscle structural abnormalities are not
homogeneously distributed among different
muscle groups. All ﬁber types of the
quadriceps are affected by the atrophying
process (163), although some authors argue
that the type IIx ﬁbers are more speciﬁcally
affected (169–171).
Changes in capillarization. Capillary
density (i.e., the number of capillaries
per mm2 of muscle ﬁbers) and the number
of capillaries per muscle ﬁber are reduced
in limb muscles of patients with COPD
(163, 164). This is not a universal ﬁnding
(172), perhaps due to the fact that, in some
studies, patients were involved in exercise
training, which could improve muscle
capillarization (163, 173). The capillary to
muscle ﬁber cross-sectional area is similar
in subjects with COPD and healthy subjects
(174). This may indicate that the oxygen
diffusion distance is maintained in
COPD (174).
Mitochondrial Function of Limb
Muscle in COPD and Bioenergetics
Mitochondrial function is altered in
COPD muscle, although it remains difﬁcult
to discern whether these abnormalities
are indicative of a myopathic process
speciﬁc to COPD or whether they reﬂect
muscle inactivity in this population.
Locomotor muscle oxidative capacity is
reduced in COPD (44, 45, 175–179,
185–191). This has been demonstrated
by direct measures of mitochondrial
density by electron microscopy (175);
by spectrophotometric determination
of mitochondrial enzyme activities
including citrate synthase (CS), succinate
dehydrogenase (SDH), 3-hydroxyacyl-
coenzyme A dehydrogenase (HAD), and
cytochrome oxidase (COX) (176–178);
and by measurements of respiration in
permeabilized muscle ﬁbers (179). In line
with these observations, the mRNA and/or
protein expression of key mitochondrial
transcriptional factors and coactivators,
including peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor g coactivator-1 (PGC1), peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors (PPAR),
and mitochondrial transcription factor
A (Tfam), are/is also reduced (180),
suggesting a lower drive for mitochondrial
biogenesis in COPD muscle. Overall, the
reduction in muscle oxidative capacity in
COPD is consistent with the type I to
type IIx ﬁber shift typically reported in this
population (161, 163).
When compared with healthy
control subjects, mitochondrial density
and mitochondrial function are reduced in
the lower limb muscle of patients with
COPD (175, 176, 179, 181–183). In
addition to this, the presence of speciﬁc
mitochondrial impairments in COPD may
affect energy conversion efﬁciency and
selected respiratory chain complexes.
However, this ﬁnding currently remains
controversial. Regarding coupling
efﬁciency, studies reported lower
respiratory control ratios in isolated
mitochondria from COPD muscle (176,
181), which could reﬂect reduced coupling
of oxidation to phosphorylation. However,
it is important to consider that greater
fragility of mitochondria within diseased
muscle can result in reduced respiratory
control ratios caused by isolation-induced
damage to organelles, as it does for other
indices of mitochondrial function (179).
Furthermore, a reduction of uncoupling
protein 3 (UCP3) expression has been
reported in patients with COPD (181,
184, 185), possibly representing a speciﬁc
adaptation to modulate the efﬁciency of
oxidative phosphorylation (184). Finally,
two studies reported an increase in COX
activity in the quadriceps in patients with
COPD compared with healthy control
subjects (176, 186). In both studies, up-
regulation of COX activity was inversely
correlated to PaO2, leading to the suggestion
that hypoxia could speciﬁcally modulate
this enzyme (176, 186). These data are,
however, at odds with results from other
studies showing a reduction in COX
activity (178), mitochondrial content (175),
and biogenic signaling (180) in COPD.
Nevertheless, considering the complexity
of COX regulation, it is possible that yet
unidentiﬁed post-translational mechanisms
underlie the reported enhanced COX
activity. Overall, more work is required to
establish the presence of speciﬁc alterations
of mitochondrial energy metabolism in
COPD muscle.
Thus far, only two studies have
assessed mitochondrial ROS release in
COPD muscle. Picard and colleagues
(179) reported the net release of hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2) per mitochondrion to
be higher in permeabilized ﬁbers of
patients with COPD compared with
control subjects. This was observed
during baseline respiration and under
active phosphorylation, indicating that
mitochondria from COPD muscle display
properties that potentiate H2O2 production.
Similar data have been reported in
isolated mitochondria (176). Currently,
the mechanisms underlying this difference
are unknown but could involve enhanced
production of H2O2 and/or lower
endogenous H2O2 scavenging capacities
in mitochondria (176, 179). Although
enhanced H2O2 release could reﬂect
pathological alterations of mitochondrial
ROS handling (176), it may also represent
a signature of the ﬁber type switch present
in COPD muscle (179). This is based on
ﬁndings that healthy muscle mitochondria
within type II ﬁbers release signiﬁcantly
greater amounts of H2O2 than their
counterparts in type I ﬁbers (187, 188).
Evidence of increased apoptosis is
reported in wasted COPD muscle (189),
but the role of mitochondria as a triggering
factor remains debated. A recent study
by Puente-Maestu and colleagues (182)
reported greater susceptibility to typical
triggers of PTP opening, including Ca21
and H2O2, in isolated mitochondria from
COPD muscle. In contrast, Picard and
colleagues (179) reported greater resistance
to Ca21-induced opening of the PTP in
permeabilized ﬁbers from patients with
COPD compared with healthy control
subjects and attributed this to the
greater predominance of type II ﬁbers,
which are intrinsically more resistant to
Ca21-induced PTP opening (187). Factors
underlying the discrepancy between the two
studies could be related to the assessment
technique whereby permeabilized muscle
ﬁbers allow characterization of the entire
population of mitochondria in a more
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e23

----- Page 11 (native) -----
preserved cytoarchitectural environment
compared with isolated mitochondria.
Another difference is the fact that, in the
studies by Puente-Maestu and colleagues
(176, 182), patients with COPD and
control subjects had lung cancer.
Additional investigations are warranted.
Abnormal limb muscle bioenergetics.
Aerobic capacity is decreased and glycolytic
activity preserved in lower limb muscles
of patients with COPD (178, 190–196).
Consistent with altered oxidative proﬁle,
the limb muscle metabolic proﬁle exhibits,
at rest, low concentrations of high-energy
phosphates such as ATP and creatine
phosphate as well as lower aerobic
enzyme activity compared with age-
matched healthy control subjects (197,
198). In addition, intermediate markers
of glycolysis, namely glucose-6-phosphate,
glucose-1-phosphate, and fructose-6-
phosphate as well as phosphofructokinase,
and lactate dehydrogenase activities
are elevated in resting COPD muscles
(198, 199).
The limb muscle transcriptomics (200)
(the RNA that are transcripted in the
muscle), proteomics (201) (the proteins
that are expressed in the muscle), and
metabolomics (202) (metabolic proﬁle in
the muscle) are altered in patients with
COPD compared with age-matched healthy
sedentary subjects. These abnormalities
are more evident in patients with muscle
atrophy. Moreover, a recent systems
biology approach to the problem (200)
suggested that patients with COPD
show a failure to coordinately activate
relevant limb muscle pathways, such as
bioenergetics, inﬂammation, and tissue
remodeling, that may lead to the abnormal
structural changes seen in these patients.
In this study, a signiﬁcant association was
observed between a number of histone
modiﬁers and peak oxygen uptake,
lending to the hypothesis that cell hypoxia,
facilitated by sedentarity, might play
a role in muscle dysfunction through
epigenetic mechanisms (200).
Low mechanical efﬁciency and high
resting energy expenditure. Increased
limb muscle O2 requirements at a given
submaximal work rate has been reported
(172, 192). The change in ﬁber type
proﬁle in COPD muscle may explain low
mechanical efﬁciency in these patients
(203). This ﬁnding is supported by a study
demonstrating higher ATP consumption
for a given mechanical work rate in patients
with COPD (204). Measurements of resting
and total whole-body energy expenditure
also support higher energy requirements
of patients with COPD (205, 206). Enhanced
muscle protein turnover could also contribute
to this phenomenon (207, 208).
Oxidative Damage in COPD
In resting and contracting limb muscle
ﬁbers, superoxide anion and nitric oxide
(NO) are the primary free radicals generated.
Superoxide anion gives rise to hydrogen
peroxide, hydroxyl radicals, and other
oxidants that form the ROS cascade. NO
targets sulfhydryl groups in various proteins
through the process of S-nitrosylation but
can also react with superoxide anion to form
highly reactive nitrogen species (RNS),
such as peroxynitrite and nitrogen dioxide.
In resting muscles, ROS and RNS are
generated at low levels, and they promote
physiological functions including regulation
of contractile process, glucose uptake, and
blood ﬂow. During strong contractions
or under pathophysiological conditions
(209), ROS and RNS are synthesized at
higher rates, which may overcome tissue
antioxidant capacity, thereby leading to the
development of oxidative stress. Oxidative
damage may alter the structure and
function of membrane lipids, proteins,
and DNA, eventually leading to cell injury
and death.
In limb muscles, ROS are mainly
produced by the mitochondrial respiratory
chain, especially during contractile activity.
ROS can also be derived from enzymes
such as nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate (NADPH) oxidase (210),
xanthine oxidase, and from chemical
reactions with transition metals (211–213).
NO is continuously produced by nitric
oxide synthases (NOS) in limb muscle
ﬁbers, and its generation is enhanced
during contraction. Three isoforms of
NOS have been identiﬁed so far: constitutive
endothelial (eNOS) and neuronal (nNOS),
which are calcium dependent, and inducible
(iNOS), which is calcium independent
(214). Several RNS are formed inside
limb muscle ﬁbers, including the highly
reactive peroxynitrite, which triggers post-
translational modiﬁcations of proteins,
including nitration of tyrosine residues
leading to the formation of nitrotyrosine
(215). Peroxynitrite also exerts direct
oxidative effects on various proteins or
other structures within the muscle ﬁbers.
Contractile proteins, key metabolic
enzymes, sarcoplasmic reticulum, and
calcium sensitivity are potential cellular
targets of ROS and RNS within the muscle
ﬁbers. The generation of free radicals
in COPD muscles under resting and
contracting conditions has been
demonstrated by the identiﬁcation of
oxidation of proteins, lipids, and DNA in
systemic compartments (216, 217).
Oxidative stress is emerging as
a major contributor to muscle dysfunction
in patients with COPD, especially in those
with severe disease. Under resting and
exercise conditions, patients with COPD
exhibit higher levels of lipid peroxidation,
oxidized glutathione, and protein oxidation
and nitration in the blood and limb muscles
(167, 171, 177, 201, 217–232). Interestingly,
chronic exposure to cigarette smoke
increases several limb muscle oxidative
stress markers in healthy smokers (233)
and animals (233, 234). In the latter
models, oxidation of muscle proteins
anteceded the pathological features induced
by cigarette smoke in the lungs of the
animals (233).
The development of oxidative stress has
strong functional implications for the
contractile performance of limb muscles.
For instance, Koechlin and colleagues
(227) reported that systemic oxidative
stress levels were directly related to
quadriceps endurance time in patients
with severe COPD. These authors also
demonstrated that hypoxemic patients
exhibited greater levels of oxidative stress
in limb muscles, both at rest and after
exercise, while showing a poorer quadriceps
performance (229). Quadriceps muscle
force is inversely related to the levels of
protein oxidation being generated within
the muscle (201, 223, 233). Importantly,
exercise capacity is inversely related to
protein oxidation levels within the
quadriceps of patients with severe
COPD (201).
One possible mechanism through
which excessive ROS generation may
adversely inﬂuence muscle contractile
performance is by inducing post-
translational modiﬁcations that may
inhibit key muscle enzymes and proteins
while enhancing their degradation. In this
regard, contractile proteins such as MHC
(171, 230) and enzymes such as creatine
kinase undergo severe oxidation within
the limb muscles of patients with COPD
(171, 222, 230, 233, 235). Oxidation of these
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e24
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 12 (native) -----
proteins induces a signiﬁcant decrease in
the content of contractile MHC as well as a
reduction in the activity of creatine kinase
(171, 222, 230, 233). The functional
implication of these changes in MHC and
creatine kinase regarding poor contractile
performance of limb muscles in patients
with COPD remains unclear. Another issue
that remains under investigation is whether
oxidative stress triggers proteolysis, which
may partly account for muscle atrophy
seen in COPD. In one study, however,
oxidative stress did not correlate with
muscle protein loss in the limb muscles
of these patients (171).
The development of oxidative stress in
limb muscles of patients with COPD may
be the result of enhanced inﬂammatory
cell inﬁltration and cytokine production.
Nevertheless, there is no strong relationship
between muscle oxidative stress and local
inﬂammation in patients with COPD
(171, 223, 233, 236). In fact, although
local and systemic levels of inﬂammatory
mediators are relatively low in patients
with COPD regardless of their body
composition, evidence of strong oxidative
stress is consistently found in limb muscles
and in the blood of these patients (171, 217,
223, 232, 233, 236). This speciﬁc issue is
covered in more detail in a section below
(MECHANISMS OF LIMB MUSCLE DYSFUNCTION
IN COPD).
Limb Muscle Function in COPD
Limb muscle function is altered in patients
with COPD as evidenced by muscle
weakness and reduced endurance. Lower
limb muscle strength has been widely
assessed in patients with COPD, and most
of the data have been obtained in the
quadriceps muscle. This muscle is readily
accessible, and it represents a typical
example of a primary locomotor muscle
that is underused in patients with COPD.
Quadriceps strength is usually assessed by
volitional tests while measuring maximal
isometric voluntary contraction (MVC),
and studies consistently show that this
measure is reduced by 20 to 30% in patients
with COPD (3, 138, 224, 237–248). This
has been conﬁrmed by nonvolitional
assessment tests based on evoked twitch
tension in response to magnetic stimulation
of the femoral nerve (246, 247, 249, 250). In
one study, the annual decline in quadriceps
strength was accelerated in patients with
COPD, averaging 4.3% per year (3), in
comparison with about 1 to 2% per year
in the healthy aging population. However,
another study reported a similar rate of
decline in quadriceps strength in COPD
versus the healthy aging population (4).
The potential for a differential decline in
limb muscle strength between COPD and
the healthy elderly requires further
investigation.
One of the major characteristics
of muscle dysfunction in COPD is its
interindividual heterogeneity, a fact
leading to the concept of a limb muscle
dysfunction phenotype in COPD.
Seymour and colleagues (248) reported
muscle weakness in 20% of patients with
mild to moderate COPD, a population in
which muscle weakness would not be
expected as a major issue. By contrast,
more than 50% of patients with severe
COPD in whom muscle weakness was
expected did not show reduced
quadriceps strength. These data show that
unexpected phenotypes regarding muscle
weakness may exist in patients with
COPD.
In one study, no alteration in
contractile apparatus was found in COPD,
as reﬂected by preserved in vitro contractile
properties of vastus lateralis muscle
bundles (239). In addition, when
quadriceps strength is normalized by thigh
muscle cross-sectional area or by muscle
mass, no signiﬁcant difference between
patients with COPD and healthy control
subjects was seen (3, 138, 224, 244).
Therefore, the reduced quadriceps strength
is mostly a reﬂection of the loss in muscle
mass (136, 188, 242, 388, 389). However,
in some patients, the loss in strength may
be disproportional to the reduction in
muscle mass (239, 248). This may occur
in patients frequently exposed to systemic
corticosteroids (138, 251). This ﬁnding
may only apply to chronically treated
patients, as no further decrease in
quadriceps strength was reported in
short-term corticosteroid-treated patients
with COPD compared with untreated
patients (252).
Muscle weakness is not homogeneously
distributed among muscle groups. Although
muscle weakness can be found in the
upper extremities, the strength of these
muscles is better preserved than that of
lower limb muscles (136, 138, 168, 220, 237,
238, 244, 249, 253). In addition, the force of
the distal upper limb muscles was better
preserved than that of the proximal upper
limb muscles.
Muscle endurance and fatigue. Muscle
endurance in patients with COPD has
been mainly assessed in lower limb muscles.
Volitional (227, 229, 242, 243, 254–257)
and nonvolitional (258) assessments of
muscle endurance have shown that
quadriceps endurance is decreased in
COPD. The magnitude of this decrease
is, however, highly variable (range,
32–77%), probably because of differences
in test procedures. The reduction in
quadriceps endurance seems to be of
similar magnitude in men and women
with COPD (255, 257) and in patients
with and without depleted FFM (244).
Impaired quadriceps endurance is also
present in patients with mild to moderate
COPD and is only poorly associated with
the degree of physical activity (243, 256,
259, 260). Endurance is more severely
reduced in the presence of hypoxemia
(229). The endurance of the elbow ﬂexor
muscle (261), the biceps (244), and the
triceps and posterior deltoid (237) is
preserved in patients with COPD,
whereas that of the adductor pollicis
muscle is slightly reduced in the presence
of chronic hypoxemia (262), providing
additional information about the
heterogeneity of the muscle
abnormalities in COPD.
Many patients with COPD stop
exercise primarily because of leg fatigue
complaints before they become
ventilatory limited (263). The perception
of fatigue has to be differentiated with
objective measurements of fatigue. Most
of the studies examining muscle fatigue
after exercise in COPD have used
a nonvolitional technique: twitch
measurement after magnetic stimulation
(240, 250, 264–268). Additionally, the
EMG median frequency represents
a valuable indirect marker to predict
contractile fatigue (269). Objective
contractile leg fatigue, as evidenced by
a temporary reduction in quadriceps
strength occurring after exercise, has
been reported in 48 to 58% of patients
with COPD (240, 250, 265, 266).
However, the incidence increases to 58
to 81% when potentiated twitch instead
of nonpotentiated twitch measurement
was used to assess muscle fatigue (265).
The occurrence of muscle fatigue is
not an abnormal phenomenon in itself,
but the key observation is that, for the
same absolute oxygen uptake and the
same duration of cycle exercise, the
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e25

----- Page 13 (native) -----
degree of contractile fatigue elicited by
exercise is greater in patients with
COPD than in healthy individuals (240).
In addition, an inverse relationship
between the degree of contractile muscle
fatigue and dynamic hyperinﬂation after
exercise has been reported in COPD,
indicating that those patients with
greater hyperinﬂation tend to be more
limited by ventilatory constraint than by
leg fatigue (264). Interestingly,
quadriceps fatigue is infrequent after
exhaustive walking in patients with
COPD, suggesting that the mechanisms
of limitation in COPD are exercise
speciﬁc (250, 270). Nevertheless, the
gastrocnemius and the tibialis anterior
may also be susceptible to fatigue during
walking (271, 272).
Limb Muscle Function and
Exacerbation of COPD
Acute COPD exacerbations are common
in the course of the disease and are
associated with systemic events, including
effects on limb muscle function.
Quadriceps strength often decreases
during hospitalization for a COPD
exacerbation (241, 273, 274).
The reduction in quadriceps force during
hospitalization is signiﬁcantly correlated
to a smaller improvement in walking time
1 month after discharge (273).
Importantly, quadriceps force only
partially recovered 3 months after
discharge from the hospital (241). Upper
limb muscle function is also affected, as
documented by a reduced handgrip force
in patients hospitalized for a COPD
exacerbation (241). Reduced handgrip
force is also associated with an increased
risk of hospital readmission due to acute
exacerbation (275). The maintenance of
muscle mass is compromised during an
exacerbation, with multiple atrophying
pathways being up-regulated (274, 276)
while markers of the mitochondrial
respiration pathway are down-regulated
(276). The cause of muscle dysfunction
during exacerbations is probably
multifactorial, involving inﬂammation,
nutritional imbalance, physical inactivity,
and the use of systemic corticosteroids.
Enhanced systemic inﬂammation may
potentially contribute to deterioration of
muscle function. Supporting this
contention is the inverse correlation
between IL-8 systemic levels and isometric
quadriceps strength during exacerbations
(241), whereas the presence of
inﬂammatory markers within the muscle
is not evident (274). During exacerbation,
dyspnea and fatigue compromise
dietary intake (277). In addition, resting
energy expenditure is acutely increased
during the ﬁrst days of hospitalization
(278). The resulting negative energy
balance may contribute to physical
inactivity in patients experiencing an
exacerbation who may choose to preserve
their energy. Indeed, patients with COPD
are very inactive during hospitalization
for an acute exacerbation and remain
inactive even 1 month after discharge
(273, 279). Patients with frequent
exacerbations recover their physical
activity level to a lesser extent than
patients without frequent exacerbations
(273). Patients not improving their
walking distance within 1 month after
exacerbation are at higher risk for
hospital readmission (273). The use of
systemic corticosteroids could also be
involved in the worsening in muscle
function in the course of a COPD
exacerbation (251).
Consequences of Limb
Muscle Dysfunction in COPD
Limb muscle dysfunction contributes to
COPD morbidity. One major impact of
COPD is the incapacity to perform daily
activities, and muscle dysfunction may
contribute to this problem. Arguably, the
most troublesome consequence of muscle
dysfunction is its negative effect on life
expectancy (Figure 3), although a causal
relationship has not been proven.
Parameters such as reduced midthigh
muscle cross-sectional area (280, 281)
and lower quadriceps strength (282, 391)
predict mortality in COPD,
independently of lung function
impairment: (1) a midthigh muscle cross-
sectional area less than 70 cm2 as assessed
by computed tomography scanning is
associated with a fourfold increase in
mortality after adjusting for age, sex and
FEV1 (280); (2) an FFMI less than 16 kg/
m2 in men and less than 15 kg/m2 in
women is associated with a 1.9-fold
increase in mortality after adjusting for
age, sex, and FEV1 (132); and (3)
a quadriceps strength (kg) to BMI (kg/
m2) ratio less than 120% is associated
with increased mortality; each 10%
increment of this ratio is associated with
a 9% reduction in mortality (282). This
highlights the importance for clinicians
to monitor body composition and muscle
strength when evaluating a patient with
COPD.
Implications for Exercise Intolerance
Exercise intolerance is a major consequence
of COPD, and it cannot be explained solely
on the basis of limitations in ventilation
and gas exchange. For instance, the degree
of impairment in lung function is a poor
predictor of exercise capacity (283).
Quadriceps strength correlates with poor
exercise tolerance in this disease (284).
The strength of the quadriceps is a strong
predictor of exercise capacity in patients
with chronic pulmonary diseases: a twofold
increase in muscle strength is associated
with a 1.4- to 1.6-fold increase in work
capacity (285) (Figure 3). This may be
related to the inﬂuence of muscle strength
on the perception of leg effort during
exercise (285), the main limiting symptom
in 40 to 45% of patients with COPD
(263). Perhaps the most striking clinical
observation pointing to a peripheral
component of exercise limitation in
COPD is that exercise capacity remains
abnormally low in most lung transplant
recipients despite normalization of lung
function (286). In patients with COPD,
exercise termination usually occurs before
a true plateau in V
:
O2 is reached. In
many patients, psychological factors such
as anxiety, fear of dyspnea, and poor
motivation may contribute to exercise
intolerance. As a result, the physiologic
contributions of individual factors to
reduced peak V
:
o2 is difﬁcult to assess.
The contribution of limb muscle
abnormalities to exercise limitation in
COPD has been challenged by Richardson
and colleagues (203). These authors showed
that the aerobic capacity of the lower
limb muscles was not reached during
cycling exercise (when a large muscle
mass was involved), because of the early
occurrence of central limitation to exercise.
The implication of this is that the aerobic
capacity of the exercising muscles of the
lower limbs, even if reduced, is not
overwhelmed during whole-body exercise
in patients with COPD.
Patients with COPD stop exercising
because of exertional discomfort and
not necessarily because of physiologic
constraints. Although dyspnea is
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e26
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 14 (native) -----
undoubtedly the primary limiting symptom
in many patients, a signiﬁcant portion
stops exercise because of leg fatigue (263).
This could be related to the fact that limb
muscle alterations, such as poor oxidative
capacity, atrophy, and weakness, increase
susceptibility to contractile fatigue. The
impact of leg fatigue on the exercise
response to acute bronchodilatation was
evaluated to test the hypothesis that the
improvement in airﬂow obstruction would
not translate into better exercise capacity
in patients with higher susceptibility to leg
fatigue (266). In this study, bronchodilation
provided by the administration of
ipratropium bromide did not enhance
exercise tolerance in patients who
developed contractile fatigue after cycling
exercise as it did in those who did not
develop contractile leg fatigue (266). This
study highlights how contractile fatigue of
the quadriceps may inﬂuence the exercise
response to bronchodilation in COPD,
a concept that has been conﬁrmed in
subsequent studies (287).
Lower capacity for muscle aerobic
metabolism may inﬂuence exercise
tolerance. Increased lactic acidosis for
a given exercise work rate, which is
a common ﬁnding in COPD (177, 190,
288, 289), increases ventilatory needs by
increasing nonaerobic carbon dioxide
production (288). This imposes an
additional burden on the respiratory
muscles, which are already facing increased
impedance to breathing. In addition, the
resulting acidemia may act as a breathing
stimulus through the carotid bodies.
Premature muscle acidosis, a contributory
factor to muscle fatigue and early exercise
termination in healthy subjects, may be
an important mechanism contributing to
exercise intolerance in COPD (290). This
may be exacerbated by a tendency to
retain carbon dioxide (respiratory acidosis)
during exercise (288). Perturbation in
muscle energy metabolism is another
potential contributor to exercise intolerance
in COPD. Direct measurements of muscle
metabolites in biopsy samples taken
immediately after a standardized bout of
constant work rate exercise (at 80%
peak work rate) showed a signiﬁcant
accumulation of muscle lactate, degradation
of muscle PCr, and loss of muscle ATP in
COPD. The magnitude of these metabolite
modiﬁcations was similar to that seen in
healthy control subjects, but they occurred
at substantially lower absolute exercise
work rates (196, 291). This observation
was replicated when plasma ammonia
concentration was measured as a surrogate
for adenine nucleotide loss (292).
Moreover, when mitochondrial energy
delivery was increased by pharmacological
activation of PDC, both blood lactate
Figure 3. Relationships between muscle mass and strength and clinical outcomes in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
A midthigh muscle cross-sectional area (MTCSA) , 70 cm2 (A) (280), a low fat-free mass index (FFMI) deﬁned as an FFMI , 16 kg/m2 in men
and , 15 kg/m2 in women (B) (132), and a reduced quadriceps strength deﬁned as a quadriceps strength (kg) to body mass index (BMI, kg/m2)
ratio , 120% (C) (282) are predictors of mortality in COPD after adjusting for traditional mortality risk factor such as age and FEV1. The strength of the
quadriceps is a signiﬁcant contributor to exercise capacity in COPD (D) (285). All panels adapted by permission from the indicated references.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e27

----- Page 15 (native) -----
and ammonia accumulation were reduced
during maximal exercise in a cohort of
patients with COPD (293). Maximal
exercise work rates were increased after this
intervention, suggesting that mitochondrial
ATP delivery is relevant to whole-body
exercise performance in COPD.
The degree of limb muscle fatigue
reached during exercise appears to be highly
regulated in healthy subjects (95, 294)
and in COPD (196, 295). This is viewed
as a protective mechanism (95) whereby
feedback signals originating from the
fatigued muscles inhibit motor cortical
output via the stimulation of group III
and IV muscle afferents, thus preventing
subsequent locomotor recruitment and the
development of dangerous and potentially
irreversible fatigue (294, 296). This concept
is in line with the notion that the central
nervous system integrates information
originating from the limb muscles to
determine the duration of exercise and
the degree of muscle fatigue (294, 297).
Preinduction of muscle fatigue by
neuromuscular electrical stimulation
contributed to limitation of exercise
tolerance in patients with COPD (298).
Spinal anesthesia, presumably blocking
group III/IV sensory afferent signals from
the lower limb muscles, was shown to
improve exercise duration to constant
work rate exercise in patients with COPD
(295). Spinal anesthesia was associated with
less leg fatigue perception and allowed
patients to reach a more profound degree
of fatigue and greater central motor output
to the exercising muscles. The reduced
ventilatory response with spinal anesthesia
was also important in explaining the
enhanced exercise duration with this
intervention. Based on studies showing
early reliance on glycolytic metabolism
and increased lactate production in
exercising patients with COPD as
compared with healthy subjects (196, 290),
it is conceivable that the afferent signal
originating from the contracting muscle
may even be greater in patients with COPD
than in healthy individuals and that this
mechanism might have a larger effect in
the former individuals. Thus, limb muscle
dysfunction could, by enhancing the level
of sensory afferent signalization, directly
contribute to exercise intolerance.
The impact of lower limb muscle
dysfunction on exercise tolerance in COPD
has been mostly assessed using the cycling
exercise modality. Gagnon and colleagues
(272) reported recently that, after walking
exercise standardized to induce similar
energy expenditure, dorsi and plantar
ﬂexors were much more prone to the
development of fatigue in patients with
COPD than in healthy control subjects.
These data are in line with another study
in which the electrical activity of ﬁve
different lower limb muscles behaved
in a similar fashion in patients with
COPD and in healthy control subjects
despite a markedly lower walking distance
during a 6-minute walk (271). Together,
these studies highlight the potential
contribution of the distal limb muscle
fatigue in daily physical activities in
patients with COPD. The occurrence
of muscle fatigue may also modulate
the response to exercise training
programs, as illustrated by the
observation that patients with COPD
developing quadriceps fatigue during
exercise training have larger training
effects compared with those who did not
fatigue during the same session (299).
Other likely consequences of muscle
atrophy and poor limb muscle function in
COPD include reduction in quality of life
(300) and greater use of health care
resources (301).
Etiology of Limb Muscle
Dysfunction in COPD
The physiopathological interaction between
chronic lung disease and alterations in limb
muscle tissue is still poorly understood
and constitutes an important research area.
Several factors have been hypothesized to
initiate and/or promote changes reported
in limb muscles of patients with COPD
(Table 1). Multiple factors are likely to
interact in a given individual, and the
relative contribution of each individual
factor is likely to vary from one patient
to another. The different factors that are
reviewed in this section all have the ability
to activate various cascades that could
initiate or enhance, alone or most probably
in combination, changes in ﬁber type
phenotypic expression, contractile
proteolysis, metabolic alterations, and
regenerative defects in limb muscles of
patients with COPD.
Disuse versus Myopathy
One important question is whether limb
muscle dysfunction in COPD simply reﬂects
years of physical inactivity or whether some
factors speciﬁcally related to COPD could
be invoked. Limb muscle dysfunction in
COPD has been attributed in part to
reduced physical activity (“detraining” or
“deconditioning”) that characterizes this
disease (302). Muscle disuse in general
can lead to many of the features seen in
limb muscles of patients with COPD:
muscle weakness, overall muscle atrophy,
decreased cross-sectional area of muscle
ﬁbers, loss of type I ﬁbers, reduced
oxidative enzyme activity, reduced
capillary-to-ﬁber ratio, early lactate release,
reduced rate of phosphocreatine resynthesis
after exercise, and altered redox status
(303–307). In healthy adults, these muscle
alterations are usually reversible after
a period of training.
Whether limb muscle dysfunction
and cellular alterations in COPD are further
compounded by a myopathy (that is,
intrinsic alterations in limb muscle over
and above the changes due to inactivity,
and which are not fully reversible by exercise
training) has been the subject of debate and
controversy in last decade and is still not
resolved (307–311). This may be in part
because of failure to identify and separately
study and discuss ﬁndings in different
phenotypic (and in the future genotypic)
subgroups of COPD. The obvious example
is in COPD cachexia. Nobody would
dispute that muscle mass loss taking
a patient to below the 95% conﬁdence limit
of normal is a pathological process. But
for patients with normal muscle mass, the
question remains.
This question is not a semantic one,
as identiﬁcation of the mechanisms of
muscle dysfunction in COPD will
potentially result in rational and efﬁcient
therapeutics. If dysfunction is only due to
deconditioning and inactivity, appropriate
exercise training would be the logical way
to improve patients and should be sufﬁcient.
If, however, myopathy occurs in COPD,
other therapeutic approaches might be
necessary to target the identiﬁed pathways.
However, it can be argued that the inability
to reach a sufﬁciently intense training
stimulus for an adequate period of time
during whole-body exercise in patients
with COPD prevents proper testing of the
hypothesis that exercise can restore
structure and function to normal.
Although we cannot close the debate,
we can expose some of the main positions.
Against the hypothesis of a disease-speciﬁc
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e28
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 16 (native) -----
myopathy are the following: (1) many
functional and cellular ﬁndings in COPD
are identical to those of disuse; (2) limb
muscle is trainable, because training has
been shown to improve muscle strength
and endurance, oxidative enzyme activities,
ﬁber cross-sectional area, and muscle
capillarization, at least in some patients
(307, 310); (3) in a small study, high-
intensity aerobic interval training was
shown to restore work performance and
oxidative capacity of the quadriceps to
a level similar to that found in sedentary
individuals (312); and (4) the fact that
full recovery of muscle function is unusual
does not necessarily indicate a myopathy,
because the duration of the training
program may be too short to normalize
alterations that have developed over
several decades (313, 314), or early
ventilatory limitation may compromise
the ability to tolerate sufﬁcient muscle
stimulus to improve global or cellular
function (311).
On the other hand, several observations
are in favor of the existence of a myopathy in
patients with COPD: (1) muscle function
(strength or endurance) is not (or is poorly)
related to the degree of physical activity
in COPD, as assessed by questionnaires
or actual measurements (302), suggesting
that mechanisms other than inactivity
may exist; (2) when patients with COPD
are compared with healthy subjects with
consistent and comparable low physical
activity, differences in muscle function and/
or structure remain (259, 308); (3) although
exercise training improves some muscle
features in COPD, muscle typology
does not improve, (i.e., increase in type I
ﬁber proportion [163, 315, 316]) to the
same extent in COPD in comparison to
what is seen in healthy subjects (317–319);
(4) quadriceps weakness occurs in
patients with COPD across all severity
stages (310).
In summary, a consensus exists for
a signiﬁcant role of muscle disuse to explain
limb muscle dysfunction in COPD, although
it is not the only mechanism. The debate
remains open on the concept of a separate
myopathy in this disease. In this debate,
one limit is the lack of clear and consensual
deﬁnition of what is a COPD-related
myopathy. Similar debates are also taking
place in other chronic diseases, such as
chronic heart failure and diabetes
(320, 321).
Mechanisms of Limb Muscle
Dysfunction in COPD
Inﬂammation. The close relationship
between the systemic inﬂammatory
response in several acute and chronic
conditions and the development of muscle
atrophy is acknowledged in the literature
(for review, see [116, 322]). Production
of key cytokines can generate an array
of cellular responses, including the
induction of the UbP system through the
transcriptional activities of NF-kB and
FOXOs (119), apoptosis (323), and
macroautophagy (324), which have all
been linked to the development of muscle
atrophy. In agreement with other
atrophying models in which inﬂammatory
response is reported, increased expression
of Atrogin-1, MuRF-1, and neural
precursor cell expressed developmentally
down-regulated protein 4 (Nedd4), all
E3-ligases, are observed in the quadriceps
of patients with COPD (102, 325).
Table 1: Etiologies of Limb Muscle Atrophy, Weakness, and Susceptibility to Fatigue
Mechanisms Involved
Factors leading to muscle atrophy and
weakness
Disuse
Associated with weakness, atrophy,
changes in ﬁber type distribution,
and metabolic alterations
(303–306, 310)
Inﬂammation
Triggering of the muscle proteolysis
cascade (102, 116, 322, 325)
Oxidative stress
Triggering of the muscle proteolysis
cascade (336, 339, 340)
Associated with reduced muscle
endurance (222, 227, 229)
Protein carbonylation possibly
involved in exercise intolerance
and weakness (201)
Hypoxemia
Decreased muscle protein synthesis
Activation of muscle degradation
through hypoxia-inducible factor/
von Hippel–Lindau signaling
cascade (347–350)
Hypercapnia
Intracellular acidosis/alterations in
contractile protein synthesis/
degradation (105, 362)
Low levels of anabolic hormones and growth
factors
Associated with reduced muscle
protein synthesis (371, 372)
Impaired energy balance
Associated with reduced muscle
protein synthesis (381, 383)
Corticosteroids
Reduced muscle protein synthesis
and enhanced proteolysis through
increased myostatin levels and
reduced insulin-like growth
factor-1 levels (385)
Vitamin D deﬁciency
Associated with muscle weakness,
type II atrophy impaired calcium
metabolism (392, 400, 405)
Factors leading to muscle susceptibility to fatigue
Central fatigue—afferent feedback from limb
muscles
Reduced motor output to the
contracting muscles (295)
Reduced O2 delivery (impaired cardiac output,
blood ﬂow competition between the
respiratory and limb muscle, reduced
capillarity)
Changes in muscle metabolism in
favor of glycolysis; accumulation
of muscle metabolites associated
with muscle fatigue
Muscle metabolic alteration (reduced oxidative
enzyme activity, reduced mitochondrial
function)
Preferential use of glycolysis and
accumulation of muscle
metabolites associated with
muscle fatigue (179, 180, 190,
199, 443)
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e29

----- Page 17 (native) -----
Increased Nedd4 expression compromises
satellite cell proliferation and muscle
regeneration by favoring ubiquitination
and degradation of Notch (326), an
important transcription factor involved in
the regulation of these processes (327).
Conﬂictual or negative results regarding
apoptosis and macroautophagy in the
muscles of COPD demand further studies
to explore the role of these mechanisms
(102, 189, 236). Although increased
inﬂammatory response is seen during
exacerbated COPD (328, 329), similar
observation is controversial in stable
patients (201, 232, 330–332). One relevant
negative observation is the lack of evidence
of muscle inﬂammation in this human
model of muscle atrophy (332, 333).
A critical appraisal of the literature reveals
only scant and unconvincing data
supporting the presence of quadriceps
inﬂammation in COPD (331, 334, 335),
even in the presence of muscle atrophy
(223, 333) or during periods of acute
exacerbation when inﬂammatory bursts
should be expected (276). As such, a clear
role of muscle inﬂammation as a key
event in the development of limb muscle
dysfunction in COPD has yet to be
conﬁrmed.
Oxidative stress. In several chronic
atrophying conditions, including COPD,
unbalanced oxidative stress could alter
integrity of muscle proteins, enhancing
their degradation (336). In COPD, systemic
(226) and local (219, 220) oxidative stress
have been reported. Acute bouts of exercise
(224, 226) as well as acute exacerbation
(329, 337) increase the level of oxidative
stress. Direct oxidative stress exposure
(338) or indirect production of ROS
through inﬂammatory response (339,
340) induces proteolysis and increases
expression of UbP components. Although
precise mechanisms are still unknown,
induction of NF-kB (339) and FOXOs
transcriptional activities (341) or p38
kinase activity (120, 342) by oxidative
stress is believed to play a role in the
proteolytic signaling.
Hypoxia. Under hypoxic conditions,
muscle mass in animals (343) and humans
(344) decreases. Moreover, under low
oxygen content, cultured myoblasts have
defective myogenic processes (slower
proliferation and differentiation) (345).
Patients with COPD having a low arterial
O2 level (330) or a reduction in O2 delivery
(346) tend to have a lower body mass
than those with a normal arterial O2 level
or a sufﬁcient O2 delivery. During episodes
of low O2 availability, a coordinated
response for cell survival is accomplished
by hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF; for
review, see [347]). In COPD, hypoxia is
a likely factor driving changes in limb
muscle tissue (200). As a correlate,
increased expression of von Hippel–Lindau
(VHL) protein, an E3 ligase involved in
the proteolytic degradation of HIF-1a
subunit, has been reported in muscle
samples of patients with severe COPD
(mean PaO2 of 69 mm Hg) compared
with healthy subjects (348). Under such
circumstances, the altered HIF signalization
may further compromise muscle mass. In
addition, regulated in development and
DNA damage responses-1 (REDD1) gene
activation was recently reported in muscle
samples from hypoxemic patients with
COPD (349). In response to several cellular
stresses, REDD1 inactivates the kinase
activity of mTOR, a key player in the
transduction of the AKT signal during
protein synthesis. At the tissue level,
increased proteolysis through activation
of the UbP system and halted synthesis
have been demonstrated in cultured
myotubes (350).
In patients with COPD, chronically
altered oxygen transport (351, 352) and
impaired oxygen use (176, 181–183, 353)
facilitate limb muscle oxidative stress
(201, 217, 226, 227, 229, 354) leading to
nitroso-redox imbalance (355–357) and
explaining post-transcriptional alterations
(inhibition of S-nitrosylation) contributing
to limb muscle dysfunction (201).
Hypoxemia may also potentiate the
inﬂammatory response (358), providing
an additional mechanism linking hypoxia
to speciﬁc cellular responses predisposing
to muscle atrophy. Hypoxemia may also
compromise muscle oxidative capacity
and capillarization (359) and predispose to
muscle fatigue (360, 361).
Hypercapnia. Increase in cellular CO2
content is present in chronic hypercapnic
patients and will develop or worsen
during COPD exacerbation. Consequently,
tissue pH decreases (197), and acidosis
can alter contractile protein synthesis
and degradation (362). In muscle tissue,
acidosis increases the expression of genes
encoding proteins of the UbP pathway
(105) and impairs the AKT signaling (363),
thereby reducing protein synthesis and
further promoting activity of the UbP
pathway (118, 364).
Low levels of anabolic hormones and
growth factors. Low testosterone levels
have been observed in patients with
COPD (365–369). Chronic hypoxia and
corticosteroid therapy may all contribute
to this observation. Indeed, current
endocrine society guidelines suggest active
case ﬁnding in populations at high risk
of symptomatic hypogonadism, including
those with COPD (370). Cross-sectional
studies have demonstrated inconsistent
association of indices of limb muscle
function with serum testosterone levels in
COPD. Laghi and colleagues observed
a higher prevalence of hypogonadism in
men with COPD but no association with
limb or respiratory muscle performance
or whole-body exercise capacity (368). In
contrast, Van Vliet and colleagues observed
that quadriceps strength, but not whole-
body exercise tolerance, was related to low
circulating testosterone levels (365).
Growth factors have an essential role in
muscle tissue homeostasis. Although growth
hormone (GH)/IGF-1 axis (reviewed in
[371]) or testosterone (372) increase muscle
content, myostatin is a strong negative
regulator of muscle growth (373).
Myostatin is a transforming growth factor-
b family member that acts as a negative
regulator of limb muscle growth. Its global
role in whole-body homeostasis has
recently been reviewed (374). The primary
means by which myostatin negatively
regulates muscle growth is by suppressing
myoblast proliferation through the
inhibition of cell cycle progression (375).
Increased expression of myostatin mRNA
transcripts (102, 376) and protein
expression (377) in the quadriceps and
elevated serum myostatin (378) were
reported in patients with COPD. Myostatin
mRNA transcript level are also correlated
with muscle strength in patients with
COPD (376). In turn, resistance training
during an acute exacerbation may reduce
quadriceps myostatin mRNA expression
in patients with COPD (379). Based on
the increased expression of Nedd4
(102) and on the repressive activity of
myostatin on satellite cell proliferation
and differentiation (373), it is tempting
to speculate that muscle repair is likely
altered in COPD.
Impaired energy balance. Impaired
energy balance, due to elevated energy
requirements, reduced dietary intake, or
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e30
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 18 (native) -----
both, may lead to limb muscle atrophy
(380, 381). The energy balance may be
compromised in COPD due to the
complex interaction of a number of factors,
including anorexia, elevated whole-body
energy requirements, imbalance between
muscle protein synthesis and breakdown,
enhanced lipolysis, and an increase in
pulmonary and systemic inﬂammatory
mediators (382). Impairment in energy
balance and protein balance may occur
simultaneously, but these processes can
also be dissociated, as reﬂected in the
different COPD body composition
phenotypes. Patients with a negative energy
balance and a negative protein balance
will deplete both body fat and protein
stores, as reﬂected in weight loss, loss of
FM, and muscle wasting. Patients with
a normal energy balance but a negative
protein balance will experience loss of
muscle mass despite normal and stable
weight (383).
Corticosteroids. Although a short
course of systemic corticosteroids may
not alter limb muscle function in COPD
(252), these antiinﬂammatory agents have
a trophism for the muscles, and their
chronic or repeated use can potentiate
muscle atrophy and weakness in patients
with COPD (251, 384). Morphological
changes have been reported in the
quadriceps in patients with COPD
presenting with a corticosteroids-related
myopathy (384). These include increased
variations in muscle ﬁber size, increased
amount of connective tissue, increased
number of central and subsarcolemmal
nuclei and diffuse necrotic ﬁbers.
Corticosteroids, particularly in their
ﬂuorinated form, appear to preferentially
affect type IIx ﬁbers; these ﬁbers can
become severely atrophic when exposed to
these medications (384). Mechanisms by
which corticosteroids may impact muscle
function are related to the ability of these
agents to compromise the production of
contractile proteins and down-regulate the
IGF-1 pathway. Corticosteroids may also
enhance proteolysis by increasing
myostatin levels (385).
Vitamin D deﬁciency. The vitamin D
receptor (VDR) is abundantly expressed in
limb muscles, where it mediates several
gene promoters resulting in differential
gene expression (386). Nongenomic or
more rapid effects of vitamin D through
intracellular VDR have also been
documented in the muscle (387). As
such, the vitamin D pathway may play an
important role in the maintenance of limb
muscle health. Rickets often presents
with severe muscle weakness, and low
vitamin D serum (25-OH vitamin D)
levels are associated with reduced limb
muscle strength and increased risk of falls
(388–390). In elderly individuals, vitamin D
status predicts physical performance and
subsequent functional decline during
long-term follow-up (391). Yet, the
underlying mechanisms by which these
potential effects of vitamin D are mediated
are not fully understood. Adults with severe
vitamin D deﬁciency show predominantly
type II muscle ﬁber atrophy (392), with
interﬁbrillar spaces inﬁltrated with fat,
ﬁbrocytes, and glycogen granules (393).
Conversely, increases in relative ﬁber
composition and type II ﬁber dimensions
have been reported in the elderly after
treatment with vitamin D (394, 395).
1,25(OH)2 vitamin D also inﬂuences active
calcium transport into the sarcoplasmatic
reticulum (396), as it regulates Ca-ATPase
by phosphorylation (392). 1,25(OH)2D,
through VDR-mediated gene transcription,
(397) affects calmodulin (398), actin,
and troponin C content (399) and can
also up-regulate the expression of IGF-1
(386).
In the context of COPD, vitamin D
deﬁciency may contribute to limb muscle
dysfunction (400, 401). Vitamin D
deﬁciency is highly prevalent in patients
with COPD compared with age-matched
smoking control subjects, with 60 to 70%
of nonsupplemented patients with severe
disease having 25-OHD levels less than
20 ng/ml or 50 nmol/L (248, 402), which
is typically accompanied by a ﬁber type
shift to type II ﬁbers (161, 169, 190).
Vitamin D deﬁciency preferentially reduces
the size of type II ﬁbers that are important
in fall prevention (389), a problem
that can be tackled by vitamin D
supplementation (403). However, one
study failed to ﬁnd a signiﬁcant relationship
between vitamin D status, muscle MHC
protein expression, and limb muscle
strength in patients with COPD (404). Yet,
in another study, genetic polymorphisms
in the VDR correlated with measures of
strength (405). Together, these studies
indicate that, to a certain extent, alterations
in the vitamin D pathway may be present
in COPD and that this pathway may be
further compromised during disease
progression, thereby affecting the muscle
independently of serum levels.
Renin-angiotensin system. The renin-
angiotensin system may have implications
for the development of limb muscle
dysfunction in COPD (406). This system
is expressed in skeletal muscle and
produces angiotensin II that inhibits the
IGF-1 signalization cascade (407),
stimulates NF-kB and, as a result, the
UbP pathway (408), and interacts positively
with myostatin (409). Polymorphism of
the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
gene, with the deletion of a pair base
sequence on chromosome 17, is associated
with higher tissue level of ACE activity and
consequently in angiotensin II tissue
levels (410). This has been associated
with a less oxidative muscle phenotype with
lower proportion of type I ﬁbers (411–413).
In contrast, the same polymorphism is
associated with better-preserved muscle
strength in COPD (414) and possibly with
a better strength response after resistance
training in healthy subjects (415). As
a result of these apparently conﬂicting
effects of ACE muscle activity on the
muscle phenotype, the effect of
interventions on this pathway is difﬁcult
to predict; this question is currently being
addressed (see clinicaltrials.gov:
NCT01014338).
Smoking. Cigarette smoking is unlikely
to be the main mechanism involved in
limb muscle dysfunction in COPD because,
in several studies, patients and control
subjects were matched for smoking history.
However, smoking by itself has some
effects on muscle biology (416–419), and
it is possible that it may predispose
patients to the development of limb
muscle dysfunction. Smoking by itself
may be associated with muscle atrophy
and weakness in otherwise healthy
subjects (4, 236, 248). Smoking is
also associated with a decrease in type I
ﬁber cross-sectional area, reduced type I
ﬁber proportion, reduced cytochrome oxidase
activity, increased lactate dehydrogenase
activity, and a higher level of protein oxidation
in the quadriceps (420–422).
Mechanisms of Muscle Susceptibility
to Fatigue in COPD
Impaired quadriceps endurance is not
explained by reduced muscle mass (193),
but reduced muscle aerobic capacity and
oxidative stress have been implicated
(196, 224, 227, 242, 423).
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e31

----- Page 19 (native) -----
Neural drive and muscle afferents. In
healthy young subjects, the interaction
between central motor command and limb
muscle afferent feedback plays a key role
in modulating the physiologic response to
exercise by affecting the cardiorespiratory
response (267), development of muscle
fatigue (294), and endurance performance
(424). The interplay between central
motor drive and the muscle feedback
during exercise conﬁnes limb muscle
fatigue within a critical threshold (294).
Despite potential relevance in COPD, few
researchers have studied the neural drive
and muscle afferents in this context.
However, the available evidence supports
the idea that increased afferent feedback
from the limb muscles during exercise is
involved in the regulation of muscle
fatigue during exercise in COPD
(295, 298).
Blood ﬂow, oxygen delivery, and
extraction. In recent years, the inﬂuence
of increased work of breathing on limb
muscle fatigue during exercise has
been documented in healthy subjects.
During strenuous exercise, peripheral
vasoconstriction associated with the high
demand for respiratory muscle blood ﬂow
appears to compromise limb muscle
perfusion (261, 425, 426) and consequently
enhance muscle fatigue (427). A blood
redistribution phenomenon in favor of the
respiratory muscles may also occur in
COPD (428), and it has been hypothesized
that strategies that reduce respiratory
muscle work may alleviate limb muscle
fatigue by restoring blood ﬂow to the
limb muscles (267, 429). This hypothesis
was supported by a study from Amann
and coworkers, who gave a range of
interventions designed to improve
oxygenation (by supplemental oxygen)
and/or reduce work of breathing
(proportional-assist ventilation or helium
or both) (267). Interestingly, quadriceps
fatigue was reduced partially and to
similar extent with each intervention.
These data were interpreted as showing
that only 30 to 40% of quadriceps fatigue
could be attributed to muscle oxygen
delivery issues.
Enhanced muscle fatigability can also
occur when the left ventricular function is
compromised (267, 430). This may be
relevant in the subset of patients with
COPD (431), including those with cardiac
comorbidities (432) and those with
pulmonary hypertension (433), in whom
altered cardiac output and oxygen delivery
have been reported.
Reduced muscle capillarity could
contribute to limit blood and oxygen
delivery to the muscle and increase
susceptibility to development of muscle
fatigue, as indicated by the positive
relationship between muscle capillarity and
exercise performance (174). Saey and
coworkers conﬁrmed that capillarity was
reduced in patients with COPD who
developed quadriceps fatigue after cycling
exercise (423). Vogiatzis and colleagues
showed that exercise training improved
capillarity in COPD (434). Thus,
augmenting capillarity may offer a route
to reduce fatigability; this issue requires
further exploration.
Mechanisms within the motor unit.
Mechanisms involved in limb muscle fatigue
include the conduction of the action
potential along the muscle ﬁber membrane
into the transverse tubule system, the
release of calcium into the myoplasm, the
binding of calcium to troponin, the
interaction between myosin and actin
during cross-bridge cycling, and the active
reuptake of calcium into the sarcoplasmic
reticulum (92). Also, an impaired
excitation–contraction coupling may be
a contributing common factor to fatigue
induced by diverse forms of exercise (90, 91).
Metabolic changes in the muscle, such as
lactate accumulation and phosphocreatine
depletion (435), limitations in muscle energy
supply (436–438), and structural and
metabolic disorganization of contractile
proteins (91, 92), can all be involved in
the development of contractile muscle
fatigue. The accumulation of lactic acid
in muscle has historically been suggested
to be the major cause of muscle fatigue
(439) (see review by Westerblad and
colleagues [92] and by Fitts [440]).
Although lactic acid is dissociated into
lactate and hydrogen ions leading to
a signiﬁcant decrease in pH, lactate itself
has no effect on muscular contraction,
but the increased concentration of
hydrogen ions, which affects the
excitation–contraction coupling by
decreasing the quantity of calcium
released, may contribute to the
development of contractile fatigue. Other
factors, such as redox status (209) and
muscle inﬂammation (441, 442),
must also be considered as potential
contributors to muscle fatigue in patients with
COPD.
In COPD, changes in muscle metabolism
favor glycolysis, and phosphorus-31 nuclear
magnetic resonance (31P-NMR) studies
suggest early depletion and prolonged
recovery of phosphocreatine in the
quadriceps after exercise (443). Changes
in muscle enzymatic proﬁle and
capillarization leading to a greater reliance
on glycolytic metabolism during exercise
are also associated with muscle fatigue in
patients with COPD (423). During exercise,
the extent of changes in muscle metabolism
and muscle fatigue after a cycle exercise
performed until exhaustion were similar
in patients with COPD and age-matched
control subjects despite a much lower total
work performed by the COPD group
(196). Moreover, taking into account the
amount of work performed, use of glycogen
and accumulation of lactate and the key
intermediate markers of glycolysis show
signiﬁcant increases after exercise in
patients with COPD (196). Together with
the known reduction in oxidative enzymes
in COPD (199), these ﬁndings suggest
that an impaired muscle oxidative capacity,
with a reduction in phosphorylation
potential and a greater reliance on
glycolysis that may well contribute to the
muscle fatigue in COPD. The greater
reliance on glycolysis can, in part, be
explained by the reduced proportion of
type I ﬁbers (444, 445) and the lower
oxidative enzyme capacities observed in
the quadriceps compared with age-matched
healthy subjects (190, 199) as well as by
the higher phosphofructokinase activity
observed in COPD (199). Moreover, an
additional component of glycolytic reliance
might be related to lactate and glucose
transporters, whose activity was found be
altered in COPD (198). Because these
transporters are crucial for lactate removal
and glucose entry in limb muscle, they
could inﬂuence the relative contribution
of the glycolytic pathway to the total energy
expenditure during exercise. With the
reduced capillarity and decreased muscle
mitochondria activities and density,
patients with COPD show electron
transport chain blockade and excessively
increased levels of systemic and local
oxidative stress (201, 446). Couillard and
colleagues demonstrated that exhaustive
quadriceps exercise induces local oxidative
stress in patients with COPD. They also
found a reduction in antioxidant activity
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e32
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 20 (native) -----
48 hours post exercise in patients with
COPD compared with healthy control
subjects (224). Although muscle fatigue
was not assessed in this study, muscle
oxidative stress was associated with
reduced quadriceps endurance,
suggesting a relationship between muscle
fatigue and oxidative stress in patients
with COPD. This relationship is further
supported by the ﬁnding that antioxidant
therapy may alleviate muscle fatigue in
COPD (227).
Thus, there are several interrelated
mechanisms by which muscle fatigue
can contribute to exercise limitation in
patients with COPD. Some act directly
on the muscle contraction process
and others through their effects on both
the cardiorespiratory and nervous
systems.
Assessment of Limb Muscle
Function in COPD
The existing relationships between limb
muscle mass and strength and important
clinical outcomes in COPD (see previous
section, Consequences of Limb Muscle
Dysfunction in COPD) suggest that
assessing body composition and limb
muscle strength in the clinical
evaluation of COPD can identify patients
who are at increased risk for exercise
intolerance and premature mortality.
One strategy could be to evaluate body
composition and quadriceps strength at
the time of referral to the exercise
laboratory for the assessment of dyspnea
and/or exercise intolerance. Some
exercise laboratories implemented this
practice several years ago (285).
Isometric maximal volitional limb muscle
strength can easily be assessed using
strain gauges (Figure 4). Body
composition can be assessed in clinical
practice using either bioelectrical
impedance (BIA) or dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry (DEXA).
Assessment of Muscle Mass
Assessing only BMI is clearly insufﬁcient
to quantify the impact of COPD on the
different body compartments in general
and on muscle mass in particular (132).
Several techniques are available to assess
the mass of functioning muscles (281,
447), including both direct and indirect
approaches. The two-compartment
model of body composition divides body
mass into FM and FFM. FFM can be
further divided in an intracellular
compartment, which includes muscle
mass, bone mineral mass, and other
metabolizing tissues, and an extracellular
ﬂuid compartment. FFM is commonly
used as a surrogate for muscle mass in
clinically stable patients with COPD.
BIA is based on the higher conductivity
of an electric current through FFM
than FM (448). The measurement is
noninvasive, is inexpensive, takes only
a few minutes, and requires no active
collaboration. The technique has been
Figure 4. Standard operating procedure for isometric quadriceps strength assessment. During the
maneuver, vigorous encouragement of the patient is needed. Patient is positioned in a standardized
fashion (typically sitting with knees and hips in 908 ﬂexion or, less often, supine [248]). Maximal
voluntary contraction force (reported in kilograms or newtons) can be reliably assessed as the best of
three reproducible maneuvers. Maximal voluntary contraction is recorded as the maximal force that
can be maintained for 1 full second.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e33

----- Page 21 (native) -----
validated using total body water assessed by
deuterium dilution space as a reference
method in patients with COPD (281). It is,
however, important to use equations to
estimate body composition that have been
validated in COPD and to be cautious
with built-in equations provided by the BIA
systems (447, 449).
DEXA enables differentiation of body
composition into three compartments by
the assessment of FM, lean tissue, and bone
mineral content. Although more expensive
than BIA, DEXA is accepted as a safe,
convenient, and noninvasive method with
a low radiation dose (,0.02 mSv). In
patients with COPD, DEXA also appears
to be a suitable alternative method to
deuterium dilution (450) for assessing FFM.
In addition, DEXA enables identiﬁcation
of bone mineral loss and of trunk and
appendicular muscle mass.
There are signiﬁcant intermethod
differences for measuring body
composition (447). The current gold
standard is considered by many to be the
deuterium dilution technique, but its use is
restricted to highly specialized hospital or
research centers. Although simple and
cheap, skinfold anthropometry generally
results in overestimation of FFM
compared with other methods (281, 447,
451). Two reasonable compromises are
BIA and DEXA. The amount of FFM
assessed by BIA was shown to be lower
than with DEXA in patients with COPD
(449, 451), especially in men (447, 449).
However, DEXA is not without potential
limitation, because it provides
systematically higher values for FFM
compared with deuterium dilution (450).
Furthermore, DEXA results differ between
the different commercial devices. This
issue is less important for longitudinal
research purposes, as long as the same
method is used throughout the follow-up
of patients. Obviously, the
cut-off thresholds to deﬁne normality will
inﬂuence the prevalence of FFM depletion.
Several COPD-speciﬁc cut-offs were
reported in the last decades and are
presented in Table 2.
In addition to the previously described
techniques assessing whole-body FFM,
several measures of regional limb muscle
mass are available. Although measurement
of thigh circumference is simple and cheap,
it may not accurately reﬂect local muscle
mass (280). Alternatively, computed
tomography (280), magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) (452), and ultrasonography
(247) have been used to assess quadriceps
size in COPD. Using MRI-based three-
dimensional shape analysis, regional
shape anomalies of individual muscles
were demonstrated in patients with COPD
(453). The amount of local muscle mass
measured with these techniques has also
been related to relevant outcomes in
COPD, such as muscle strength (247)
and mortality (280). Correlation between
regional and whole-body muscle mass is
poor in COPD, suggesting that direct
lower limb muscle assessment indeed has
additional value (247). These methods are
useful in research, because they may be
more responsive to speciﬁc lower limb
interventions (e.g., strengthening exercise)
than the assessment of whole-body muscle
mass.
Finally, muscle biopsy is a valuable
tool to assess morphologic and biochemical
properties of limb muscle (454). The
Bergstr¨om needle is the most commonly
used (455, 456), but open surgical
techniques have also been applied (168,
239). Despite useful information obtained
from muscle biopsy, this technique is
invasive and has the potential for
complications, including discomfort and
minor scarring. Bleeding and infection can
also occur, but these are rare events (,1%)
(457). To reduce the discomfort associated
with this procedure, a microbiopsy
technique has been developed (458).
Although the quantity of muscle obtained
through this technique is less than with the
regular Bergstr¨om biopsy, it can still
provide sufﬁcient tissue for biochemical
and molecular analyses with a reasonable
degree of agreement with the Bergstr¨om
biopsy (458). This technique would seem
particularly suited when several muscle
biopsies are required, for example when
evaluating the time course of response of
a given protein or molecule to a speciﬁc
intervention. Finally, the choice of muscle
for biopsy and the representation of only
a tiny fraction of the entire muscle should
be taken into consideration.
Assessment of Limb Muscle Strength
Although strength is not the most sensitive
measure to assess muscle function, it is
an accessible way to investigate to which
extent the limb muscles are affected in
COPD and to prescribe adequate loads for
resistance training. Learning about the
status of the limb muscles provides
clinicians with important information for
understanding the mechanisms of exercise
limitation in a given patient.
Volitional assessment. Several studies
have measured limb muscle strength in
patients with COPD and healthy elderly
control subjects. Quadriceps muscle force
is typically reduced compared with age-
matched control subjects (248). Much less
is known about limb muscle function in
community or primary care settings
(459, 460). Technical aspects of assessing
volitional muscle force are reported in
detail elsewhere (461). Because limb muscle
strength can vary in individual patients
from very low to supranormal, techniques
to assess limb muscle strength need to be
able to deal with a large range of force
development. Some techniques, such as
manual muscle testing, in which limb
muscle strength is qualitatively assessed
from “none at all” to “normal,” may
therefore be less preferred in COPD.
These techniques may be useful in the
critical care setting (462), particularly if
Table 2: Cut-offs for Depletion of Whole-Body Fat-Free Mass and Fat-Free Mass
Index in Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
Study
Rationale
Men
(kg/m2)
Women
(kg/m2)
Schols et al. (134)
FFM corresponding to a weight of ,90% of
ideal body weight according to
Metropolitan Health Insurance Tables (129,
130)
,16
,15
Vestbo et al. (131)
10th percentile of FFM in Copenhagen City
Heart Study
,17.1
,14.6
Coin et al. (661)
10th percentile of FFM in the age range
60–69 yr
,17.8
,14.6
Deﬁnition of abbreviations: FFM = fat-free mass.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e34
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 22 (native) -----
sum scores are calculated over several
muscle groups (463). Hand-held
dynamometry, which provides more
quantitative information than the former
measurement, is promising, but even
in frail elderly the limits of agreement
are wide (464), and results depend on
the skills and strength of the tester.
Nevertheless, at a group level, using this
technique, muscle weakness has been
shown in patients with COPD (238).
Muscle strength can also be measured by
assessing the maximum weight that
a patient can move once over the full
range of motion without compensatory
movements (i.e., the one-repetition
measurement [465]). This technique,
although used in clinical trials in COPD to
assess the effect of interventions (466), does
not allow easy comparison of limb muscle
force across different settings, as the result
obtained depends on the technique of the
patient, the machine used (e.g., number of
pulleys), and starting position. Hydraulic
resistances can also be applied to assess
limb muscle strength dynamically in
patients (138, 467). The obtained strength
values will depend on the speed of the
contraction, which may be difﬁcult to
standardize across equipment.
Although various methodologies exist
to measure muscle strength, isometric
maximal volitional limb muscle strength
assessment is one methodology that
could be implemented in clinical practice
to provide reliable and reproducible
measurements (468, 469). A standard
operating procedure for this measure is
provided in Figure 4. The maximal
voluntary contraction force has historically
been reported in kilograms, because
weights are used to calibrate the apparatus.
Because force should technically be
reported in newtons, some investigators
prefer to do this by multiplying the
measured force in kilograms by the
gravitational pull (9.81 m/s2). MVC force
is typically assessed as the best of three
reproducible maneuvers. During the
maneuvers, patients need to be vigorously
encouraged. Patients are positioned in
a standardized position (typically sitting
with knees and hips in 908 ﬂexion or, less
often, supine [248]). Isometric muscle force
can also be assessed on speciﬁcally built
computerized dynamometers (e.g., Cybex
or Biodex). In this case, the peak torque is
assessed at ﬁxed joint angle speeds (470,
471). Higher angular speeds do result in
lower peak torque in subjects with COPD
(472), as in control subjects. The outcome
is normally reported as torque in newton-
meters (Nm), rather than newtons or
kilograms, which are only appropriate for
isometric efforts.
Limb muscle strength is negatively
related to age and positively related to
body weight. Male patients have superior
strength compared with female patients
(248). Because COPD occurs in both sexes
over a wide range of ages, it is best to
report values as percent of the predicted
normal value (238, 248), although we
acknowledge that there are no universal
reference values for this variable.
Alternatively, for muscles working against
gravity (knee extensors, ankle dorsiﬂexors),
a correction for body weight, which is
the main factor associated to limb muscle
strength, has been used (471).
Nonvolitional strength. One limitation
of volitional techniques to assess limb
muscle strength is their dependence on
cooperation of the patients. The assessment
is also dependent on all central and
peripheral factors linked to contraction
(motor cortex, central command, peripheral
nerve conduction).
Nonvolitional assessment of limb
muscle strength can be used for research
or diagnostic purposes. In this method,
electrical or magnetic stimulation of
a peripheral nerve is conducted by the
application of a single stimulus. This
technique is practiced by only a handful
of research laboratories but has provided
important insight in the involvement of
different muscle groups in COPD. Using
this technique, investigators have shown
that quadriceps twitch force was
proportionally more reduced than the
abductor pollicis (thumb opposition) twitch
force in COPD, suggesting either that
distal muscles are less impaired than
more proximal muscles or the upper-limb
muscles are less impaired than lower-limb
muscles (249).
Electrical stimulation of the peripheral
motor nerve allows the construction of
force–frequency curves in vivo, where
force is reported at different stimulation
frequencies. In a small study, Degens and
colleagues were unable to show differences
between patients with severe COPD and
control subjects matched for FFM (473).
This study also reported a similar
involvement of hand and quadriceps
muscles.
Stimulation of the muscle can be
done in a rested muscle to obtain an
unpotentiated twitch stimulation, or
it may be performed seconds after
a vigorous voluntary contraction to obtain
a potentiated twitch stimulation. Clearly,
the latter demands cooperation of the
patient. None of these can be considered
physiologic maneuvers.
Twitch stimulations are obtained
by supramaximal stimulation of the
conducting nerve. To ensure supramaximality,
the stimulator output is slowly increased
until the obtained twitch force or the EMG
signal accompanying the muscle ﬁber
discharge does not further increase. More
recent studies tend to use a plateau in
force output to ensure supramaximality
(266, 299, 474, 475). The assessment of
twitch quadriceps force has less day-to-day
variability compared with MVC (474).
Twitch muscle force has been used to
measure limb muscle fatigue (applying
the twitch before and after limb muscle
loading). Methodological aspects, such as
the choice of the coil, inﬂuence the outcome
of the measurement (476). Potentiated
and unpotentiated twitch muscle force
can be used as nonvolitional evoked
contractions on stimulation of the femoral
nerve. Unpotentiated twitches are obtained
by stimulating at 1 Hz the rested/relaxed
quadriceps. Potentiated twitches are
obtained a few seconds after muscle
potentiation, using an MVC preceding
the 1-Hz twitch stimulation of the
femoral nerve. Although theoretically the
unpotentiated twitch may be the preferred
stimulation, it is difﬁcult for some patients
to keep the quadriceps completely relaxed
for the 20 minutes required to achieve
depotentiation. Also, the potentiated
twitch may exhibit bigger changes after
exercise or multiple efforts and therefore
may be more reliable and more sensitive
to detect signals of muscle fatigue (475).
Normal expected values are reported in
relatively small sets of healthy control
subjects (247, 477). The twitch force of
the quadriceps is reduced in COPD,
whereas the twitch/MVC ratio is
unchanged (247).
Transcranial magnetic stimulation
has been used in COPD (478, 479). With
this technique, the stimulation is applied on
the motor cortex through the skull of the
patient, allowing the stimulus to travel
through the whole path of neuronal
discharge. Outcomes of this test are
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e35

----- Page 23 (native) -----
based on EMG recordings: latency time in
milliseconds and motor evoked potentials in
microvolts assessed by surface EMG (430).
In vitro contractile properties can be
studied in muscle ﬁbers harvested from
patients with COPD and control subjects,
and results suggest that contractile
properties of limb muscle ﬁber bundles
were relatively preserved in patients with
COPD compared with control subjects
(239). To the best of our knowledge, single-
skinned ﬁber contractile properties have
only been studied in the diaphragm (480)
and not in the limb muscle.
Assessment of Limb
Muscle Endurance
Endurance of speciﬁc limb muscles is
generally not used as outcome in clinical
studies of COPD (481, 482). Nevertheless,
the evaluation of limb muscle endurance
may be more sensitive and useful to study
pharmacological and nonpharmacological
interventions speciﬁcally targeting the
limb muscles. So far, no direct comparisons
between different endurance protocols,
no standardization, and no reference values
are available, explaining why a broader
application of assessing limb muscle
endurance has not yet found its way to
clinical practice. One protocol that could
be recommended for implementation
consists of repeated leg extension
maneuvers at a predetermined rate of 12
contractions per minute performed at 10%
MVC with a duty cycle of 0.4. The outcome
of interest with this protocol is time to
task failure, deﬁned as the time at which
leg extension falls below 80% targeted value
for three successive contractions (243).
According to the deﬁnition of
endurance, time to task failure should be the
favored outcome of the test. Tests that
directly record endurance time are
conceptually superior to measurements
that measure fatigue by reporting alternative
outcomes, such as drops in muscular
strength or changes in EMG signaling
after a time-ﬁxed contractile maneuver
(483–485). Although muscle fatigue may
strongly correlate with endurance, it should
not be interpreted as a direct assessment
of endurance. Measurement of endurance
requires a muscle or muscle group to
contract against a load, producing a time-
dependent loss of mechanical function.
Over recent decades, a broad variety of
tests have been developed to assess muscle
endurance, which may differ on three
general components: nature of the
contractions (volitional or nonvolitional),
exercise conditions, and intensity (484, 486).
Muscle stimulation can be exogenously
imposed by direct nerve or muscle
electromagnetic stimulation (258, 269, 483),
but most endurance protocols rely on
a volitional contractions. The latter method
is easier and less invasive than the former
but also more difﬁcult to control, as it relies
on patient collaboration. The exercise
condition can be based on isometric
contractions with maintenance of muscle
length (258, 298, 483), on a dynamic
contractions to shorten the muscle against
a ﬁxed load (concentric contractions) (243,
256, 257), or on variable loads but with
constant angular speed (isokinetic) (193,
487). Isometric and concentric contractions
are physiological maneuvers that can be
easily implemented at low cost but with
a drawback of between-test variability and
reduced sensitivity. Isokinetic contractions
are nonphysiological maneuvers that require
more sophisticated and costly devices, in
addition to an appropriate training of the
patient. However, this method has the clear
advantage of being very reliable.
The intensity of the endurance maneuver
may be maximal or submaximal and can
be imposed via a single or a repeated
number of contractions. Although maximal
maneuvers are more representative of the
maximal anaerobic capacity of the muscle,
and they reﬂect maximal strength, repeated
submaximal contractions are probably the
method of choice for assessing endurance.
It should be stressed that before a series of
submaximal contractions, a similar but
maximal type of contraction is needed in
the same individual to determine patient-
speciﬁc optimal loads (243, 256). Submaximal
loads are then imposed at certain pace with
ﬁxed duty cycle and may range from 10 to
80% of the maximal load according to the
protocol used (243, 488). For isokinetic
measurements, repeated maneuvers at higher
angular speeds (90–3008/s) have been used
(193, 486).
Assessment of Muscle Oxygenation
Using Near-Infrared and Magnetic
Resonance Spectroscopy
Near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS)
constitutes a simple in vivo method to
quantify muscle oxygenation, oxygen
dynamics, and oxidative energy metabolism
at rest and during exercise. NIRS is
advantageous because it is noninvasive,
exhibits low movement artifacts, and
provides good temporal and spatial
resolution (489). The use of NIRS may
be limited in the presence of subcutaneous
fat accumulation, which impairs the
transmission of the signal at the muscle
level. NIRS technology has been applied to
the study of a number of chronic health
conditions, including patients with COPD.
Such studies have investigated the impact
of the pulmonary system limitations on
locomotor muscle fatigue in patients with
COPD (490–492). Collectively, these
studies (491–493) have shown that
respiratory muscle unloading (via oxygen
and/or heliox breathing, bronchodilation,
and proportional-assist ventilation)
improves leg muscle oxygen availability
during exercise in patients with COPD.
Recently, NIRS has been used in
combination with the light-absorbing tracer
indocyanine green dye to quantify regional
blood ﬂow in muscle and connective tissue
during dynamic exercise in patients with
COPD (352). Subsequent studies showed
that respiratory muscle unloading improves
locomotor muscle blood ﬂow and oxygen
delivery during exercise in patients with
different patterns and degrees of dynamic
hyperinﬂation (429, 494). 31P-NMR
spectroscopy is a noninvasive method to
evaluate high-energy compounds ATP,
PCr, inorganic phosphate (Pi), and
intracellular pH of single muscle groups
during exercise and recovery (495).
Effects of Interventions on
Limb Muscle Function in
COPD
Several interventions have been used in an
attempt to improve muscle function in
patients with COPD. These and their
respective effects on limb muscles are
summarized in Table 3.
Exercise Training
Rehabilitative exercise training improves
limb muscle function and morphology in
patients with COPD (313, 314, 496–498).
As such, quadriceps muscle strength,
endurance, and fatigability all improve
signiﬁcantly after exercise training (265,
314, 496–499), with smaller, albeit
signiﬁcant, increases in midthigh muscle
cross-sectional area (466) and FFM (497).
Typically, longer exercise programs
produce greater physiological training
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e36
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 24 (native) -----
effects, with a recommended minimum of
8 weeks to achieve a substantial effect (500).
The number of sessions per week also
varies; although outpatient programs
commonly include 2 to 3 days a week,
inpatient programs are usually planned for
5 days a week. The session length per day is
generally 1 to 4 hours (501). The optimal
exercise intensity is unknown. Nevertheless,
high level of intensity of exercise (.60%
maximal work rate) for 20 to 60 minutes
per session is more potent in terms of
inducing a physiological response to
training than less intense exercise (,40%
maximal work rate) (288). However,
many individuals with chronic lung disease
are unable to train at that level, and
substantially lower intensity of exercise is
an alternative (500). One option is interval
exercise training, in which the long
constant-load exercise session is replaced
by several smaller bouts (typically lasting
30 to 180 s) of high-intensity exercise
(80–120% peak capacity) separated either
by periods of rest (lasting 30 to 60 s) or by
lower-intensity exercise bouts (50–80%),
thereby allowing intense loads to be applied
to locomotor muscles with lower sensations
of dyspnea and/or leg discomfort compared
with continuous or constant-load exercise
training (502). Despite these interesting
features of interval training, the outcome is
very similar to constant-load modality
(502). As such, interval training should be
viewed as another available option, among
the several strategies available, to train
patients with COPD, the goal being to ﬁnd
ways to retain patients in the training
program. Single-leg cycling exercise
training uses the concept of training
a smaller muscle mass at a time, thereby
reducing the demand on the respiratory
system while allowing training of the
targeted muscles at an intensity that would
not otherwise be possible with two-legged
cycling (503, 504). Proof-of-concept of this
training modality has been reported in
a small number of patients suggesting
physiological superiority of single-leg
cycling over two-legged cycling (503,
504). Whether these observations impact
on clinical outcomes, such as quality of
life, or on long-term outcome is
unknown.
Endurance exercise training (either
of interval or constant-load modality)
increases the cross-sectional area of all ﬁber
types within the quadriceps muscle (163,
165, 505, 506). In addition, endurance
training reduces in the proportion of type
IIx ﬁbers in the quadriceps (434, 505, 506).
Metabolic improvements observed after
training include: (1) increased oxidative
capacity (documented by the increase in
both the capillary-to-ﬁber ratio and the
activity of oxidative enzymes) (434,
505–507), (2) a reduction in exercise-
induced lactic acid production (288, 507),
and (3) normalization of the decline in the
PCr/Pi ratio during exercise (192). These
morphological and typological adaptations
in limb muscles are not different across
GOLD classes 2 to 4 (165). In addition,
interval training yields muscle adaptations
that are similar to those obtained by
constant-load training (505).
The phenotypical adaptations within
the limb muscles are accompanied by the
up-regulation of key factors governing
muscle hypertrophy and regeneration,
namely the IGF-1 and MyoD (434, 466,
506). Furthermore, endurance training
reduces the expression of myostatin (316,
434). Patients with COPD with normal
lower limb muscle mass exhibit substantial
capacity for muscle adaptation in response
to exercise training, irrespective of the
magnitude and direction of changes in the
expression of local muscle inﬂammatory
factors (334, 434, 506) or the induction of
exercise-induced oxidative and nitrosative
stress (201, 334). There is also emerging
evidence to suggest that, in patients with
COPD with either normal or low muscle
mass, exercise training seems to reduce
the activity of protein breakdown
pathways, in particular NF-kB–activated
UbP pathway (434). Most exercise
training studies performed have involved
patients with GOLD spirometry classes 3
to 4 COPD; more needs to be learned
about the milder form of the disease
(GOLD 1–2).
The magnitude of response to exercise
training in COPD is highly variable, with
some patients showing little or no beneﬁt
(508). This interindividual variability in the
response to training is not unique to
COPD, because similar observations have
also been made in healthy individuals.
There seems to be a genetic component to
this phenomenon (415, 509). The lack of
response to exercise training may also be
related to the inability to tolerate sufﬁcient
intensity and/or duration of training and/or
to poor compliance to the training
intervention (288, 510). Patients who
develop quadriceps contractile fatigue
during the training sessions show greater
training effects in terms of functional
exercise capacity and health-related quality
Table 3: Effects of Treatments for Limb Muscle Dysfunction in Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease
Treatment
Mass
Strength
Exercise
Tolerance
Survival
Exercise
O (497)
O (496, 497)
O (662)
?
Oxygen
?
?
O (539–541)
O
Nutrition alone
No (663)
No (663)
No (663)
?
Nutrition with
exercise training
O (552, 554, 567)
O (554, 567)
O (552, 554, 567)
?
Nutrition with
exercise training
and anabolic
hormone
supplementation
O (558)
O (558)
O (558)
?
Testosterone
O (466)
O (466)
No (466, 575)
?
Growth hormones
O (596)
No (596)
No (596)
?
Ghrelin
?
?
?
?
Megestrol
No (630)
?
No (630)
?
Creatine
?
?
No (633–635)
?
Antioxidants
?
?
?
?
Vitamin D alone
?
?
?
?
Vitamin D with
exercise training
?
?
?
?
O: Studies support that the treatment has a favorable effect on the outcome; No: studies support that
the treatment has no favorable effect on the outcome; ?: there are no supporting data for a treatment
effect on the outcome.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e37

----- Page 25 (native) -----
of life (299). This would argue in favor
of the intensity of the training stimulus at
the muscle level being an important
determinant of the outcome of exercise
training.
The available evidence also suggests
that the muscle response to training differs
to some extent between COPD and healthy
control subjects (511). The muscle
angiogenic and molecular response to
training may be blunted in patients with
COPD (512, 513); whether this can be
entirely explained by a lower training
intensity in COPD is uncertain. Patients
with COPD and healthy sedentary
subjects present a distinct gene expression
response after endurance training, from
a quantitative and qualitative perspective.
Fewer genes are signiﬁcantly changed in
patients with COPD compared with healthy
control subjects (511). In turn, genes
associated with oxidative stress, UbP, and
cyclooxygenase pathways are distinctly
induced only in patients with COPD,
potentially reﬂecting the speciﬁc molecular
response of the muscle to exercise and
suggesting additional mechanisms for
exercise limitation in COPD (511). In some
patients with COPD, the occurrence of
oxidative (231) and nitrosative (196) stress
at the muscle level has been reported
after exercise training; cachectic patients
seem to be more prone to this effect
(514). Some studies have reported an
enhancement in antioxidant activity with
exercise training (515, 516), whereas others
have consistently shown no signiﬁcant
changes or even a reduction in the
antioxidant potential (reduced glutathione)
of the limb muscles of patients with
severe COPD after exercise training (201,
217, 231, 514, 517, 518), which was not
observed among the healthy control
subjects. However, the clinical relevance of
these observations is unclear (201, 334),
and it should be stressed that exercise
training is a very safe and effective
intervention for the vast majority of
patients with COPD.
Resistance training is accomplished
when muscle contractions are performed
against a speciﬁc opposing force generated
by a resistance (519). In a recent systematic
review, increases in muscle strength and
mass after short-term resistance exercises
were demonstrated in patients with COPD
(520). The key features of resistance
exercise protocols used in these trials
included, on average, 12 weeks of
progressive resistance exercise training
consisting of two to three sessions per
week, each session including two to four
sets of 8 to 12 repetitions of each exercise,
at loads ranging and progressing from
z30 to z90% of one repetition maximum.
The improvement in muscle function
translated into better performance of some
daily activities (520). Combination of
resistance training with endurance
training in COPD has revealed a greater
improvement in quadriceps muscle
strength and thigh muscle cross-sectional
area compared with endurance training
alone (497). Although short-term effects
of resistance training on muscle mass
and strength are well known in COPD,
long-term effects remain to be determined
(521).
The effects of resistance training on
intrinsic muscle changes have been scarcely
studied in COPD (481). In patients with
moderately severe COPD and normal
whole-body muscle mass, resistance
exercise training enhances the expression of
muscle IGF-1 and other components of the
muscle IGF system and of myogenic
regulatory factors (316).
Exercise training early after an
exacerbation. Keeping in mind the
deleterious effects of exacerbations on limb
muscles, several interventions to prevent or
counteract muscle impairment have been
considered (522). These interventions,
mainly based on exercise training, have
been used during, immediately after, or late
after the exacerbation (523). A Cochrane
Collaboration metaanalysis revealed that
pulmonary rehabilitation immediately after
an exacerbation signiﬁcantly improved
exercise capacity in addition to reducing
hospital admissions and mortality
(524). Postexacerbation pulmonary
rehabilitation was also associated with an
improvement of quadriceps strength
(525, 526). Moreover, 1 month after
discharge, the functional status and
muscle force remained better in the
group that underwent training during the
exacerbation (379), suggesting that this
modality may facilitate functional
recovery after an acute exacerbation.
To date, only a few interventions have
taken place during the hospitalization
period. Resistance training initiated
during the second day of hospitalization
counteracted limb muscle dysfunction, as
quadriceps force increased by 10% and
6-minute walking distance improved at
discharge (379). This was associated with
an increase in anabolic markers in the
muscle (379). In that study, trained patients
with COPD exhibited a lower mRNA
expression level of myostatin (an indication
of muscle growth) with a higher myogenin/
MyoD ratio (reﬂecting the regenerative
capacity of the muscle) in comparison to
nontrained patients. On the other hand, no
between-group differences were detected
for IGF-1, myogenic growth factor, MURF-
1, MAFbx, and NEDD4 mRNA expression
levels. Therefore, the suggested positive
effect of high-intensity resistance training
on muscle regenerative regulatory factors
deserves further exploration.
Neuromuscular Stimulation
Transcutaneous neuromuscular electrical
stimulation (NMES) involves the
application of an electrical current through
electrodes placed on the skin over the
targeted muscles, thereby depolarizing
motor neurons and, in turn, inducing
muscle contractions (527). NMES is
a promising training modality to improve
lower limb muscle function that can be
particularly useful for severely disabled
patients with COPD in whom the tolerance
to whole-body training is compromised
(528). Indeed, NEMS may even be
applicable for home use (529) and in
unstable patients (530). Nonetheless, larger
well-designed trials are needed to improve
our understanding of NMES and to clarify
how it can be optimally used. The effects of
NMES on intrinsic muscular changes have
not been extensively explored. Dal Corso
and colleagues reported an increase in type
II ﬁber cross-sectional area with a decrease
in type I ﬁber cross-sectional area of the
quadriceps after a 6-week home-based
NMES program in moderately impaired
patients with COPD (531). In another
study, the application of a 6-week NMES
program in patients with COPD recovering
from an acute exacerbation decreased
muscle oxidative stress and improved MHC
content and the proportion of type I muscle
ﬁbers in the quadriceps (530). In patients
with advanced COPD, NMES improved
midthigh and calf muscle cross-sectional
area. This was associated with a more
favorable muscle anabolic to catabolic
balance (532). In this study, the
improvement in walking distance after
NMES training was associated with gains
in muscle strength, reduced ventilation
during walking, and the ability to
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e38
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 26 (native) -----
tolerate higher NMES stimulation
intensity (532).
An interesting feature of NMES is its
small impact on ventilation, heart rate, and
dyspnea so that it can be applied during
periods of exacerbation, during admission to
the intensive care unit for acute COPD
exacerbation (530), and in bed-bound
patients. In these settings, NMES may
improve muscle function and decrease the
number of days needed to transfer from
bed to chair (462).
Oxygen Therapy
Long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT)
enhances survival in hypoxemic patients
with COPD (533–535). Presumably, this is
due to effects of oxygen at the tissue level,
although the mechanisms by which LTOT
enhances survival were not determined in
these early studies. Since then, it would be
considered unethical to conduct a clinical
trial in which hypoxemic patients with
COPD would not be provided with LTOT;
for this reason, the possibilities for
investigating the effects of LTOT at the
limb muscle level are very limited.
Furthermore, the investigation of the effects
of LTOT on the muscle is confounded by
several methodological considerations. For
example, the therapeutic goal of LTOT is
the correction of arterial hypoxemia, but, in
the context of muscle function, the goal
might be to prevent cell hypoxia (536). The
characteristics of oxygen transport from the
atmosphere to the mitochondria (351) are
well known, but regional competition for
blood ﬂow between respiratory and limb
muscles during exercise (352) and
resistance of oxygen transport at the
peripheral level may be of major
importance in patients with COPD (351).
Those phenomena may result in cell
hypoxia without apparent arterial
hypoxemia. Moreover, difﬁculties in
assessing cell hypoxia in the clinical arena
seem to have stalled progress in this area
despite the fact that LTOT, muscle training,
and active lifestyle should be key relevant
interventions with potentially synergistic
effects.
Despite the physiological rationale
supporting the deleterious effects of chronic
cell hypoxia on limb muscle function and
a beneﬁcial effect of oxygen administration,
little is known about the effects of oxygen
therapy on limb muscle function in patients
with COPD. There is little doubt that oxygen
therapy administered acutely improves
muscle energy metabolism during exercise
(360, 361). Consistent with these acute
improvements, two muscle biopsy studies
highlighted that correction of hypoxemia
during an episode of acute respiratory
failure or chronically with LTOT was
associated with improved quadriceps
bioenergetics status in hypoxemic patients
with COPD (537, 538). A recent study by
Amann and colleagues (267) clearly shows
that increasing oxygen transport by
different types of interventions reduces
muscle susceptibility to fatigue by
approximately 30 to 40%. Acute oxygen
supplementation also improves whole-body
exercise performance by reducing
ventilation, dynamic hyperinﬂation, and
the perception of dyspnea (539–542).
Oxygen supplementation during the
training sessions may thus help patients
to reach higher training intensities (543)
and possibly enhance limb muscle
adaptation. However, this hypothesis has
yet to be directly tested. In addition,
reports on the effectiveness of oxygen
supplementation as an adjunct to
exercise training have been equivocal (544);
for this reason, oxygen supplementation
cannot be widely recommended in this
setting.
Nutritional Supplementation
Muscle atrophy is often associated with
muscle weakness and exercise limitation
(545, 546), and it worsens the prognosis of
many chronic diseases, including COPD
(131, 547), and impairs health-related
quality of life (548, 549). Moreover,
underweight smokers appear to be more
susceptible to develop COPD (550). As
body weight gain is associated with an
improvement in the prognosis of patients
with COPD (149), efforts should be
developed to establish appropriate
treatments for the underweight patients.
A caveat of this intervention is that
restoration of energy and protein balance
by nutritional intervention will
predominantly result in gain of FM, with
little effect on limb muscle mass and
function (551, 552).
Depending on the body composition
abnormality, intervention strategies will be
oriented toward restoring energy and
protein balance (weight loss), restoring
protein balance (hidden muscle atrophy),
or decreasing energy balance while
maintaining protein balance (obesity and
visceral fat expansion). Furthermore,
speciﬁc nutrients may be considered as
ergogenic aids to enhance efﬁcacy of
pulmonary rehabilitation.
One of the ﬁrst nutritional intervention
studies in COPD showed that high-caloric
oral liquid dietary supplementation
during 3 months was able to restore energy
balance and increase body weight by
more than 4 kg in underweight patients
with COPD (553). The study also
illustrated that discontinuation of the
intervention for the next 3 months led to
a rapid and parallel decline in weight,
midarm muscle circumference, and
limb muscle function. In weight-losing
patients with COPD, even dietary
counseling and food fortiﬁcation resulted
in signiﬁcant body weight gain (2 kg)
and FM with maintenance of FFM during
the 6-month intervention and 6-month
follow-up period (551). In this study,
the absence of an anabolic stimulus
in association with the nutritional intervention
may have prevented a gain in FFM and limb
muscle strength. During the same period,
the control group lost weight and FFM.
Nutritional interventions have been
coupled with exercise training in
malnourished patients aiming to provide an
adequate anabolic stimulus and a positive
effect on FFM. The effects of 7 weeks of
nutritional supplementation on top of
a rehabilitation program were investigated
in a randomized controlled trial (552). The
treatment group showed weight gain that
predominantly consisted of FM. Absence of
an enhancing effect of nutrition on FFM
could be related to the low anabolic
stimulus of the exercise program that
consisted of walking and low-impact
conditioning exercise. A similar nutritional
intervention strategy when combined with
a more intensive exercise program (5 d/wk,
strength and endurance exercise) did show
positive effects on FFM and limb muscle
function after 8 weeks (554).
To judge efﬁcacy of nutritional
intervention on muscle protein synthesis
and muscle mass, it is important to have
information of the quantity and quality of
protein in the diet. It appears that
supplementation of dietary protein (.1.5 g/
kg/d) is able to increase muscle mass (555).
Baldi and colleagues (556) randomized
patients with COPD experiencing an
ongoing weight loss to a 12-week
rehabilitation program alone or in
conjunction with a nutritional intervention
consisting of an amino acid mixture
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e39

----- Page 27 (native) -----
with high branched chain amino acid
concentrations (total protein intake . 1.5 g/kg).
Body weight and FFM signiﬁcantly
increased in the exercise and amino acid
supplementation group but not in the
control group. In an acute experiment in
normal body weight patients with COPD
and mild muscle atrophy, Engelen and
colleagues (557) showed that branched
chain amino acid supplementation with soy
protein enhanced whole-body protein
synthesis and altered interorgan protein
metabolism in favor of the limb muscles.
The effect was more pronounced in COPD
than in a healthy age-matched control
group.
Pison and colleagues (558) investigated
the efﬁcacy of a multimodal intervention
approach including nutrition, anabolic
steroids, and exercise versus education only
in patients with chronic respiratory failure.
The combined approach was indeed
successful in improving body weight, FFM,
exercise tolerance, and even survival in
patients compliant with the protocol. One
limitation with this study is that it is not
possible to tease out the respective beneﬁt
that could be attributed to each individual
component of the intervention.
In general, the response to nutritional
supplementation is highly variable. This
may be related to patient characteristics,
type of intervention, or adherence to the
treatment. Steiner and colleagues (552)
reported a better response to nutritional
rehabilitation in less-wasted patients.
Creutzberg and colleagues (559) attempted
to identify determinants of poor response
to nutritional rehabilitation in a controlled
clinical setting. Poor responders were
characterized by higher levels of systemic
inﬂammatory markers and relative
expansion of FM despite a similar degree
of weight loss as the responders.
N-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
(PUFA) may improve muscle maintenance
by modulating systemic inﬂammation.
Three months of nutritional supplementation
enriched with PUFA as adjunct to exercise
training decreased systemic inﬂammatory
markers, including C-reactive protein, tumor
necrosis factor-a, and IL-8 in elderly patients
with COPD (560). This was conﬁrmed by the
same group in a recent study investigating
the effects of nutritional supplementation
enriched with PUFA and vitamins A, C, and
E incorporated into a 12-week home-based
pulmonary rehabilitation program; the
intervention also yielded improved exercise
performance (561). However, the effect of
a mixture of n-3/n-6 PUFA as a supplement
to pulmonary rehabilitation on systemic
inﬂammation could not be subsequently
conﬁrmed (562). This negative ﬁnding was
possibly related to the duration of the
intervention. In the same study (562),
a signiﬁcantly enhanced exercise capacity
was also shown in the treated group. This
effect might be related to positive effects of
PUFA on muscle oxidative metabolism,
because PUFA are natural ligands of the
PPARs, which are important regulators of
oxidative metabolism (180). Other studies on
nutritional modulation of muscle oxidative
metabolism showed inconclusive results, as
recently reviewed (563). Decreased muscle
glutamate concentration in COPD is
consistently reported and is associated with
decreased muscle glutathione concentration
and early lactic acidosis (225). Continuous
oral glutamate ingestion for 80 minutes,
however, did not lead to an acute effect on
limb muscle substrate metabolism and
muscle performance in patients with COPD
as well as in healthy age-matched control
subjects (564). In line, with this negative
ﬁnding, glutamine supplementation did
not enhance V
:
O2 peak, V
:
O2 at lactate
threshold, or speed pulmonary oxygen
uptake kinetics in COPD (565).
Patients with COPD are vulnerable to
denutrition during an acute exacerbation of
the disease. Adequate nutritional support,
especially in patients with already impaired
energy balance, is also important. As
such, nutritional interventions during
hospitalization with protein intake
exceeding 1.5 g/kg body weight was shown
to result in protein and total energy intake
improvement without a drop in normal
dietary intake, although this did not result
in any improvement in muscle strength
(278, 566).
Most studies so far have focused on
wasted patients with advanced COPD. In
this population, therapeutic efﬁcacy and
feasibility are hampered by the severity of
respiratory impairment, persistent low-
grade systemic inﬂammation, and limb
muscle pathology, including active
muscle protein degradation and intrinsic
abnormalities in muscle oxidative
metabolism. Because muscle atrophy is not
limited to advanced disease, one could argue
that early intervention may be indicated to
improve or maintain physical functioning.
Furthermore it is important to maintain
long-term beneﬁcial effects also from a cost-
effectiveness point of view. A prescheduled
post hoc analysis of muscle-wasted patients
with moderate COPD participating in
a clinical trial showed that 4 months of
intervention consisting of exercise and
standardized nutritional supplements
followed by a 20-month maintenance
program including nutritional counseling
and supplements on indication resulted in
signiﬁcant long-term effects on FFM, limb
muscle function, and 6-minute walking
distance compared with usual care trial
(567). Cost analysis furthermore revealed
signiﬁcantly lower hospital admission costs
in the intervention group. One limitation
of this study is that the nutritional
intervention was embedded within
a rehabilitation program, making it difﬁcult
to pinpoint the role of nutrition in the
observed improvement.
In conclusion, some improvement in
FFM and in muscle strength can be achieved
with nutritional intervention, particularly
when coupled with an anabolic stimulus.
However, nutritional interventions are not
widely used, because the magnitude of the
beneﬁcial effects in enhancing exercise
performance on top of exercise training is of
uncertain clinical importance. Nevertheless,
some patients, particularly those who are
actively losing body weight and in whom
nutritional intake is deﬁcient, should be
targeted for this intervention.
Testosterone and Other
Anabolic Steroids
Testosterone and its analogs are potent
anabolic agents acting to increase muscle
protein synthesis and reduce muscle protein
breakdown, yielding muscle mass increases.
These drugs have lipolytic effects, so that FM
is decreased. Testosterone levels decline
with age (around 1–2% per year), and
a signiﬁcant number of older men have
levels below the lower limit of normal for
young men. There is debate among
endocrinologists about whether this is
representative of normal ageing or an
indication of a pathologic state. Current
endocrine society guidance suggests
testosterone supplementation for older men
with symptomatic hypogonadism (370).
Reduced muscle mass and function is
a common feature of hypogonadism in
addition to loss of libido, erectile
dysfunction, loss of energy and vitality,
and reduced bone mineral density and
muscle mass.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e40
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 28 (native) -----
Testosterone is not effective when
administered orally. It can be given by
intramuscular injection or absorbed
transcutaneously via a patch or in a gel.
Some testosterone analogs can be
administered orally (e.g., oxandrolone).
Testosterone has a number of toxicities that
limit its use. Prominent among them are
stimulation of the prostate in men, with the
attendant risk of accelerating the growth of
prostate cancer foci. In women, testosterone
in high doses yields virilization. A new class
of molecules, dubbed selective androgen
receptor modulators, has the potential to
yield muscle hypertrophy while avoiding
prostate stimulation and virilization (568,
569); these molecules are now being tested
in clinical trials.
Testosterone yields muscle ﬁber
hypertrophy, an adaptation similar to that
seen with a resistance training program.
Muscle mass and strength increases are to be
expected. Most studies in healthy younger
and older subjects have detected increases in
muscle strength but not muscle endurance.
Healthy eugonadal men respond to
supraphysiologic doses of testosterone with
increased muscle mass and strength but
decreased FM (372). The dose–response
relationship for increase in muscle mass
and strength and decrease in FM in both
healthy young men (570) and older men
(571) is linear. In women, randomized trials
have been reported in which testosterone
administration in lower doses than
generally given to men has induced
increases in both muscle mass (481) and
strength (572).
Only a few investigators have studied
testosterone supplementation in COPD.
Casaburi and colleagues conducted a trial of
testosterone supplementation or placebo
with or without resistance training in 47
men with COPD who had low circulating
testosterone levels at recruitment (466).
A weekly injection of 100 mg of
testosterone enanthate for 10 weeks
increased testosterone levels to the middle
of the range seen in healthy young men.
Improvements were seen in leg muscle
strength (assessed as one repetition
maximum testing of leg extension) and
mass (assessed by DEXA scanning) with
testosterone alone that were similar to
those receiving resistance training alone.
Gains in muscle strength and mass in
supplemented patients who undertook
resistance training were even greater,
suggesting a synergistic effect. Svartberg
and colleagues compared testosterone
supplementation with placebo in 29 men
with COPD who were not selected or
screened for biochemical hypogonadism
at recruitment and did not present
with low muscle mass (573).
Testosterone was administered
intramuscularly every 4 weeks for 26
weeks. There were increases in FFM and
concomitant reductions in FM in
the active treatment group.
The effects of testosterone analog
supplementation in COPD have been
investigated in few studies. Schols and
colleagues administered a relatively low dose
of nandrolone every 2 weeks for 8 weeks to
men and women with COPD (574); small
increases in lean body mass and respiratory
muscle strength were observed. Six months
of stanozolol administration to 10 men with
COPD resulted in increased body weight
and lean body mass but no endurance
exercise changes (575). Forty-nine male and
female patients with COPD completed
a 4-month observational study of
oxandrolone; body weight increased, but
6-minute walking distance did not (576). In
a randomized placebo-controlled
multicenter trial of oxandrolone involving
142 underweight men and women with
COPD, an increase in lean mass was
discerned, but FM was decreased; 6-minute
walking distance was unchanged (577).
Creutzberg and colleagues administered
nandrolone to 33 men with COPD for
8 weeks; lean body mass increased, but
changes in muscle strength and endurance
did not differ signiﬁcantly from those
in a matched control group (578).
Interestingly, patients on maintenance low
dose of systemic corticosteroids beneﬁted
from the intervention by showing
improvements in respiratory muscle
strength and exercise capacity (578).
Sharma and colleagues randomized 16 men
and women with COPD to receive biweekly
injections of nandrolone or placebo for
16 weeks (579). No differences between
groups in body composition, muscle
function, or quality-of-life measures were
discerned.
There are limited mechanistic data on
the effect of testosterone on limb muscle
function in COPD. Muscle ﬁber cross-
sectional area and IGF signaling were
assessed in the intervention study of Lewis
and colleagues (316) and Casaburi and
colleagues (466). In patients receiving
testosterone during resistance training,
a global increase in MHC, IGF, and
myogenin mRNA expression was
observed, suggesting the intervention had
a signiﬁcant anabolic effect at a muscle
level. Also, endothelial and neuronal
NOS protein levels increased in subjects
receiving testosterone supplementation,
which might be expected to improve
muscle vasodilatory capabilities
(466, 580).
In conclusion, testosterone is a powerful
anabolic agent that has a potential therapeutic
role in the management of older patients
with chronic diseases such as COPD, wherein
muscle atrophy is a prevalent and clinically
signiﬁcant problem. Beneﬁts are likely to
be maximized if combined with resistance
training. The role of therapy in patients with
preserved serum testosterone levels is
uncertain. Low-dose supplementation may
also be tolerable in women, although the
optimal dose that improves functionality
without inducing virilization may be hard
to deﬁne. Apparently, testosterone
supplementation is more effective than its
analogs. Despite this, testosterone
supplementation cannot be currently
recommended as routine treatment of
muscle atrophy in COPD because of the
possibility of adverse effects. Another
point is that the available studies are only
short term, and the clinical impact of this
supplementation on important clinical
outcomes such as exercise tolerance,
quality of life, and survival is unknown.
Novel selective androgen receptor
modulators are undergoing clinical
trials and may provide additional
beneﬁts.
Growth Hormone and
Its Secretagogues
GH is a 191–amino acid peptide hormone
secreted mainly by the anterior pituitary
gland. Despite the continuous hormone
release, most of the GH production is
secreted in a pulsatile manner (581). GH
synthesis and release is directly controlled
by GH-releasing hormone (GHRH; also
known as GH-releasing factor, GRF) and
peripheral feedback signals (582). Exercise
itself is a peripheral stimulus for GH
production.
GH is an anabolic agent that stimulates
growth through an increased production of
IGF-1. This factor enhances protein
synthesis and lipolysis, promoting the
preferential use of lipids rather than
carbohydrates for energy generation (583).
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e41

----- Page 29 (native) -----
It also inhibits protein oxidation and
degradation, stimulates calcium retention
and bone mineralization, promotes
myoblast differentiation and muscle
growth, and improves the immune
response (583). Overall, the effect of the
GH–IGF-1 axis is to increase the baseline
metabolic rate, and it will affect body
composition by improving lean body mass
(584). GH has also cardiovascular effects,
inducing an increase in heart rate and
improving endothelial function in patients
with arteriosclerosis. Although the plasma
levels of this hormone can be increased
in patients with COPD (585–587), the
function of the GH axis may be impaired in
this disease (588). Moreover, some
conditions and treatments frequently
associated with COPD, such as aging,
reduction in physical activity, and the use
of systemic steroids may also be
associated with reduced levels of GH in
plasma (589–591). Although exogenous
GH does not seem to improve limb
muscle strength in athletes, an increase in
maximal respiratory pressures was shown
(584, 592). However, its effects on
exercise capacity are not clear, because
different studies have reported similar
work rate and oxygen uptake but higher
levels of lactate after GH administration
(584). This is in line with studies showing
an improvement in anaerobic
performance after GH administration
(593).
Although effects of GH are not very
clear in athletes, they seem to be more
promising in patients with cachexia. In this
regard, GH has demonstrated clear anabolic
effects in such patients and is currently
approved for use in HIV/AIDS-associated
wasting syndrome as well as in other
conditions, such as chronic renal failure and
some cases of short bowel syndrome. GH
has also been used in patients with COPD
and malnutrition, inducing substantial
weight improvement and lean body mass
gain (594, 595). Nonetheless, results on
respiratory and limb muscle strength and
exercise capacity are still controversial
(587, 594, 596, 597). Therapy with GH
is currently administered through
subcutaneous injections of recombinant
GH (0.05–0.06 mg/kg daily), several
times per week, and side effects
include paresthesias, arthralgias, insulin
resistance–glucose intolerance, sodium
retention, peripheral edema, and arterial
hypertension (598). In addition, it still
remains debatable whether GH
treatment may induce carcinogenic
effects (599). All these considerations,
along with its relatively expensive price,
do not support the use of GH in the
treatment of COPD muscle dysfunction.
The adverse effects of GH therapy
have led to the development of GH
secretagogues that have some potential
advantages.
GRF is a C-terminal peptide of 40 to
44 amino acids (600). Administration of
human GRF might be able to recover GH
secretion pulses (601) and, therefore, the
physiological actions of this pituitary
hormone. However, the clinical usefulness
of human GRF therapy is limited, because
there is a wide intersubject variability in the
GH response, and the peptide is rapidly
degraded in plasma. Therefore, its effect is
limited to roughly 2 hours, even at high
doses (602).
Ghrelin is a 28–amino acid peptide
hormone that can circulate in two distinct
forms: acylated and unacylated molecules.
Although acylation is essential for
binding to its receptor, unacylated ghrelin
is also an active peptide. Ghrelin was
originally isolated from the stomach
(603), but it has also been isolated in
pancreas, brain, pituitary gland, kidneys,
placenta, heart, and lungs (604).
Interestingly, ghrelin receptor is also
expressed in different tissues, including
the lungs (605). The main function of
ghrelin is to induce the release of GH
from the anterior pituitary (603, 604).
Interestingly, ghrelin has a synergistic
relationship with GRF. However, ghrelin
has many other functions, including the
regulation of appetite (potent orexigenic)
(606) and gut motility. It may also play
a role in the immune and cardiovascular
systems. In this regard, ghrelin is a potent
antiinﬂammatory mediator, reducing
the levels of different proinﬂammatory
cytokines. Therefore, it is considered
as a promising therapeutic agent for
the treatment of different chronic
inﬂammatory diseases. As previously
mentioned, ghrelin is also expressed in
the myocardium, inhibiting cell apoptosis
while improving ventricular function
during ischemia-reperfusion injury (607).
Although still controversial, this peptide
also seems to be a vasodilator agent,
through the induction of nitric oxide
production, and a stimulator of
angiogenesis. Finally, ghrelin inﬂuences
fat metabolism by reducing lipid
oxidation and increasing adiposity (608).
Pharmacological doses of ghrelin
successfully reverse muscle wasting in
different disorders that are associated
with cachexia (609, 610). However, both
ghrelin and its receptor are also expressed
in different cancers and cancer cell lines.
Therefore, it has been suggested that it
might play a role in the progression of the
disease, and more speciﬁcally in cell
proliferation, invasion, and migration
(611).
Plasma levels of endogenous ghrelin
increase both in normal subjects with
weight loss induced by a low caloric intake
(612, 613) and in underweight patients
with COPD (614, 615). This increase is
attributed to a compensatory mechanism.
Nevertheless, exogenous ghrelin has been
used in patients with COPD with
nutritional abnormalities, inducing similar
effects to GH: it increases food intake
and muscle mass (616). It seems to be
more effective than GH in improving
the strength of respiratory and limb
muscles (610). Ghrelin has also exhibited
antiinﬂammatory effects in patients with
COPD, reducing the number of
neutrophils in the sputum (617). Current
therapeutic doses of ghrelin are established
as 2 mg/kg administered intravenously
twice a day for at least 3 consecutive
weeks.
Tesamorelin is a GRF analog
composed of a 44–amino acid sequence
(618, 619). Its advantage over that of
classical GRF is that it has been
stabilized, and therefore it maintains its
biological activity in plasma (600).
Tesamorelin markedly increases levels of
both GH and IGF-1 (618, 620, 621), thus
resulting in the physiologic effects of
these two anabolic agents. Moreover,
tesamorelin seems to increase both
baseline and pulse GH secretion (622).
Tesamorelin is already in use to treat
lipodystrophy in HIV-infected patients
(619). Moreover, some studies have been
performed in other muscle wasting
disorders, such as COPD (623). In
a multicenter, double-blind, randomized
placebo-controlled study, tesamorelin
improved body composition by
increasing lean mass and improved limb
and respiratory muscle strength
(623–625). Current doses are 2 mg
administered daily via subcutaneous
injection. This ensures an 8-hour period
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e42
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 30 (native) -----
of GH release, and side effects appear to
be minor (618). However, the high
price of this therapy is still a limiting
factor for its widespread use (620).
Unfortunately, a recent multicenter large
phase II study using tesamorelin in
patients with COPD was interrupted,
precluding the recommendation of the
use of this drug in clinical settings (626).
Sermorelin is a GRF-like compound
that can be administered subcutaneously.
However, its physiological effects, potential
advantages over that of the other
secretagogues, and possible therapeutic
indications still need more extensive studies
to be precisely determined (602).
Examorelin is another synthetic GRF
analog, of only six amino acids, which
might have some advantages over
previous secretagogues because it can be
released using subcutaneous, oral, or
intranasal administration (627). Another
promising GRF analog is LAB GHRH,
which can also be administered either
orally, by injection, or by inhalation.
However, as with sermorelin, conclusive
studies are lacking for examorelin and
LAB GHRH. Furthermore, they have not
as yet been used in underweight patients
with COPD.
In conclusion, GH, ghrelin, and GRF
analogs are anabolic agents that improve
body weight and muscle mass, being
logical treatments for different chronic
conditions associated with cachexia.
However, their actions on muscle
function are not yet clear. Because larger-
scale trials are still awaited, especially for
new secretagogues, the role of these
peptides in the treatment of COPD needs
to be further clariﬁed. In view of present
data, we can speculate that they should
probably be restricted to patients with
severe muscle atrophy.
Other Anabolic Drugs and
Bioactive Nutrients
Anabolism may be deﬁned as the synthesis
of complex molecules in living organisms
from simpler ones together with the storage
of energy. Using this deﬁnition, several
pharmacologic agents have been described
that have anabolic potential. Some, however,
have not been evaluated in COPD at this
time.
Megestrol acetate. Megestrol acetate
(MA) is a progestational appetite
stimulant that also has antiinﬂammatory
effects (628, 629). A prospective, double-
blind, randomized, multicenter, placebo-
controlled outpatient trial involving
patients with COPD was published in
2002 (630). Body weight increased by 3.2
kg in the MA group and 0.7 kg in the
placebo group, but unfortunately this was
mainly fat. Spirometry and maximum
inspiratory pressure did not change
signiﬁcantly. Changes in 6-minute
walking distance did not differ
statistically between groups at Weeks 2
and 4 but were greater in the placebo
group at Week 8. Consistent with its
known ability to stimulate ventilation,
PaCO2 decreased in the MA group.
Questionnaires revealed that body image
and appetite improved in the MA but not
the placebo group. Cortisol decreased
substantially, and, in male subjects,
testosterone levels decreased by 85% in
the MA group. Therefore, this study
showed that MA increased body weight
and stimulated pulmonary ventilation in
underweight patients with COPD but did
not improve muscle function. It may be
concluded that megestrol acetate is
anabolic to fat, but not to muscle, likely
because this drug lowers testosterone
levels substantially.
Creatine. Creatine monohydrate is
a nutritional supplement in wide use as
an aid to exercise performance. In
limb muscle, creatine undergoes
phosphorylation to form PCr, a source of
high-energy phosphate that supports
ATP resynthesis during exercise. This
mechanism of action suggests that
creatine supplementation would be
expected to enhance exercise endurance
capacity. A substantial number of studies
have evaluated creatine supplementation
in athletes and healthy elderly subjects.
Two metaanalyses have concluded that,
in general, creatine supplementation
enhances exercise performance
(631, 632).
Three randomized placebo-controlled
studies in patients with moderate to severe
COPD have evaluated the additive beneﬁt of
creatine supplementation in conjunction
with pulmonary rehabilitation. Fuld and
colleagues (633) randomized 38 subjects to
undergo a 2-week “loading period” with
creatine versus placebo followed by
a 10-week pulmonary rehabilitation
program. The creatine group had a greater
increase in FFM (about 1 kg) as well as
evidence of greater improvement in leg
muscle strength and endurance. But whole-
body exercise capacity (incremental and
endurance shuttle walk distance,
incremental and constant work rate cycle
ergometer testing) increase was no greater
than with rehabilitation alone. Faager
and colleagues (634) randomized 23
patients with COPD to oral creatine
supplementation versus placebo in
combination with 8 weeks of exercise
training. Those randomized to creatine
showed no augmentation of improvement
in endurance shuttle walk distance
compared with those receiving placebo.
Deacon and colleagues (635) studied 100
patients with COPD who were randomized
to creatine or placebo during 7 weeks of
exercise training. Quadriceps muscle
biopsies, performed in a subset of
participants, showed creatine uptake in
the group receiving creatine. However, the
two groups showed no difference in
improvement in incremental shuttle walk
distance or knee extensor strength. A recent
metaanalysis (636) concluded that creatine
supplementation when added to pulmonary
rehabilitation does not improve exercise
capacity, muscle strength, or quality of life
in patients with COPD.
L-Carnitine. Carnitine is required for
optimal mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation
and is a critical source of energy (637).
Studies in the sports medicine literature
have tended to demonstrate a performance-
improving effect of L-carnitine, whereas
studies in untrained healthy individuals
have tended not to show this beneﬁt (638).
The effects of adding L-carnitine to
a whole-body and respiratory training
program were determined in patients with
moderate to severe COPD (639). Sixteen
patients with COPD were studied; they
were randomly assigned to oral L-carnitine
or placebo for 6 weeks. Both groups
participated in thrice weekly 30-minute
treadmill and threshold inspiratory muscle
training sessions. Anthropometry detected
no change in body composition in either
group. Peak work rate in the incremental
treadmill test was signiﬁcantly improved in
both groups, with no signiﬁcant difference
between groups. However, blood lactate,
blood pressure, and heart rate at identical
exercise levels during the incremental test
were lower in the carnitine group after
training. Inspiratory muscle strength and
6-mintue walk distance were improved
in both groups, but the gains of the
carnitine group were signiﬁcantly
greater. This small study suggests that
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e43

----- Page 31 (native) -----
carnitine may be able to improve exercise
tolerance in patients with COPD in the
context of a pulmonary rehabilitation
program, but larger, longer-term studies
will be required to conﬁrm this.
Myostatin inhibitor. No studies
exploring the effect of myostatin inhibitors
have been performed in patients with
COPD. A safety trial of a neutralizing
antibody to myostatin, MYO-029, in 116
patients with adult muscular dystrophy was
reported in 2008 (640). The drug was well
tolerated; further studies may be
forthcoming.
Antioxidants
Limb muscle ﬁbers possess strong
antioxidant systems that protect the
myocytes from potential deleterious effects
of ROS. For instance, the antioxidants
CuZn-superoxide dismutase (SOD),
catalase, and glutathione peroxidase are
present in the sarcoplasm, whereas Mn-
SOD and glutathione peroxidase are
localized within the mitochondrial matrix.
Other thiol-based antioxidant proteins such
as thioredoxins and peroxiredoxins are also
abundantly expressed inside the myocytes.
Moreover, nonenzymatic antioxidant
systems complement the action of the
antioxidant enzymes, such as the lipid-
soluble compounds vitamin E, carotenes,
and ubiquinol, which are localized to cell
membranes. Ascorbic acid, urate, lipoate,
and glutathione, the most abundant
nonprotein thiols, are water soluble and
widely distributed within the muscle ﬁbers.
The ratio of reduced to oxidized
glutathione is an indicator of the redox
tissue potential. In this regard, thiol
oxidation is a sensitive marker of oxidative
stress that has been clearly implicated in
muscle fatigue (641).
In resting muscles of patients with
COPD, the levels of antioxidant enzymes
are signiﬁcantly increased (171, 201,
217, 222, 642). Speciﬁcally, both
mitochondrial SOD content and total
SOD activity were consistently shown to
be greater in the quadriceps of patients
with severe COPD (171, 201, 217, 222). A
signiﬁcant rise in Mn-SOD content was
also detected in the quadriceps of healthy
smokers as well as in respiratory and
limb muscles of mice chronically exposed
to cigarette smoke (233). Nonetheless,
tissue antioxidant potential as measured
by reduced glutathione was not different
between patients with COPD and control
subjects in their limb muscles (217, 231,
514). Similar ﬁndings were reported in
muscles of guinea pigs chronically
exposed to cigarette smoke, in whom
antioxidant content levels did not differ
from those encountered in the control
animals (233).
The issue of whether patients with
COPD should be treated with antioxidants
to delay the development of limb muscle
fatigue is still debatable. Previous studies in
humans (643, 644) have demonstrated
that nutritional antioxidants (vitamins
C and E and carotenes) do not attenuate
fatigue, despite reducing biochemical
markers of oxidative stress. However,
treatment of animals with actual
antioxidant enzymes such as SOD and
catalase, which selectively scavenge ROS,
was shown to diminish fatigue during
repetitive muscle contractions (645, 646).
Allopurinol, which directly inhibits the
activity of the ROS-producing enzyme
xanthine oxidase, was shown to
signiﬁcantly decrease systemic lipid
peroxidation and oxidized glutathione,
with no changes in quadriceps endurance,
after strenuous exercise in patients with
severe COPD (226). Furthermore,
inhibitors of cyclooxygenase and
antioxidants may reduce the perception of
muscle fatigue in patients with cancer
cachexia (647). Nonetheless, current
knowledge on whether antioxidant
enzyme promoters and inhibitors of
ROS-producing enzymes may lessen
fatigue and improve muscle performance
is at its infancy, and further research,
probably conducted in animal
experiments at an initial stage, is
warranted.
An alternative approach to the use of
antioxidants has been the administration
of compounds such as N-acetyl cysteine
(NAC), glutathione, and whey-based
cysteine donors that prevent thiol
oxidation. These compounds improve
muscle performance and attenuate
oxidative stress markers in experimental
models of resistive loading and in patients
with COPD (227, 518, 641, 648).
Moreover, inhibition of glutathione
levels worsened muscle fatigue (641),
suggesting that glutathione redox status
is an important determinant of muscle
fatigue. NAC, an acetyl derivative of
the amino acid cysteine, neutralizes ROS
by reducing disulﬁde bonds. NAC may
also enhance intracellular levels of
glutathione in vivo in several organs,
including the lungs (649). Importantly,
investigations conducted in healthy
subjects have shown that treatment with
NAC delays fatigue and increases
glutathione availability in response to
chronic endurance training (650, 651).
These are relevant ﬁndings that may
have implications in the management
of the COPD-associated muscle
dysfunction, especially when targeting
improvement of muscle performance.
In conclusion, increasing antioxidant
potential seems to improve muscle
performance while attenuating fatigue.
These ﬁndings have important
implications in the design of endurance
exercise training programs in patients with
COPD. Future research is warranted to
advance current knowledge on the effects
of nutritional and pharmacological agents
tailored to enhancing antioxidant
enzyme activity and/or inhibition of ROS
production in muscles of patients with
COPD.
Vitamin D Supplementation
Several randomized trials and metaanalyses
in elderly subjects systematically
demonstrate that vitamin D
supplementation improves balance and
reduces falls by approximately 20% (403,
652). It is still debated whether these effects
are obtained because of improved
neuromuscular control and better neural
signaling rather than through optimization
of limb muscle strength. Indeed, data on
strength are less consistent, with one
metaanalysis revealing efﬁcacy of
supplementation only when baseline 25-
OHD levels are below 10 ng/ml (653).
However, a large cross-sectional study
shows that muscle strength continues to
increase from 25-OHD levels of 9 ng/ml
to 37 ng/ml (388), which made some
experts suggest that, for obtaining
beneﬁcial effects on the muscle, higher
doses of supplementation are necessary
(654). It should be mentioned that none
of these studies has reported on patients
with COPD.
Surprisingly, few studies have
explored vitamin D supplementation in
the context of training (655). Two
intervention studies evaluated the effect of
a daily dose of vitamin D (400–800 IU)
and calcium (1 g) in combination with
strength or resistance training in an
elderly population (656, 657). They found
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e44
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 32 (native) -----
no effect, perhaps because both the
supplementation dosage and the load of
the training program were too low to
generate positive results (654, 655). When
focusing on COPD, vitamin D deﬁciency
has been linked to more drop-out and worse
outcome after pulmonary rehabilitation
(658). A randomized controlled trial (659) in
50 patients with COPD referred for
rehabilitation showed mild additional
beneﬁts of high-dose vitamin D supplements
(3,000 U/d) on limb muscle strength and
exercise tolerance (659, 660). A larger
prospective randomized controlled study is
currently ongoing (clinicaltrials.gov:
NCT01416701). Additional studies are
needed to evaluate clinical and long-term
beneﬁts in patients or subgroups of patients
with COPD.
Suggestions for Future
Research
Despite the progress made since the ﬁrst
limb muscle dysfunction statement in
COPD, much remains to be learned about
this important systemic consequence of this
disease. For example, we do not know
whether limb muscle dysfunction in COPD
is the mere reﬂection of years of disuse or
whether there is a speciﬁc form of myopathy
in this condition or in speciﬁc COPD
phenotypes. Along these lines, it is unclear
whether the development of muscle
weakness parallels the development of
COPD or whether different causal factors
are inﬂuencing the trajectory of decline of
muscle strength and lung function. Body
composition abnormalities in COPD are
rapidly changing in the context of
a worldwide epidemic of obesity. Clinicians
are now faced with many more obese
patients with COPD than lean ones. In this
situation, the diagnosis of muscle atrophy
may become more difﬁcult, as clinicians are
likely to be misled by the presence of
a normal or increased BMI, believing that
this implies normal muscle mass. Although
muscle atrophy is less prevalent when
BMI is normal or increased, there is still
a portion of patients in this category
exhibiting muscle atrophy and weakness.
As such, the incorporation of body
composition analysis in the clinical arena
will become even more relevant.
There are some examples/suggestions for
future research that should help advance our
understanding of the development and
treatmentof limbmuscle dysfunction in COPD.
1. The choice of the appropriate
comparator in studies evaluating
muscle function in COPD is critical. If
the question about the presence of
disuse versus myopathy is to be
answered, it will be important to match
patients with COPD and control
subjects with similar degree of physical
activities.
2. Studies should be done to determine
widely accepted normative values for
quadriceps muscle strength.
3. There is a need to know more about the
onset of limb muscle dysfunction in
COPD. As such, the focus on patients
with mild disease would be of interest.
Longitudinal studies looking at the
changes in limb muscle function over
time will be important to understand
when the pathological processes within
the muscles start and how they evolve
over time.
4. The investigation of the basic/molecular
mechanisms of limb muscle dysfunction
is a key issue for the development of
speciﬁc and safe strategies to target this
problem.
5. Clinical trials are warranted to evaluate
to which extent treatment of limb
muscle function affects clinical
outcomes (exercise capacity, quality of
life, and survival) in COPD.
6. Large and multicenter studies in
thoroughly phenotyped patients will be
instrumental in understanding speciﬁc
risk factors for developing limb muscle
dysfunction and evaluating treatment
for this condition.
7. Whether muscle abnormalities can be
completely normalized with exercise
training is a question that should be
addressed speciﬁcally in a clinical trial.
8. In the context of increasing prevalence
of (abdominal) obesity in COPD,
emphasis should be placed on the
possible cross-talk between fat and
muscle. For example, it may be that
limb muscle dysfunction could
inﬂuence the prevalence of the
metabolic syndrome.
Conclusions
The limb muscles have been the topic of
several publications since the ﬁrst ATS/
ERS statement on this topic. Limb
muscle dysfunction is a clinically
relevant systemic manifestation of
COPD because it inﬂuences important
clinical outcomes in this disease. This
comorbid condition associated with
COPD can be treated with exercise
training. Future research should allow
a better understanding of the
mechanisms involved in the
development of skeletal muscle
dysfunction with the hope for speciﬁc
therapies for this problem. n
This statement was prepared by an ad hoc subcommittee of the ATS Assembly on Pulmonary Rehabilitation and the ERS Scientiﬁc Group 01.02
“Rehabilitation and Chronic Care.”
Members of this committee were as
follows:
FRANC¸ OIS MALTAIS, M.D. (Chair)
MARC DECRAMER, PH.D., M.D. (Co-Chair)
ESTHER BARREIRO, M.D., PH.D.
YAN BURELLE, PH.D.
RICHARD CASABURI, PH.D, M.D.
RICHARD DEBIGAR ´E, PH.D.
P. N. RICHARD DEKHUIJZEN, M.D., PH.D.
FRITS FRANSSEN, M.D., PH.D.
GHISLAINE GAYAN-RAMIREZ, PH.D.
JOAQUIM GEA, M.D.
HARRY R. GOSKER, PH.D.
RIK GOSSELINK, PH.D.
MAURICE HAYOT, PH.D., M.D.
SABAH N. A. HUSSAIN, PH.D., M.D.
WIM JANSSENS, PH.D., M.D.
MICHAEL I. POLKEY, PH.D.
JOSEP ROCA, M.D.
DIDIER SAEY, P.T., PH.D.
ANNEMIE M. W. J. SCHOLS, PH.D.
MARTIJN A. SPRUIT, PH.D.
MICHAEL STEINER, M.D.
TANJA TAIVASSALO, PH.D.
THIERRY TROOSTERS, PH.D.
IOANNIS VOGIATZIS, PH.D.
PETER D. WAGNER, M.D.
Author Disclosures: F.M. was on an advisory
committee and received speaker fees from
GlaxoSmithKline ($5,000–24,999 combined);
he received research support from
GlaxoSmithKline ($50,000–99,999). R.C.
received research support from Novartis
($100,000–249,999). J.G. holds a patent for
a training valve, with proceeds paid to his
institution. W.J. received speaker fees from
AstraZeneca ($1–4,999), was on an advisory
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e45

----- Page 33 (native) -----
committee and received speaker fees from
Boehringer Ingelheim ($1–4,999 combined),
and received research support from
Boehringer Ingelheim ($5,000–24,999); he was
on an advisory committee of Chiesi ($1–4,999),
and on an advisory committee and received
speaker fees from GlaxoSmithKline ($1–4,999
combined); he was on an advisory committee
and received speaker fees from Novartis ($1–
4,999 combined). M.D., E.B., Y.B., R.D.,
P.N.R.D., F.F., G.G-R., H.R.G., R.G., M.H.,
S.N.A.H., M.I.P., J.R., D.S., A.M.W.J.S., M.A.S.,
M.S., T. Taivassalo, T. Troosters., I.V., and P.D.W.
reported no relevant commercial interests.
Acknowledgment: The authors thank
Annette De Bruyne and Eline Lahousse for
their secretarial assistance and H ´el `ene
Trudel for drawing the ﬁgures. They also
thank Kevin Wilson and Guy Brusselle for
their guidance during the preparation of this
document.
References
1. Skeletal muscle dysfunction in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: a statement of the American Thoracic Society and
European Respiratory Society. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;
159:S1–S40.
2. Evans WJ, Morley JE, Argil ´es J, Bales C, Baracos V, Guttridge D, Jatoi A,
Kalantar-Zadeh K, Lochs H, Mantovani G, et al. Cachexia: a new
deﬁnition. Clin Nutr 2008;27:793–799.
3. Hopkinson NS, Tennant RC, Dayer MJ, Swallow EB, Hansel TT, Moxham
J, Polkey MI. A prospective study of decline in fat free mass and
skeletal muscle strength in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Respir Res 2007;8:25.
4. van den Borst B, Koster A, Yu B, Gosker HR, Meibohm B, Bauer DC,
Kritchevsky SB, Liu Y, Newman AB, Harris TB, et al. Is age-related
decline in lean mass and physical function accelerated by obstructive
lung disease or smoking? Thorax 2011;66:961–969.
5. Burke RE. Revisiting the notion of ‘motor unit types.’ Prog Brain Res
1999;123:167–175.
6. Burke RE, Levine DN, Zajac FE III. Mammalian motor units:
physiological-histochemical correlation in three types in cat
gastrocnemius. Science 1971;174:709–712.
7. Burke RE. Motor unit types of cat triceps surae muscle. J Physiol 1967;
193:141–160.
8. Sieck GC, Prakash YS. Morphological adaptations of neuromuscular
junctions depend on ﬁber type. Can J Appl Physiol 1997;22:197–230.
9. Sica RE, McComas AJ. Fast and slow twitch units in a human muscle.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1971;34:113–120.
10. Feinstein B, Lindegard B, Nyman E, Wohlfart G. Morphologic studies of
motor units in normal human muscles. Acta Anat (Basel) 1955;23:
127–142.
11. Garnett RA, O’Donovan MJ, Stephens JA, Taylor A. Motor unit
organization of human medial gastrocnemius. J Physiol 1979;287:
33–43.
12. Pereira Sant’Ana JA, Ennion S, Sargeant AJ, Moorman AF, Goldspink
G. Comparison of the molecular, antigenic and ATPase determinants
of fast myosin heavy chains in rat and human: a single-ﬁbre study.
Pﬂugers Arch 1997;435:151–163.
13. Henneman E. Relation between size of neurons and their susceptibility
to discharge. Science 1957;126:1345–1347.
14. Milner-Brown HS, Stein RB, Yemm R. The orderly recruitment of human
motor units during voluntary isometric contractions. J Physiol 1973;
230:359–370.
15. Stephens JA, Usherwood TP. The mechanical properties of human
motor units with special reference to their fatiguability and
recruitment threshold. Brain Res 1977;125:91–97.
16. Yemm R. The orderly recruitment of motor units of the masseter and
temporal muscles during voluntary isometric contraction in man.
J Physiol 1977;265:163–174.
17. Desmedt JE, Godaux E. Ballistic contractions in man: characteristic
recruitment pattern of single motor units of the tibialis anterior
muscle. J Physiol 1977;264:673–693.
18. Wakeling JM. Motor units are recruited in a task-dependent fashion
during locomotion. J Exp Biol 2004;207:3883–3890.
19. Mori S. Discharge patterns of soleus motor units with associated
changes in force exerted by foot during quiet stance in man.
J Neurophysiol 1973;36:458–471.
20. Vieira TM, Loram ID, Muceli S, Merletti R, Farina D. Recruitment of
motor units in the medial gastrocnemius muscle during human quiet
standing: is recruitment intermittent? What triggers recruitment?
J Neurophysiol 2012;107:666–676.
21. Lexell J. Human aging, muscle mass, and ﬁber type composition.
J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 1995;50:11–16.
22. Faulkner JA, Larkin LM, Claﬂin DR, Brooks SV. Age-related changes in
the structure and function of skeletal muscles. Clin Exp Pharmacol
Physiol 2007;34:1091–1096.
23. Ess ´en-Gustavsson B, Borges O. Histochemical and metabolic
characteristics of human skeletal muscle in relation to age. Acta
Physiol Scand 1986;126:107–114.
24. Vandervoort AA. Aging of the human neuromuscular system. Muscle
Nerve 2002;25:17–25.
25. Korhonen MT, Cristea A, Al´en M, H¨akkinen K, Sipil¨a S, Mero A, Viitasalo JT,
Larsson L, Suominen H. Aging, muscle ﬁber type, and contractile function
in sprint-trained athletes. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2006;101:906–917.
26. Brown MC, Holland RL, Hopkins WG. Motor nerve sprouting. Annu Rev
Neurosci 1981;4:17–42.
27. Luff AR. Age-associated changes in the innervation of muscle ﬁbers
and changes in the mechanical properties of motor units. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 1998;854:92–101.
28. Fling BW, Knight CA, Kamen G. Relationships between motor unit size
and recruitment threshold in older adults: implications for size
principle. Exp Brain Res 2009;197:125–133.
29. Mulder ER, Gerrits KH, Kleine BU, Rittweger J, Felsenberg D, de Haan
A, Stegeman DF. High-density surface EMG study on the time
course of central nervous and peripheral neuromuscular changes
during 8 weeks of bed rest with or without resistive vibration
exercise. J Electromyogr Kinesiol 2009;19:208–218.
30. Cescon C, Gazzoni M. Short term bed-rest reduces conduction velocity
of individual motor units in leg muscles. J Electromyogr Kinesiol
2010;20:860–867.
31. Duchateau J, Hainaut K. Electrical and mechanical changes in
immobilized human muscle. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1987;62:2168–2173.
32. Duchateau J, Hainaut K. Effects of immobilization on contractile
properties, recruitment and ﬁring rates of human motor units.
J Physiol 1990;422:55–65.
33. Seki K, Taniguchi Y, Narusawa M. Effects of joint immobilization on ﬁring
rate modulation of human motor units. J Physiol 2001;530:507–519.
34. Seki K, Kizuka T, Yamada H. Reduction in maximal ﬁring rate of
motoneurons after 1-week immobilization of ﬁnger muscle in human
subjects. J Electromyogr Kinesiol 2007;17:113–120.
35. Folland JP, Williams AG. The adaptations to strength training :
morphological and neurological contributions to increased strength.
Sports Med 2007;37:145–168.
36. Grifﬁn L, Cafarelli E. Resistance training: cortical, spinal, and motor unit
adaptations. Can J Appl Physiol 2005;30:328–340.
37. Gonyea WJ. Role of exercise in inducing increases in skeletal muscle
ﬁber number. J Appl Physiol 1980;48:421–426.
38. Edman KA. Double-hyperbolic force-velocity relation in frog muscle
ﬁbres. J Physiol 1988;404:301–321.
39. Enoka RM. Muscle fatigue—from motor units to clinical symptoms. J
Biomech 2012;45:427–433.
40. Chamberlain S, Lewis DM. Contractile characteristics and innervation
ratio of rat soleus motor units. J Physiol 1989;412:1–21.
41. Berg HE, Larsson L, Tesch PA. Lower limb skeletal muscle function
after 6 wk of bed rest. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1997;82:182–188.
42. Sieck GC, Fournier M. Diaphragm motor unit recruitment during
ventilatory and nonventilatory behaviors. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1989;
66:2539–2545.
43. Fryer MW, Neering IR. Actions of caffeine on fast- and slow-twitch
muscles of the rat. J Physiol 1989;416:435–454.
44. Fryer MW, Stephenson DG. Total and sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium
contents of skinned ﬁbres from rat skeletal muscle. J Physiol 1996;
493:357–370.
45. Salviati G, Volpe P. Ca21 release from sarcoplasmic reticulum of
skinned fast- and slow-twitch muscle ﬁbers. Am J Physiol 1988;254:
C459–C465.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e46
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 34 (native) -----
46. Delbono O, Meissner G. Sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca21 release in rat
slow- and fast-twitch muscles. J Membr Biol 1996;151:123–130.
47. Ferguson DG, Franzini-Armstrong C. The Ca21 ATPase content of
slow and fast twitch ﬁbers of guinea pig. Muscle Nerve 1988;11:
561–570.
48. Schiafﬁno S, Reggiani C. Molecular diversity of myoﬁbrillar proteins:
gene regulation and functional signiﬁcance. Physiol Rev 1996;76:
371–423.
49. Laszewski-Williams B, Ruff RL, Gordon AM. Inﬂuence of ﬁber type and
muscle source on Ca21 sensitivity of rat ﬁbers. Am J Physiol 1989;
256:C420–C427.
50. Mounier Y, Holy X, Stevens L. Compared properties of the contractile
system of skinned slow and fast rat muscle ﬁbres. Pﬂugers Arch
1989;415:136–141.
51. Stephenson DG, Forrest QG. Different isometric force - [Ca21]
relationships in slow and fast twitch skinned muscle ﬁbres of the rat.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1980;589:358–362.
52. Stephenson DG, Williams DA. Calcium-activated force responses in
fast- and slow-twitch skinned muscle ﬁbres of the rat at different
temperatures. J Physiol 1981;317:281–302.
53. Sieck GC, Prakash YS. Cross-bridge kinetics in respiratory muscles.
Eur Respir J 1997;10:2147–2158.
54. Sieck GC, Han YS, Prakash YS, Jones KA. Cross-bridge cycling
kinetics, actomyosin ATPase activity and myosin heavy chain
isoforms in skeletal and smooth respiratory muscles. Comp Biochem
Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol 1998;119:435–450.
55. Jones EJ, Bishop PA, Woods AK, Green JM. Cross-sectional area and
muscular strength: a brief review. Sports Med 2008;38:987–994.
56. Fukunaga T, Miyatani M, Tachi M, Kouzaki M, Kawakami Y, Kanehisa
H. Muscle volume is a major determinant of joint torque in humans.
Acta Physiol Scand 2001;172:249–255.
57. Ikai M, Fukunaga T. Calculation of muscle strength per unit cross-
sectional area of human muscle by means of ultrasonic
measurement. Int Z Angew Physiol 1968;26:26–32.
58. Moss BM, Refsnes PE, Abildgaard A, Nicolaysen K, Jensen J. Effects
of maximal effort strength training with different loads on dynamic
strength, cross-sectional area, load-power and load-velocity
relationships. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 1997;75:193–199.
59. Fitts RH, McDonald KS, Schluter JM. The determinants of skeletal
muscle force and power: their adaptability with changes in activity
pattern. J Biomech 1991;24:111–122.
60. Larsson L, Moss RL. Maximum velocity of shortening in relation to
myosin isoform composition in single ﬁbres from human skeletal
muscles. J Physiol 1993;472:595–614.
61. Widrick JJ, Trappe SW, Blaser CA, Costill DL, Fitts RH. Isometric force
and maximal shortening velocity of single muscle ﬁbers from elite
master runners. Am J Physiol 1996;271:C666–C675.
62. Bottinelli R, Canepari M, Pellegrino MA, Reggiani C. Force-velocity
properties of human skeletal muscle ﬁbres: myosin heavy chain
isoform and temperature dependence. J Physiol 1996;495:573–586.
63. Geiger PC, Cody MJ, Macken RL, Sieck GC. Maximum speciﬁc force
depends on myosin heavy chain content in rat diaphragm muscle
ﬁbers. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2000;89:695–703.
64. Larsson L, Grimby G, Karlsson J. Muscle strength and speed of
movement in relation to age and muscle morphology. J Appl Physiol
1979;46:451–456.
65. Janssen I, Heymsﬁeld SB, Wang ZM, Ross R. Skeletal muscle mass
and distribution in 468 men and women aged 18-88 yr. J Appl
Physiol (1985) 2000;89:81–88.
66. Chodzko-Zajko WJ, Proctor DN, Fiatarone Singh MA, Minson CT, Nigg
CR, Salem GJ, Skinner JS; American College of Sports Medicine.
American College of Sports Medicine position stand. Exercise and
physical activity for older adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2009;41:
1510–1530.
67. Lexell J, Taylor CC, Sj ¨ostr ¨om M. What is the cause of the ageing
atrophy? Total number, size and proportion of different ﬁber types
studied in whole vastus lateralis muscle from 15- to 83-year-old men.
J Neurol Sci 1988;84:275–294.
68. Aagaard P, Magnusson PS, Larsson B, Kjaer M, Krustrup P.
Mechanical muscle function, morphology, and ﬁber type in lifelong
trained elderly. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2007;39:1989–1996.
69. Caspersen CJ, Kriska AM, Dearwater SR. Physical activity
epidemiology as applied to elderly populations. Baillieres Clin
Rheumatol 1994;8:7–27.
70. Bassey EJ, Bendall MJ, Pearson M. Muscle strength in the triceps
surae and objectively measured customary walking activity in
men and women over 65 years of age. Clin Sci (Lond) 1988;74:
85–89.
71. Martin HJ, Syddall HE, Dennison EM, Cooper C, Sayer AA. Relationship
between customary physical activity, muscle strength and physical
performance in older men and women: ﬁndings from the
Hertfordshire Cohort Study. Age Ageing 2008;37:589–593.
72. Ichas F, Jouaville LS, Mazat JP. Mitochondria are excitable organelles
capable of generating and conveying electrical and calcium signals.
Cell 1997;89:1145–1153.
73. Murgia M, Giorgi C, Pinton P, Rizzuto R. Controlling metabolism and
cell death: at the heart of mitochondrial calcium signalling. J Mol Cell
Cardiol 2009;46:781–788.
74. Bernardi P. Mitochondrial transport of cations: channels, exchangers,
and permeability transition. Physiol Rev 1999;79:1127–1155.
75. Wallace DC, Fan W. Energetics, epigenetics, mitochondrial genetics.
Mitochondrion 2010;10:12–31.
76. Turrens JF. Mitochondrial formation of reactive oxygen species.
J Physiol 2003;552:335–344.
77. Poderoso JJ, Boveris A, Cadenas E. Mitochondrial oxidative stress:
a self-propagating process with implications for signaling cascades.
Biofactors 2000;11:43–45.
78. Crow MT, Mani K, Nam YJ, Kitsis RN. The mitochondrial death pathway
and cardiac myocyte apoptosis. Circ Res 2004;95:957–970.
79. Mattson MP, Kroemer G. Mitochondria in cell death: novel targets for
neuroprotection and cardioprotection. Trends Mol Med 2003;9:
196–205.
80. Zoratti M, Szab `o I. The mitochondrial permeability transition. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1995;1241:139–176.
81. Saltin B, Rowell LB. Functional adaptations to physical activity and
inactivity. Fed Proc 1980;39:1506–1513.
82. Reichmann H, Hoppeler H, Mathieu-Costello O, von Bergen F, Pette D.
Biochemical and ultrastructural changes of skeletal muscle
mitochondria after chronic electrical stimulation in rabbits. Pﬂugers
Arch 1985;404:1–9.
83. Dimauro S. A history of mitochondrial diseases. J Inherit Metab Dis
2011;34:261–276.
84. Wallace DC. A mitochondrial paradigm of metabolic and degenerative
diseases, aging, and cancer: a dawn for evolutionary medicine. Annu
Rev Genet 2005;39:359–407.
85. Neder JA, Jones PW, Nery LE, Whipp BJ. Determinants of the exercise
endurance capacity in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. The power-duration relationship. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2000;162:497–504.
86. Poole DC, Ward SA, Gardner GW, Whipp BJ. Metabolic and respiratory
proﬁle of the upper limit for prolonged exercise in man. Ergonomics
1988;31:1265–1279.
87. Poole DC, Ward SA, Whipp BJ. The effects of training on the metabolic
and respiratory proﬁle of high-intensity cycle ergometer exercise.
Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 1990;59:421–429.
88. Luo YM, Hart N, Mustfa N, Lyall RA, Polkey MI, Moxham J. Effect of
diaphragm fatigue on neural respiratory drive. J Appl Physiol (1985)
2001;90:1691–1699.
89. Asmussen E. Muscle fatigue. Med Sci Sports 1979;11:313–321.
90. Fujimoto T, Nishizono H. Involvement of membrane excitation failure in
fatigue induced by intermittent submaximal voluntary contraction of
the ﬁrst dorsal interosseous muscle. J Sports Med Phys Fitness
1993;33:107–117.
91. Westerblad H, Allen DG. Recent advances in the understanding of
skeletal muscle fatigue. Curr Opin Rheumatol 2002;14:648–652.
92. Westerblad H, Allen DG. Cellular mechanisms of skeletal muscle
fatigue. Adv Exp Med Biol 2003;538:563–570, discussion 571.
93. Edwards RH, Hill DK, Jones DA, Merton PA. Fatigue of long duration in
human skeletal muscle after exercise. J Physiol 1977;272:769–778.
94. Moxham J, Edwards RH, Aubier M, De Troyer A, Farkas G, Macklem
PT, Roussos C. Changes in EMG power spectrum (high-to-low
ratio) with force fatigue in humans. J Appl Physiol 1982;53:
1094–1099.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e47

----- Page 35 (native) -----
95. Amann M, Dempsey JA. Locomotor muscle fatigue modiﬁes central
motor drive in healthy humans and imposes a limitation to exercise
performance. J Physiol 2008;586:161–173.
96. Timmons JA, Gustafsson T, Sundberg CJ, Jansson E, Hultman E,
Kaijser L, Chwalbinska-Moneta J, Constantin-Teodosiu D,
Macdonald IA, Greenhaff PL. Substrate availability limits human
skeletal muscle oxidative ATP regeneration at the onset of ischemic
exercise. J Clin Invest 1998;101:79–85.
97. Greenhaff PL, Timmons JA. Interaction between aerobic and anaerobic
metabolism during intense muscle contraction. Exerc Sport Sci Rev
1998;26:1–30.
98. Putman CT, Spriet LL, Hultman E, Dyck DJ, Heigenhauser GJ. Skeletal
muscle pyruvate dehydrogenase activity during acetate infusion in
humans. Am J Physiol 1995;268:E1007–E1017.
99. Ludvik B, Mayer G, Stifter S, Putz D, Barnas U, Graf H. Effects of
dichloroacetate on exercise performance in healthy volunteers.
Pﬂugers Arch 1993;423:251–254.
100. Constantin-Teodosiu D, Greenhaff PL. The tricarboxylic acid cycle in
human skeletal muscle: is there a role for nutritional intervention?
Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 1999;2:527–531.
101. Eliason G, Abdel-Halim S, Arvidsson B, Kadi F, Piehl-Aulin K. Physical
performance and muscular characteristics in different stages of
COPD. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2009;19:865–870.
102. Plant PJ, Brooks D, Faughnan M, Bayley T, Bain J, Singer L, Correa J,
Pearce D, Binnie M, Batt J. Cellular markers of muscle atrophy in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol
2010;42:461–471.
103. Th ´eriault ME, Par ´e ME, Maltais F, Debigar ´e R. Satellite cells
senescence in limb muscle of severe patients with COPD. PLoS
ONE 2012;7:e39124.
104. Mitch WE, Goldberg AL. Mechanisms of muscle wasting. The role of the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway N Engl J Med 1996;335:1897–1905.
105. Bailey JL, Wang X, England BK, Price SR, Ding X, Mitch WE. The
acidosis of chronic renal failure activates muscle proteolysis in rats
by augmenting transcription of genes encoding proteins of the
ATP-dependent ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. J Clin Invest 1996;
97:1447–1453.
106. Hasselgren PO, Fischer JE. Muscle cachexia: current concepts of
intracellular mechanisms and molecular regulation. Ann Surg 2001;
233:9–17.
107. Mitch WE, Bailey JL, Wang X, Jurkovitz C, Newby D, Price SR.
Evaluation of signals activating ubiquitin-proteasome proteolysis in
a model of muscle wasting. Am J Physiol 1999;276:C1132–C1138.
108. Li YP, Reid MB. NF-kappaB mediates the protein loss induced by
TNF-alpha in differentiated skeletal muscle myotubes. Am J Physiol
2000;279:R1165–R1170.
109. Bodine SC, Latres E, Baumhueter S, Lai VK, Nunez L, Clarke BA,
Poueymirou WT, Panaro FJ, Na E, Dharmarajan K, et al.
Identiﬁcation of ubiquitin ligases required for skeletal muscle
atrophy. Science 2001;294:1704–1708.
110. Gomes MD, Lecker SH, Jagoe RT, Navon A, Goldberg AL. Atrogin-1,
a muscle-speciﬁc F-box protein highly expressed during muscle
atrophy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001;98:14440–14445.
111. Solomon V, Goldberg AL. Importance of the ATP-ubiquitin-
proteasome pathway in the degradation of soluble and myoﬁbrillar
proteins in rabbit muscle extracts. J Biol Chem 1996;271:
26690–26697.
112. Smith IJ, Lecker SH, Hasselgren PO. Calpain activity and muscle
wasting in sepsis. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2008;295:
E762–E771.
113. Zhao J, Brault JJ, Schild A, Cao P, Sandri M, Schiafﬁno S, Lecker SH,
Goldberg AL. FoxO3 coordinately activates protein degradation
by the autophagic/lysosomal and proteasomal pathways in
atrophying muscle cells. Cell Metab 2007;6:472–483.
114. Du J, Wang X, Miereles C, Bailey JL, Debigar ´e R, Zheng B, Price SR,
Mitch WE. Activation of caspase-3 is an initial step triggering
accelerated muscle proteolysis in catabolic conditions. J Clin Invest
2004;113:115–123.
115. McClung JM, Judge AR, Powers SK, Yan Z. p38 MAPK links oxidative
stress to autophagy-related gene expression in cachectic muscle
wasting. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2010;298:C542–C549.
116. Glass DJ. Skeletal muscle hypertrophy and atrophy signaling
pathways. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2005;37:1974–1984.
117. Mammucari C, Milan G, Romanello V, Masiero E, Rudolf R, Del
Piccolo P, Burden SJ, Di Lisi R, Sandri C, Zhao J, et al. FoxO3
controls autophagy in skeletal muscle in vivo. Cell Metab 2007;6:
458–471.
118. Sandri M, Sandri C, Gilbert A, Skurk C, Calabria E, Picard A, Walsh K,
Schiafﬁno S, Lecker SH, Goldberg AL. Foxo transcription factors
induce the atrophy-related ubiquitin ligase atrogin-1 and cause
skeletal muscle atrophy. Cell 2004;117:399–412.
119. Cai D, Frantz JD, Tawa NE Jr, Melendez PA, Oh BC, Lidov HG,
Hasselgren PO, Frontera WR, Lee J, Glass DJ, et al. IKKbeta/
NF-kappaB activation causes severe muscle wasting in mice. Cell
2004;119:285–298.
120. Li YP, Chen Y, John J, Moylan J, Jin B, Mann DL, Reid MB. TNF-alpha
acts via p38 MAPK to stimulate expression of the ubiquitin ligase
atrogin1/MAFbx in skeletal muscle. FASEB J 2005;19:362–370.
121. Hilder TL, Tou JC, Grindeland RE, Wade CE, Graves LM. Phosphorylation
of insulin receptor substrate-1 serine 307 correlates with JNK activity in
atrophic skeletal muscle. FEBS Lett 2003;553:63–67.
122. Supinski GS, Ji X, Callahan LA. The JNK MAP kinase pathway
contributes to the development of endotoxin-induced diaphragm
caspase activation. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2009;
297:R825–R834.
123. Trendelenburg AU, Meyer A, Rohner D, Boyle J, Hatakeyama S, Glass
DJ. Myostatin reduces Akt/TORC1/p70S6K signaling, inhibiting
myoblast differentiation and myotube size. Am J Physiol Cell
Physiol 2009;296:C1258–C1270.
124. Morissette MR, Cook SA, Buranasombati C, Rosenberg MA, Rosenzweig
A. Myostatin inhibits IGF-I-induced myotube hypertrophy through Akt.
Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2009;297:C1124–C1132.
125. Lokireddy S, Wijesoma IW, Sze SK, McFarlane C, Kambadur R,
Sharma M. Identiﬁcation of atrogin-1-targeted proteins during the
myostatin-induced skeletal muscle wasting. Am J Physiol Cell
Physiol 2012;303:C512–C529.
126. Lokireddy S, McFarlane C, Ge X, Zhang H, Sze SK, Sharma M,
Kambadur R. Myostatin induces degradation of sarcomeric
proteins through a Smad3 signaling mechanism during skeletal
muscle wasting. Mol Endocrinol 2011;25:1936–1949.
127. Vandenburgh HH, Karlisch P, Shansky J, Feldstein R. Insulin and IGF-I
induce pronounced hypertrophy of skeletal myoﬁbers in tissue
culture. Am J Physiol 1991;260:C475–C484.
128. Rommel C, Bodine SC, Clarke BA, Rossman R, Nunez L, Stitt TN,
Yancopoulos GD, Glass DJ. Mediation of IGF-1-induced skeletal
myotube hypertrophy by PI(3)K/Akt/mTOR and PI(3)K/Akt/GSK3
pathways. Nat Cell Biol 2001;3:1009–1013.
129. 1983 metropolitan height and weight tables. Stat Bull Metrop Life
Found 1983;64:3–9.
130. Harrison GG. Height-weight tables. Ann Intern Med 1985;103:
989–994.
131. Vestbo J, Prescott E, Almdal T, Dahl M, Nordestgaard BG, Andersen
T, Sørensen TI, Lange P. Body mass, fat-free body mass, and
prognosis in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
from a random population sample: ﬁndings from the Copenhagen
City Heart Study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006;173:79–83.
132. Schols AM, Broekhuizen R, Weling-Scheepers CA, Wouters EF. Body
composition and mortality in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;82:53–59.
133. Schutz Y, Kyle UU, Pichard C. Fat-free mass index and fat mass index
percentiles in Caucasians aged 18-98 y. Int J Obes Relat Metab
Disord 2002;26:953–960.
134. Schols AM, Soeters PB, Dingemans AM, Mostert R, Frantzen PJ,
Wouters EF. Prevalence and characteristics of nutritional depletion
in patients with stable COPD eligible for pulmonary rehabilitation.
Am Rev Respir Dis 1993;147:1151–1156.
135. Coronell C, Orozco-Levi M, Gea J. COPD and body weight in
a Mediterranean population. Clin Nutr 2002;21:437–438, author
reply 437–438.
136. Engelen MP, Schols AM, Does JD, Wouters EF. Skeletal muscle
weakness is associated with wasting of extremity fat-free mass but
not with airﬂow obstruction in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Clin Nutr 2000;71:733–738.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e48
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 36 (native) -----
137. Caron MA, Debigar ´e R, Dekhuijzen PN, Maltais F. Comparative
assessment of the quadriceps and the diaphragm in patients with
COPD. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2009;107:952–961.
138. Bernard S, LeBlanc P, Whittom F, Carrier G, Jobin J, Belleau R,
Maltais F. Peripheral muscle weakness in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;
158:629–634.
139. Eisner MD, Blanc PD, Sidney S, Yelin EH, Lathon PV, Katz PP,
Tolstykh I, Ackerson L, Iribarren C. Body composition and
functional limitation in COPD. Respir Res 2007;8:7.
140. Steuten LM, Creutzberg EC, Vrijhoef HJ, Wouters EF. COPD as
a multicomponent disease: inventory of dyspnoea, underweight,
obesity and fat free mass depletion in primary care. Prim Care
Respir J 2006;15:84–91.
141. Guerra S, Sherrill DL, Bobadilla A, Martinez FD, Barbee RA. The
relation of body mass index to asthma, chronic bronchitis, and
emphysema. Chest 2002;122:1256–1263.
142. Franssen FM, O’Donnell DE, Goossens GH, Blaak EE, Schols AM.
Obesity and the lung: 5. Obesity and COPD. Thorax 2008;63:
1110–1117.
143. Mancuso P. Obesity and lung inﬂammation. J Appl Physiol (1985)
2010;108:722–728.
144. Rutten EP, Breyer MK, Spruit MA, Hofstra T, van Melick PP, Schols
AM, Wouters EF. Abdominal fat mass contributes to the systemic
inﬂammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Clin Nutr
2010;29:756–760.
145. Skyba P, Ukropec J, Pobeha P, Ukropcova B, Joppa P, Kurdiova T,
Stroffekova K, Brusik M, Klimes I, Tkac I, et al. Metabolic phenotype
and adipose tissue inﬂammation in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Mediators Inﬂamm 2010;2010:173498.
146. van den Borst B, Gosker HR, Wesseling G, de Jager W, Hellwig VA,
Snepvangers FJ, Schols AM. Low-grade adipose tissue
inﬂammation in patients with mild-to-moderate chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;94:1504–1512.
147. Marquis K, Maltais F, Duguay V, Bezeau AM, LeBlanc P, Jobin J,
Poirier P. The metabolic syndrome in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. J Cardiopulm Rehabil 2005;25:
226–232, discussion 233–234.
148. Lam KB, Jordan RE, Jiang CQ, Thomas GN, Miller MR, Zhang WS,
Lam TH, Cheng KK, Adab P. Airﬂow obstruction and metabolic
syndrome: the Guangzhou Biobank Cohort Study. Eur Respir J
2010;35:317–323.
149. Schols AM, Slangen J, Volovics L, Wouters EF. Weight loss is
a reversible factor in the prognosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:1791–1797.
150. Landbo C, Prescott E, Lange P, Vestbo J, Almdal TP. Prognostic value
of nutritional status in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:1856–1861.
151. Poulain M, Doucet M, Drapeau V, Fournier G, Tremblay A, Poirier P,
Maltais F. Metabolic and inﬂammatory proﬁle in obese patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Chron Respir Dis 2008;5:35–41.
152. van den Borst B, Gosker HR, Koster A, Yu B, Kritchevsky SB, Liu Y,
Meibohm B, Rice TB, Shlipak M, Yende S, et al.; Health, Aging,
and Body Composition (Health ABC) Study. The inﬂuence of
abdominal visceral fat on inﬂammatory pathways and mortality risk
in obstructive lung disease. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;96:516–526.
153. Ferguson GT, Calverley PM, Anderson JA, Jenkins CR, Jones PW,
Willits LR, Yates JC, Vestbo J, Celli B. Prevalence and progression
of osteoporosis in patients with COPD: results from the TOwards
a Revolution in COPD Health study. Chest 2009;136:1456–1465.
154. Graat-Verboom L, Wouters EF, Smeenk FW, van den Borne BE,
Lunde R, Spruit MA. Current status of research on osteoporosis in
COPD: a systematic review. Eur Respir J 2009;34:209–218.
155. Silva DR, Coelho AC, Dumke A, Valentini JD, de Nunes JN, Stefani CL,
da Silva Mendes LF, Knorst MM. Osteoporosis prevalence and
associated factors in patients with COPD: a cross-sectional study.
Respir Care 2011;56:961–968.
156. Coin A, Sergi G, Marin S, Vianello A, Perissinotto E, Sarti S, Rinaldi G,
Mosele M, Inelmen EM, Enzi G, et al. Predictors of low bone mineral
density in elderly males with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: the role of body mass index. Aging Male 2010;13:142–147.
157. Bolton CE, Ionescu AA, Shiels KM, Pettit RJ, Edwards PH, Stone MD,
Nixon LS, Evans WD, Grifﬁths TL, Shale DJ. Associated loss of fat-
free mass and bone mineral density in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004;170:
1286–1293.
158. Engelen MP, Schols AM, Lamers RJ, Wouters EF. Different patterns of
chronic tissue wasting among patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Clin Nutr 1999;18:275–280.
159. Kurosaki H, Ishii T, Motohashi N, Motegi T, Yamada K, Kudoh S,
Jones RC, Kida K. Extent of emphysema on HRCT affects loss of
fat-free mass and fat mass in COPD. Intern Med 2009;48:41–48.
160. Rutten EP, Grydeland TB, Pillai SG, Wagers S, Dirksen A, Coxson HO,
Gulsvik A, Wouters EF, Bakke PS. Quantitative CT: associations
between emphysema, airway wall thickness and body composition
in COPD. Pulm Med 2011;2011:419328.
161. Gosker HR, Zeegers MP, Wouters EF, Schols AM. Muscle ﬁbre type
shifting in the vastus lateralis of patients with COPD is associated
with disease severity: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Thorax 2007;62:944–949.
162. Kim HC, Mofarrahi M, Hussain SN. Skeletal muscle dysfunction in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Int J Chron
Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2008;3:637–658.
163. Whittom F, Jobin J, Simard PM, Leblanc P, Simard C, Bernard S,
Belleau R, Maltais F. Histochemical and morphological
characteristics of the vastus lateralis muscle in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1998;
30:1467–1474.
164. Jobin J, Maltais F, Doyon JF, LeBlanc P, Simard PM, Simard AA,
Simard C. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: capillarity and
ﬁber-type characteristics of skeletal muscle. J Cardiopulm Rehabil
1998;18:432–437.
165. Vogiatzis I, Terzis G, Stratakos G, Cherouveim E, Athanasopoulos D,
Spetsioti S, Nasis I, Manta P, Roussos C, Zakynthinos S. Effect of
pulmonary rehabilitation on peripheral muscle ﬁber remodeling in
patients with COPD in GOLD stages II to IV. Chest 2011;140:
744–752.
166. Larsson L. Histochemical characteristics of human skeletal muscle
during aging. Acta Physiol Scand 1983;117:469–471.
167. Doucet M, Debigar ´e R, Joanisse DR, C ˆot ´e C, Leblanc P, Gr ´egoire J,
Deslauriers J, Vaillancourt R, Maltais F. Adaptation of the
diaphragm and the vastus lateralis in mild-to-moderate COPD.
Eur Respir J 2004;24:971–979.
168. Gea JG, Pasto M, Carmona MA, Orozco-Levi M, Palomeque J,
Broquetas J. Metabolic characteristics of the deltoid muscle in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur Respir J
2001;17:939–945.
169. Gosker HR, Engelen MP, van Mameren H, van Dijk PJ, van der Vusse
GJ, Wouters EF, Schols AM. Muscle ﬁber type IIX atrophy is
involved in the loss of fat-free mass in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Clin Nutr 2002;76:113–119.
170. Natanek SA, Riddoch-Contreras J, Marsh GS, Hopkinson NS, Man
WD, Moxham J, Polkey MI, Kemp PR. Yin Yang 1 expression and
localisation in quadriceps muscle in COPD. Arch Bronconeumol
2011;47:296–302.
171. Fermoselle C, Rabinovich R, Aus´ın P, Puig-Vilanova E, Coronell C,
Sanchez F, Roca J, Gea J, Barreiro E. Does oxidative stress
modulate limb muscle atrophy in severe COPD patients? Eur Respir
J 2012;40:851–862.
172. Richardson RS, Leek BT, Gavin TP, Haseler LJ, Mudaliar SR, Henry R,
Mathieu-Costello O, Wagner PD. Reduced mechanical efﬁciency in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease but normal peak VO2 with
small muscle mass exercise. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004;169:
89–96.
173. Rabinovich RA, Vilar ´o J. Structural and functional changes of
peripheral muscles in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
patients. Curr Opin Pulm Med 2010;16:123–133.
174. Eliason G, Abdel-Halim SM, Piehl-Aulin K, Kadi F. Alterations in the
muscle-to-capillary interface in patients with different degrees of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Respir Res 2010;11:97.
175. Gosker HR, Hesselink MK, Duimel H, Ward KA, Schols AM. Reduced
mitochondrial density in the vastus lateralis muscle of patients with
COPD. Eur Respir J 2007;30:73–79.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e49

----- Page 37 (native) -----
176. Puente-Maestu L, P ´erez-Parra J, Godoy R, Moreno N, Tejedor A,
Gonz ´alez-Aragoneses F, Bravo JL, Alvarez FV, Camaño S, Agust´ı
A. Abnormal mitochondrial function in locomotor and respiratory
muscles of COPD patients. Eur Respir J 2009;33:1045–1052.
177. Maltais F, LeBlanc P, Whittom F, Simard C, Marquis K, B ´elanger M,
Breton MJ, Jobin J. Oxidative enzyme activities of the vastus
lateralis muscle and the functional status in patients with COPD.
Thorax 2000;55:848–853.
178. Green HJ, Bombardier E, Burnett M, Iqbal S, D’Arsigny CL, O’Donnell DE,
Ouyang J, Webb KA. Organization of metabolic pathways in vastus
lateralis of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J
Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2008;295:R935–R941.
179. Picard M, Godin R, Sinnreich M, Baril J, Bourbeau J, Perrault H,
Taivassalo T, Burelle Y. The mitochondrial phenotype of peripheral
muscle in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: disuse or
dysfunction? Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2008;178:1040–1047.
180. Remels AH, Schrauwen P, Broekhuizen R, Willems J, Kersten S,
Gosker HR, Schols AM. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
expression is reduced in skeletal muscle in COPD. Eur Respir J
2007;30:245–252.
181. Rabinovich RA, Bastos R, Ardite E, Llin `as L, Orozco-Levi M, Gea J,
Vilar ´o J, Barber `a JA, Rodr´ıguez-Roisin R, Fern ´andez-Checa JC,
et al. Mitochondrial dysfunction in COPD patients with low body
mass index. Eur Respir J 2007;29:643–650.
182. Puente-Maestu L, P ´erez-Parra J, Godoy R, Moreno N, Tejedor A,
Torres A, L ´azaro A, Ferreira A, Agust´ı A. Abnormal transition pore
kinetics and cytochrome C release in muscle mitochondria of
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir
Cell Mol Biol 2009;40:746–750.
183. Naimi AI, Bourbeau J, Perrault H, Baril J, Wright-Paradis C, Rossi A,
Taivassalo T, Sheel AW, Rabøl R, Dela F, et al. Altered
mitochondrial regulation in quadriceps muscles of patients with
COPD. Clin Physiol Funct Imaging 2011;31:124–131.
184. Gosker HR, Schrauwen P, Hesselink MK, Schaart G, van der Vusse
GJ, Wouters EF, Schols AM. Uncoupling protein-3 content is
decreased in peripheral skeletal muscle of patients with COPD. Eur
Respir J 2003;22:88–93.
185. Russell AP, Somm E, Debigar ´e R, Hartley O, Richard D, Gastaldi G,
Melotti A, Michaud A, Giacobino JP, Muzzin P, et al. COPD results
in a reduction in UCP3 long mRNA and UCP3 protein content in
types I and IIa skeletal muscle ﬁbers. J Cardiopulm Rehabil 2004;
24:332–339.
186. Sauleda J, Garc´ıa-Palmer F, Wiesner RJ, Tarraga S, Harting I, Tom ´as
P, G ´omez C, Saus C, Palou A, Agust´ı AG. Cytochrome oxidase
activity and mitochondrial gene expression in skeletal muscle of
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 1998;157:1413–1417.
187. Picard M, Csukly K, Robillard ME, Godin R, Ascah A, Bourcier-Lucas
C, Burelle Y. Resistance to Ca21-induced opening of the
permeability transition pore differs in mitochondria from glycolytic
and oxidative muscles. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol
2008;295:R659–R668.
188. Anderson EJ, Neufer PD. Type II skeletal myoﬁbers possess unique
properties that potentiate mitochondrial H(2)O(2) generation. Am J
Physiol Cell Physiol 2006;290:C844–C851.
189. Agust´ı AG, Sauleda J, Miralles C, Gomez C, Togores B, Sala E, Batle
S, Busquets X. Skeletal muscle apoptosis and weight loss in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2002;166:485–489.
190. Maltais F, Simard AA, Simard C, Jobin J, Desgagn ´es P, LeBlanc P.
Oxidative capacity of the skeletal muscle and lactic acid kinetics
during exercise in normal subjects and in patients with COPD. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 1996;153:288–293.
191. Maltais F, Saey D, Debigar ´e R. Enhancing the beneﬁts of pulmonary
rehabilitation: doing more for a few or doing a little less for many?
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2008;178:215–216.
192. Sala E, Roca J, Marrades RM, Alonso J, Gonzalez De Suso JM,
Moreno A, Barber ´a JA, Nadal J, de Jover L, Rodriguez-Roisin R,
et al. Effects of endurance training on skeletal muscle bioenergetics
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1999;159:1726–1734.
193. Vilaro J, Rabinovich R, Gonzalez-deSuso JM, Troosters T, Rodr´ıguez
D, Barber `a JA, Roca J. Clinical assessment of peripheral muscle
function in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Am J Phys Med Rehabil 2009;88:39–46.
194. Debigar ´e R, C ˆot ´e CH, Maltais F. Peripheral muscle wasting in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Clinical relevance and
mechanisms. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001;164:1712–1717.
195. Green HJ, Burnett ME, D’Arsigny CL, O’Donnell DE, Ouyang J, Webb
KA. Altered metabolic and transporter characteristics of vastus
lateralis in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. J Appl Physiol
(1985) 2008;105:879–886.
196. Saey D, Lemire BB, Gagnon P, Bombardier E, Tupling AR, Debigar ´e R,
C ˆot ´e CH, Maltais F. Quadriceps metabolism during constant
workrate cycling exercise in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
J Appl Physiol (1985) 2011;110:116–124.
197. Fiaccadori E, Del Canale S, Vitali P, Coffrini E, Ronda N, Guariglia A.
Skeletal muscle energetics, acid-base equilibrium and lactate
metabolism in patients with severe hypercapnia and hypoxemia.
Chest 1987;92:883–887.
198. Green HJ, Bombardier E, Duhamel TA, Stewart RD, Tupling AR, Ouyang
J. Metabolic, enzymatic, and transporter responses in human muscle
during three consecutive days of exercise and recovery. Am J Physiol
Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2008;295:R1238–R1250.
199. Jakobsson P, Jorfeldt L, Henriksson J. Metabolic enzyme activity in
the quadriceps femoris muscle in patients with severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;
151:374–377.
200. Turan N, Kalko S, Stincone A, Clarke K, Sabah A, Howlett K, Curnow
SJ, Rodriguez DA, Cascante M, O’Neill L, et al. A systems biology
approach identiﬁes molecular networks deﬁning skeletal muscle
abnormalities in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. PLOS
Comput Biol 2011;7:e1002129.
201. Barreiro E, Rabinovich R, Marin-Corral J, Barber`a JA, Gea J, Roca J.
Chronic endurance exercise induces quadriceps nitrosative stress in
patients with severe COPD. Thorax 2009;64:13–19.
202. Rodriguez DA, Alcarraz-Viz ´an G, Diaz-Moralli S, Reed M, Gomez FP,
Falciani F, Gunther U, Roca J, Cascante M. Plasma metabolic
proﬁle in COPD patients: effects of exercise and endurance training.
Metabolomics 2012;8:508–516.
203. Richardson RS, Sheldon J, Poole DC, Hopkins SR, Ries AL,
Wagner PD. Evidence of skeletal muscle metabolic reserve
during whole body exercise in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;159:
881–885.
204. Layec G, Haseler LJ, Hoff J, Richardson RS. Evidence that a higher
ATP cost of muscular contraction contributes to the lower
mechanical efﬁciency associated with COPD: preliminary ﬁndings.
Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2011;300:R1142–R1147.
205. Schols AM, Fredrix EW, Soeters PB, Westerterp KR, Wouters EF.
Resting energy expenditure in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Clin Nutr 1991;54:983–987.
206. Baarends EM, Schols AM, Westerterp KR, Wouters EF. Total daily
energy expenditure relative to resting energy expenditure in
clinically stable patients with COPD. Thorax 1997;52:780–785.
207. Kao CC, Hsu JW, Bandi V, Hanania NA, Kheradmand F, Jahoor F.
Resting energy expenditure and protein turnover are increased in
patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Metabolism 2011;60:1449–1455.
208. Cavalheri V, Don ´aria L, Ferreira T, Finatti M, Camillo CA, Cipulo
Ramos EM, Pitta F. Energy expenditure during daily activities as
measured by two motion sensors in patients with COPD. Respir
Med 2011;105:922–929.
209. Reid MB. Invited Review: redox modulation of skeletal muscle
contraction: what we know and what we don’t. J Appl Physiol
(1985) 2001;90:724–731.
210. Javeshghani D, Magder SA, Barreiro E, Quinn MT, Hussain SN.
Molecular characterization of a superoxide-generating NAD(P)H
oxidase in the ventilatory muscles. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002;
165:412–418.
211. Jackson MJ, Pye D, Palomero J. The production of reactive oxygen
and nitrogen species by skeletal muscle. J Appl Physiol (1985)
2007;102:1664–1670.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e50
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 38 (native) -----
212. Powers SK, Kavazis AN, DeRuisseau KC. Mechanisms of disuse
muscle atrophy: role of oxidative stress. Am J Physiol Regul Integr
Comp Physiol 2005;288:R337–R344.
213. Supinski G. Free radical induced respiratory muscle dysfunction. Mol
Cell Biochem 1998;179:99–110.
214. Stamler JS, Meissner G. Physiology of nitric oxide in skeletal muscle.
Physiol Rev 2001;81:209–237.
215. Beckman JS, Koppenol WH. Nitric oxide, superoxide, and
peroxynitrite: the good, the bad, and ugly. Am J Physiol 1996;271:
C1424–C1437.
216. de Batlle J, Barreiro E, Romieu I, Mendez M, G ´omez FP, Balcells E,
Ferrer J, Orozco-Levi M, Gea J, Ant ´o JM, et al. Dietary modulation
of oxidative stress in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
patients. Free Radic Res 2010;44:1296–1303.
217. Rodriguez DA, Kalko S, Puig-Vilanova E, Perez-Olabarr´ıa M, Falciani
F, Gea J, Cascante M, Barreiro E, Roca J. Muscle and blood redox
status after exercise training in severe COPD patients. Free Radic
Biol Med 2012;52:88–94.
218. Ribera F, N’Guessan B, Zoll J, Fortin D, Serrurier B, Mettauer B,
Bigard X, Ventura-Clapier R, Lampert E. Mitochondrial electron
transport chain function is enhanced in inspiratory muscles of
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 2003;167:873–879.
219. Allaire J, Maltais F, LeBlanc P, Simard PM, Whittom F, Doyon JF,
Simard C, Jobin J. Lipofuscin accumulation in the vastus lateralis
muscle in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Muscle Nerve 2002;25:383–389.
220. Barreiro E, Gea J, Corominas JM, Hussain SN. Nitric oxide synthases
and protein oxidation in the quadriceps femoris of patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol
2003;29:771–778.
221. Barreiro E, de la Puente B, Minguella J, Corominas JM, Serrano S,
Hussain SN, Gea J. Oxidative stress and respiratory muscle
dysfunction in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2005;171:1116–1124.
222. Barreiro E, Gea J, Matar G, Hussain SN. Expression and carbonylation
of creatine kinase in the quadriceps femoris muscles of patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Cell Mol
Biol 2005;33:636–642.
223. Barreiro E, Schols AM, Polkey MI, Galdiz JB, Gosker HR, Swallow EB,
Coronell C, Gea J; ENIGMA in COPD project. Cytokine proﬁle in
quadriceps muscles of patients with severe COPD. Thorax 2008;63:
100–107.
224. Couillard A, Maltais F, Saey D, Debigar ´e R, Michaud A, Koechlin C,
LeBlanc P, Pr ´efaut C. Exercise-induced quadriceps oxidative stress
and peripheral muscle dysfunction in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003;
167:1664–1669.
225. Engelen MP, Schols AM, Does JD, Deutz NE, Wouters EF. Altered
glutamate metabolism is associated with reduced muscle
glutathione levels in patients with emphysema. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 2000;161:98–103.
226. Heunks LM, Viña J, van Herwaarden CL, Folgering HT, Gimeno A,
Dekhuijzen PN. Xanthine oxidase is involved in exercise-induced
oxidative stress in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J
Physiol 1999;277:R1697–R1704.
227. Koechlin C, Couillard A, Simar D, Cristol JP, Bellet H, Hayot M, Pr ´efaut
C. Does oxidative stress alter quadriceps endurance in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease? Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004;
169:1022–1027.
228. Koechlin C, Couillard A, Cristol JP, Chanez P, Hayot M, Le Gallais
D, Pr ´efaut C. Does systemic inﬂammation trigger local exercise-
induced oxidative stress in COPD? Eur Respir J 2004;23:
538–544.
229. Koechlin C, Maltais F, Saey D, Michaud A, LeBlanc P, Hayot M,
Pr ´efaut C. Hypoxaemia enhances peripheral muscle oxidative
stress in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax 2005;60:
834–841.
230. Marin-Corral J, Minguella J, Ram´ırez-Sarmiento AL, Hussain SN, Gea
J, Barreiro E. Oxidised proteins and superoxide anion production in
the diaphragm of severe COPD patients. Eur Respir J 2009;33:
1309–1319.
231. Rabinovich RA, Ardite E, Troosters T, Carb ´o N, Alonso J, Gonzalez de
Suso JM, Vilar ´o J, Barber `a JA, Polo MF, Argil ´es JM, et al. Reduced
muscle redox capacity after endurance training in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2001;164:1114–1118.
232. Van Helvoort HA, Heijdra YF, Thijs HM, Viña J, Wanten GJ, Dekhuijzen
PN. Exercise-induced systemic effects in muscle-wasted patients
with COPD. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2006;38:1543–1552.
233. Barreiro E, Peinado VI, Galdiz JB, Ferrer E, Marin-Corral J, S ´anchez F,
Gea J, Barber `a JA; ENIGMA in COPD Project. Cigarette smoke-
induced oxidative stress: A role in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease skeletal muscle dysfunction. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2010;182:477–488.
234. Barreiro E, del Puerto-Nevado L, Puig-Vilanova E, P ´erez-Rial S,
S ´anchez F, Mart´ınez-Gal ´an L, Rivera S, Gea J, Gonz ´alez-
Mangado N, Peces-Barba G. Cigarette smoke-induced oxidative
stress in skeletal muscles of mice. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2012;
182:9–17.
235. Puente-Maestu L, Tena T, Trascasa C, P´erez-Parra J, Godoy R, Garc´ıa
MJ, Stringer WW. Training improves muscle oxidative capacity and
oxygenation recovery kinetics in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Eur J Appl Physiol 2003;88:580–587.
236. Barreiro E, Ferrer D, Sanchez F, Minguella J, Marin-Corral J, Martinez-
Llorens J, Lloreta J, Gea J. Inﬂammatory cells and apoptosis in
respiratory and limb muscles of patients with COPD. J Appl Physiol
(1985) 2011;111:808–817.
237. Clark CJ, Cochrane LM, Mackay E, Paton B. Skeletal muscle strength
and endurance in patients with mild COPD and the effects of weight
training. Eur Respir J 2000;15:92–97.
238. Gosselink R, Troosters T, Decramer M. Distribution of muscle
weakness in patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. J Cardiopulm Rehabil 2000;20:353–360.
239. Debigar ´e R, C ˆote CH, Hould FS, LeBlanc P, Maltais F. In vitro and
in vivo contractile properties of the vastus lateralis muscle in males
with COPD. Eur Respir J 2003;21:273–278.
240. Mador MJ, Bozkanat E, Kufel TJ. Quadriceps fatigue after cycle
exercise in patients with COPD compared with healthy control
subjects. Chest 2003;123:1104–1111.
241. Spruit MA, Gosselink R, Troosters T, Kasran A, Gayan-Ramirez G,
Bogaerts P, Bouillon R, Decramer M. Muscle force during
an acute exacerbation in hospitalised patients with COPD and
its relationship with CXCL8 and IGF-I. Thorax 2003;58:
752–756.
242. Allaire J, Maltais F, Doyon JF, No ¨el M, LeBlanc P, Carrier G, Simard
C, Jobin J. Peripheral muscle endurance and the oxidative proﬁle
of the quadriceps in patients with COPD. Thorax 2004;59:
673–678.
243. Coronell C, Orozco-Levi M, M ´endez R, Ram´ırez-Sarmiento A, G ´aldiz
JB, Gea J. Relevance of assessing quadriceps endurance in
patients with COPD. Eur Respir J 2004;24:129–136.
244. Franssen FM, Broekhuizen R, Janssen PP, Wouters EF, Schols AM.
Limb muscle dysfunction in COPD: effects of muscle wasting and
exercise training. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2005;37:2–9.
245. Man WD, Hopkinson NS, Harraf F, Nikoletou D, Polkey MI, Moxham J.
Abdominal muscle and quadriceps strength in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Thorax 2005;60:718–722.
246. Vivodtzev I, Flore P, L ´evy P, Wuyam B. Voluntary activation during
knee extensions in severely deconditioned patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: beneﬁt of endurance training.
Muscle Nerve 2008;37:27–35.
247. Seymour JM, Ward K, Sidhu PS, Puthucheary Z, Steier J, Jolley CJ,
Rafferty G, Polkey MI, Moxham J. Ultrasound measurement of
rectus femoris cross-sectional area and the relationship with
quadriceps strength in COPD. Thorax 2009;64:418–423.
248. Seymour JM, Spruit MA, Hopkinson NS, Natanek SA, Man WD,
Jackson A, Gosker HR, Schols AM, Moxham J, Polkey MI, et al. The
prevalence of quadriceps weakness in COPD and the relationship
with disease severity. Eur Respir J 2010;36:81–88.
249. Man WD, Soliman MG, Nikoletou D, Harris ML, Rafferty GF, Mustfa N,
Polkey MI, Moxham J. Non-volitional assessment of skeletal
muscle strength in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Thorax 2003;58:665–669.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e51

----- Page 39 (native) -----
250. Man WD, Soliman MG, Gearing J, Radford SG, Rafferty GF, Gray BJ,
Polkey MI, Moxham J. Symptoms and quadriceps fatigability after
walking and cycling in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003;168:562–567.
251. Decramer M, Lacquet LM, Fagard R, Rogiers P. Corticosteroids
contribute to muscle weakness in chronic airﬂow obstruction.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1994;150:11–16.
252. Hopkinson NS, Man WD, Dayer MJ, Ross ET, Nickol AH, Hart N,
Moxham J, Polkey MI. Acute effect of oral steroids on muscle
function in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur Respir J
2004;24:137–142.
253. Heijdra YF, Pinto-Plata V, Frants R, Rassulo J, Kenney L, Celli BR.
Muscle strength and exercise kinetics in COPD patients with
a normal fat-free mass index are comparable to control subjects.
Chest 2003;124:75–82.
254. Couillard A, Koechlin C, Cristol JP, Varray A, Pr ´efaut C. Evidence of
local exercise-induced systemic oxidative stress in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease patients. Eur Respir J 2002;20:
1123–1129.
255. Janaudis-Ferreira T, Wadell K, Sundelin G, Lindstr ¨om B. Thigh muscle
strength and endurance in patients with COPD compared with
healthy controls. Respir Med 2006;100:1451–1457.
256. Serres I, Gautier V, Varray A, Pr ´efaut C. Impaired skeletal muscle
endurance related to physical inactivity and altered lung function in
COPD patients. Chest 1998;113:900–905.
257. Van’t Hul A, Harlaar J, Gosselink R, Hollander P, Postmus P, Kwakkel
G. Quadriceps muscle endurance in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Muscle Nerve 2004;29:267–274.
258. Swallow EB, Gosker HR, Ward KA, Moore AJ, Dayer MJ, Hopkinson
NS, Schols AM, Moxham J, Polkey MI. A novel technique for
nonvolitional assessment of quadriceps muscle endurance in
humans. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2007;103:739–746.
259. Gouzi F, Pr ´efaut C, Abdellaoui A, Vuillemin A, Molinari N, Ninot G,
Caris G, Hayot M. Evidence of an early physical activity reduction in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients. Arch Phys Med
Rehabil 2011;92:1611–1617, e2.
260. van den Borst B, Slot IG, Hellwig VA, Vosse BA, Kelders MC, Barreiro
E, Schols AM, Gosker HR. Loss of quadriceps muscle oxidative
phenotype and decreased endurance in patients with mild-to-
moderate COPD. J Appl Physiol 2013;114:1319–1328.
261. Newell SZ, McKenzie DK, Gandevia SC. Inspiratory and skeletal
muscle strength and endurance and diaphragmatic activation in
patients with chronic airﬂow limitation. Thorax 1989;44:
903–912.
262. Zattara-Hartmann MC, Badier M, Guillot C, Tomei C, Jammes Y.
Maximal force and endurance to fatigue of respiratory and skeletal
muscles in chronic hypoxemic patients: the effects of oxygen
breathing. Muscle Nerve 1995;18:495–502.
263. Killian KJ, Leblanc P, Martin DH, Summers E, Jones NL, Campbell EJ.
Exercise capacity and ventilatory, circulatory, and symptom
limitation in patients with chronic airﬂow limitation. Am Rev Respir
Dis 1992;146:935–940.
264. Butcher SJ, Lagerquist O, Marciniuk DD, Petersen SR, Collins DF,
Jones RL. Relationship between ventilatory constraint and muscle
fatigue during exercise in COPD. Eur Respir J 2009;33:763–770.
265. Mador MJ, Kufel TJ, Pineda LA, Steinwald A, Aggarwal A, Upadhyay
AM, Khan MA. Effect of pulmonary rehabilitation on quadriceps
fatiguability during exercise. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001;163:
930–935.
266. Saey D, Debigar ´e R, LeBlanc P, Mador MJ, C ˆot ´e CH, Jobin J, Maltais
F. Contractile leg fatigue after cycle exercise: a factor limiting
exercise in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003;168:425–430.
267. Amann M, Regan MS, Kobitary M, Eldridge MW, Boutellier U, Pegelow
DF, Dempsey JA. Impact of pulmonary system limitations on
locomotor muscle fatigue in patients with COPD. Am J Physiol
Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2010;299:R314–R324.
268. Polkey MI, Kyroussis D, Hamnegard CH, Mills GH, Green M, Moxham
J. Quadriceps strength and fatigue assessed by magnetic
stimulation of the femoral nerve in man. Muscle Nerve 1996;19:
549–555.
269. Saey D, C ˆot ´e CH, Mador MJ, Laviolette L, LeBlanc P, Jobin J, Maltais
F. Assessment of muscle fatigue during exercise in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Muscle Nerve 2006;34:62–71.
270. Pepin V, Saey D, Whittom F, LeBlanc P, Maltais F. Walking versus
cycling: sensitivity to bronchodilation in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005;172:1517–1522.
271. Marquis N, Debigar ´e R, Bouyer L, Saey D, Laviolette L, Brouillard C,
Maltais F. Physiology of walking in patients with moderate to severe
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2009;41:1540–1548.
272. Gagnon P, Maltais F, Bouyer L, Ribeiro F, Coats V, Brouillard C, No ¨el
M, Rousseau-Gagnon M, Saey D. Distal leg muscle function in
patients with COPD. COPD 2013;10:235–242.
273. Pitta F, Troosters T, Probst VS, Spruit MA, Decramer M, Gosselink R.
Physical activity and hospitalization for exacerbation of COPD.
Chest 2006;129:536–544.
274. Crul T, Spruit MA, Gayan-Ramirez G, Quarck R, Gosselink R,
Troosters T, Pitta F, Decramer M. Markers of inﬂammation and
disuse in vastus lateralis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
patients. Eur J Clin Invest 2007;37:897–904.
275. Vilar ´o J, Ramirez-Sarmiento A, Mart´ınez-Llorens JM, Mendoza T,
Alvarez M, S ´anchez-Cayado N, Vega A, Gimeno E, Coronell C,
Gea J, et al. Global muscle dysfunction as a risk factor of
readmission to hospital due to COPD exacerbations. Respir Med
2010;104:1896–1902.
276. Crul T, Testelmans D, Spruit MA, Troosters T, Gosselink R, Geeraerts
I, Decramer M, Gayan-Ramirez G. Gene expression proﬁling in
vastus lateralis muscle during an acute exacerbation of COPD.
Cell Physiol Biochem 2010;25:491–500.
277. Vermeeren MA, Schols AM, Wouters EF. Effects of an acute
exacerbation on nutritional and metabolic proﬁle of patients with
COPD. Eur Respir J 1997;10:2264–2269.
278. Vermeeren MA, Wouters EF, Geraerts-Keeris AJ, Schols AM.
Nutritional support in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease during hospitalization for an acute exacerbation;
a randomized controlled feasibility trial. Clin Nutr 2004;23:
1184–1192.
279. Donaldson GC, Wilkinson TM, Hurst JR, Perera WR, Wedzicha JA.
Exacerbations and time spent outdoors in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005;171:446–452.
280. Marquis K, Debigar ´e R, Lacasse Y, LeBlanc P, Jobin J, Carrier G,
Maltais F. Midthigh muscle cross-sectional area is a better
predictor of mortality than body mass index in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002;
166:809–813.
281. Schols AM, Wouters EF, Soeters PB, Westerterp KR. Body
composition by bioelectrical-impedance analysis compared with
deuterium dilution and skinfold anthropometry in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Clin Nutr 1991;53:
421–424.
282. Swallow EB, Reyes D, Hopkinson NS, Man WD, Porcher R, Cetti EJ,
Moore AJ, Moxham J, Polkey MI. Quadriceps strength predicts
mortality in patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Thorax 2007;62:115–120.
283. Jones NL, Killian KJ. Limitation of exercise in chronic airway
obstruction. In: Cherniack NS, editor. Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders; 1991. pp.
196–206.
284. Gosselink R, Troosters T, Decramer M. Peripheral muscle weakness
contributes to exercise limitation in COPD. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1996;153:976–980.
285. Hamilton AL, Killian KJ, Summers E, Jones NL. Muscle strength,
symptom intensity, and exercise capacity in patients with
cardiorespiratory disorders. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;152:
2021–2031.
286. Williams TJ, Patterson GA, McClean PA, Zamel N, Maurer JR.
Maximal exercise testing in single and double lung transplant
recipients. Am Rev Respir Dis 1992;145:101–105.
287. Desch ˆenes D, Pepin V, Saey D, LeBlanc P, Maltais F. Locus of
symptom limitation and exercise response to bronchodilation in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev
2008;28:208–214.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e52
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 40 (native) -----
288. Casaburi R, Patessio A, Ioli F, Zanaboni S, Donner CF, Wasserman K.
Reductions in exercise lactic acidosis and ventilation as a result
of exercise training in patients with obstructive lung disease. Am
Rev Respir Dis 1991;143:9–18.
289. Maltais F, Bernard S, Jobin J, Belleau R, LeBlanc P. Lactate kinetics
during exercise in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Can
Respir J 1997;4:251–257.
290. Maltais F, Jobin J, Sullivan MJ, Bernard S, Whittom F, Killian KJ,
Desmeules M, B ´elanger M, LeBlanc P. Metabolic and
hemodynamic responses of lower limb during exercise in patients
with COPD. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1998;84:1573–1580.
291. Steiner MC, Evans R, Deacon SJ, Singh SJ, Patel P, Fox J, Greenhaff
PL, Morgan MD. Adenine nucleotide loss in the skeletal muscles
during exercise in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax
2005;60:932–936.
292. Calvert LD, Singh SJ, Greenhaff PL, Morgan MD, Steiner MC. The
plasma ammonia response to cycle exercise in COPD. Eur Respir J
2008;31:751–758.
293. Calvert LD, Shelley R, Singh SJ, Greenhaff PL, Bankart J, Morgan MD,
Steiner MC. Dichloroacetate enhances performance and reduces
blood lactate during maximal cycle exercise in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2008;177:
1090–1094.
294. Amann M, Proctor LT, Sebranek JJ, Pegelow DF, Dempsey JA.
Opioid-mediated muscle afferents inhibit central motor drive and
limit peripheral muscle fatigue development in humans. J Physiol
2009;587:271–283.
295. Gagnon P, Bussi `eres JS, Ribeiro F, Gagnon SL, Saey D, Gagn ´e N,
Provencher S, Maltais F. Inﬂuences of spinal anesthesia on exercise
tolerance in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2012;186:606–615.
296. Amann M, Proctor LT, Sebranek JJ, Eldridge MW, Pegelow DF,
Dempsey JA. Somatosensory feedback from the limbs exerts
inhibitory inﬂuences on central neural drive during whole body
endurance exercise. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2008;105:1714–1724.
297. Noakes TD, St Clair Gibson A, Lambert EV. From catastrophe to
complexity: a novel model of integrative central neural regulation of
effort and fatigue during exercise in humans: summary and
conclusions. Br J Sports Med 2005;39:120–124.
298. Gagnon P, Saey D, Vivodtzev I, Laviolette L, Mainguy V, Milot J,
Provencher S, Maltais F. Impact of preinduced quadriceps
fatigue on exercise response in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease and healthy subjects. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2009;107:
832–840.
299. Burtin C, Saey D, Saglam M, Langer D, Gosselink R, Janssens W,
Decramer M, Maltais F, Troosters T. Effectiveness of exercise
training in patients with COPD: the role of muscle fatigue. Eur
Respir J 2012;40:338–344.
300. Mostert R, Goris A, Weling-Scheepers C, Wouters EF, Schols AM.
Tissue depletion and health related quality of life in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Respir Med 2000;94:
859–867.
301. Decramer M, Gosselink R, Troosters T, Verschueren M, Evers G.
Muscle weakness is related to utilization of health care resources in
COPD patients. Eur Respir J 1997;10:417–423.
302. Bossenbroek L, de Greef MH, Wempe JB, Krijnen WP, Ten Hacken
NH. Daily physical activity in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: a systematic review. COPD 2011;8:
306–319.
303. Booth FW, Gollnick PD. Effects of disuse on the structure and function
of skeletal muscle. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1983;15:415–420.
304. Larsson L, Ansved T. Effects of long-term physical training and
detraining on enzyme histochemical and functional skeletal muscle
characteristic in man. Muscle Nerve 1985;8:714–722.
305. Coyle EF, Martin WH III, Bloomﬁeld SA, Lowry OH, Holloszy JO.
Effects of detraining on responses to submaximal exercise. J Appl
Physiol (1985) 1985;59:853–859.
306. Casaburi R. Deconditioning. In: Fishman AP, editor. Pulmonary
rehabilitation. New York: Marcel Dekker; 1996. pp. 213–230.
307. Polkey MI, Moxham J. Attacking the disease spiral in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Clin Med 2006;6:190–196.
308. Couillard A, Pr ´efaut C. From muscle disuse to myopathy in COPD:
potential contribution of oxidative stress. Eur Respir J 2005;26:
703–719.
309. Polkey MI, Rabe KF. Chicken or egg: physical activity in COPD
revisited. Eur Respir J 2009;33:227–229.
310. Polkey MI, Moxham J. Attacking the disease spiral in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: an update. Clin Med 2011;11:
461–464.
311. Wagner PD. Skeletal muscles in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: deconditioning, or myopathy? Respirology 2006;11:
681–686.
312. Brønstad E, Rognmo O, Tjonna AE, Dedichen HH, Kirkeby-Garstad I,
H ˚aberg AK, Bjørk Ingul C, Wisløff U, Steinshamn S. High-intensity
knee extensor training restores skeletal muscle function in COPD
patients. Eur Respir J 2012;40:1130–1136.
313. Man WD, Kemp P, Moxham J, Polkey MI. Exercise and muscle
dysfunction in COPD: implications for pulmonary rehabilitation. Clin
Sci (Lond) 2009;117:281–291.
314. Troosters T, Gosselink R, Decramer M. Short- and long-term effects
of outpatient rehabilitation in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: a randomized trial. Am J Med 2000;109:
207–212.
315. Gosker HR, Schrauwen P, Broekhuizen R, Hesselink MK,
Moonen-Kornips E, Ward KA, Franssen FM, Wouters EF,
Schols AM. Exercise training restores uncoupling protein-3
content in limb muscles of patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2006;290:
E976–E981.
316. Lewis MI, Fournier M, Storer TW, Bhasin S, Porszasz J, Ren SG, Da X,
Casaburi R. Skeletal muscle adaptations to testosterone and
resistance training in men with COPD. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2007;
103:1299–1310.
317. Howald H, Hoppeler H, Claassen H, Mathieu O, Straub R. Inﬂuences
of endurance training on the ultrastructural composition of the
different muscle ﬁber types in humans. Pﬂugers Arch 1985;403:
369–376.
318. Russell AP, Feilchenfeldt J, Schreiber S, Praz M, Crettenand A,
Gobelet C, Meier CA, Bell DR, Kralli A, Giacobino JP, et al.
Endurance training in humans leads to ﬁber type-speciﬁc increases
in levels of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
coactivator-1 and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha
in skeletal muscle. Diabetes 2003;52:2874–2881.
319. Simoneau JA, Lortie G, Boulay MR, Marcotte M, Thibault MC,
Bouchard C. Human skeletal muscle ﬁber type alteration with high-
intensity intermittent training. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol
1985;54:250–253.
320. Middlekauff HR. Making the case for skeletal myopathy as the major
limitation of exercise capacity in heart failure. Circ Heart Fail 2010;3:
537–546.
321. Rehn TA, Munkvik M, Lunde PK, Sjaastad I, Sejersted OM. Intrinsic
skeletal muscle alterations in chronic heart failure patients:
a disease-speciﬁc myopathy or a result of deconditioning? Heart
Fail Rev 2012;17:421–436.
322. Sp ¨ate U, Schulze PC. Proinﬂammatory cytokines and skeletal muscle.
Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2004;7:265–269.
323. Siu PM. Muscle apoptotic response to denervation, disuse, and aging.
Med Sci Sports Exerc 2009;41:1876–1886.
324. Harris J. Autophagy and cytokines. Cytokine 2011;56:140–144.
325. Doucet M, Russell AP, L ´eger B, Debigar ´e R, Joanisse DR, Caron MA,
LeBlanc P, Maltais F. Muscle atrophy and hypertrophy signaling in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 2007;176:261–269.
326. Koncarevic A, Jackman RW, Kandarian SC. The ubiquitin-protein
ligase Nedd4 targets Notch1 in skeletal muscle and distinguishes
the subset of atrophies caused by reduced muscle tension. FASEB
J 2007;21:427–437.
327. Vasyutina E, Lenhard DC, Birchmeier C. Notch function in
myogenesis. Cell Cycle 2007;6:1451–1454.
328. Hurst JR, Donaldson GC, Perera WR, Wilkinson TM, Bilello JA, Hagan
GW, Vessey RS, Wedzicha JA. Use of plasma biomarkers at
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2006;174:867–874.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e53

----- Page 41 (native) -----
329. Karadag F, Karul AB, Cildag O, Yilmaz M, Ozcan H. Biomarkers of
systemic inﬂammation in stable and exacerbation phases of COPD.
Lung 2008;186:403–409.
330. Takabatake N, Nakamura H, Abe S, Inoue S, Hino T, Saito H, Yuki H,
Kato S, Tomoike H. The relationship between chronic hypoxemia
and activation of the tumor necrosis factor-alpha system in patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2000;161:1179–1184.
331. Montes de Oca M, Torres SH, De Sanctis J, Mata A, Hern ´andez N,
T ´alamo C. Skeletal muscle inﬂammation and nitric oxide in patients
with COPD. Eur Respir J 2005;26:390–397.
332. Gosker HR, Kubat B, Schaart G, van der Vusse GJ, Wouters EF, Schols
AM. Myopathological features in skeletal muscle of patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur Respir J 2003;22:280–285.
333. Debigar ´e R, Maltais F, C ˆot ´e CH, Michaud A, Caron MA, Mofarrahi M,
Leblanc P, Hussain SN. Proﬁling of mRNA expression in quadriceps
of patients with COPD and muscle wasting. COPD 2008;5:75–84.
334. Rabinovich RA, Figueras M, Ardite E, Carb ´o N, Troosters T, Filella X,
Barber `a JA, Fernandez-Checa JC, Argil ´es JM, Roca J. Increased
tumour necrosis factor-alpha plasma levels during moderate-
intensity exercise in COPD patients. Eur Respir J 2003;21:789–794.
335. Agust´ı A, Morl ´a M, Sauleda J, Saus C, Busquets X. NF-kappaB
activation and iNOS upregulation in skeletal muscle of patients with
COPD and low body weight. Thorax 2004;59:483–487.
336. Moylan JS, Reid MB. Oxidative stress, chronic disease, and muscle
wasting. Muscle Nerve 2007;35:411–429.
337. Stanojkovic I, Kotur-Stevuljevic J, Milenkovic B, Spasic S, Vujic T,
Stefanovic A, Llic A, Ivanisevic J. Pulmonary function, oxidative
stress and inﬂammatory markers in severe COPD exacerbation.
Respir Med 2011;105:S31–S37.
338. Li YP, Chen Y, Li AS, Reid MB. Hydrogen peroxide stimulates
ubiquitin-conjugating activity and expression of genes for speciﬁc
E2 and E3 proteins in skeletal muscle myotubes. Am J Physiol Cell
Physiol 2003;285:C806–C812.
339. Li YP, Schwartz RJ, Waddell ID, Holloway BR, Reid MB. Skeletal
muscle myocytes undergo protein loss and reactive oxygen-
mediated NF-kappaB activation in response to tumor necrosis
factor alpha. FASEB J 1998;12:871–880.
340. Buck M, Chojkier M. Muscle wasting and dedifferentiation induced by
oxidative stress in a murine model of cachexia is prevented by
inhibitors of nitric oxide synthesis and antioxidants. EMBO J 1996;
15:1753–1765.
341. Furukawa-Hibi Y, Kobayashi Y, Chen C, Motoyama N. FOXO
transcription factors in cell-cycle regulation and the response to
oxidative stress. Antioxid Redox Signal 2005;7:752–760.
342. Lemire BB, Debigar´e R, Dub´e A, Th´eriault ME, C ˆot´e CH, Maltais F.
MAPK signaling in the quadriceps of patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2012;113:159–166.
343. Magalhães J, Ascensão A, Soares JM, Ferreira R, Neuparth MJ, Oliveira
J, Amado F, Marques F, Duarte JA. Acute and chronic exposition of
mice to severe hypoxia: the role of acclimatization against skeletal
muscle oxidative stress. Int J Sports Med 2005;26:102–109.
344. Hoppeler H, Kleinert E, Schlegel C, Claassen H, Howald H, Kayar SR,
Cerretelli P. Morphological adaptations of human skeletal muscle to
chronic hypoxia. Int J Sports Med 1990;11:S3–S9.
345. Yun Z, Lin Q, Giaccia AJ. Adaptive myogenesis under hypoxia. Mol
Cell Biol 2005;25:3040–3055.
346. Pitsiou G, Kyriazis G, Hatzizisi O, Argyropoulou P, Mavrofridis E,
Patakas D. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha serum levels, weight loss
and tissue oxygenation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Respir Med 2002;96:594–598.
347. Semenza GL. Regulation of oxygen homeostasis by hypoxia-inducible
factor 1. Physiology (Bethesda) 2009;24:97–106.
348. Jatta K, Eliason G, Portela-Gomes GM, Grimelius L, Caro O, Nilholm
L, Sirjs ¨o A, Piehl-Aulin K, Abdel-Halim SM. Overexpression of von
Hippel-Lindau protein in skeletal muscles of patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. J Clin Pathol 2009;62:70–76.
349. Favier FB, Costes F, Defour A, Bonnefoy R, Lefai E, Baug ´e S,
Peinnequin A, Benoit H, Freyssenet D. Downregulation of Akt/
mammalian target of rapamycin pathway in skeletal muscle is
associated with increased REDD1 expression in response to
chronic hypoxia. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2010;
298:R1659–R1666.
350. Caron MA, Th ´eriault ME, Par ´e ME, Maltais F, Debigar ´e R. Hypoxia
alters contractile protein homeostasis in L6 myotubes. FEBS Lett
2009;583:1528–1534.
351. Wagner PD. The biology of oxygen. Eur Respir J 2008;31:887–890.
352. Vogiatzis I, Athanasopoulos D, Habazettl H, Aliverti A, Louvaris Z,
Cherouveim E, Wagner H, Roussos C, Wagner PD, Zakynthinos S.
Intercostal muscle blood ﬂow limitation during exercise in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2010;
182:1105–1113.
353. Puente-Maestu L, L ´azaro A, Tejedor A, Camaño S, Fuentes M, Cuervo
M, Navarro BO, Agust´ı A. Effects of exercise on mitochondrial DNA
content in skeletal muscle of patients with COPD. Thorax 2011;66:
121–127.
354. Chandel NS, McClintock DS, Feliciano CE, Wood TM, Melendez JA,
Rodriguez AM, Schumacker PT. Reactive oxygen species
generated at mitochondrial complex III stabilize hypoxia-inducible
factor-1alpha during hypoxia: a mechanism of O2 sensing. J Biol
Chem 2000;275:25130–25138.
355. Hare JM. Nitric oxide and excitation-contraction coupling. J Mol Cell
Cardiol 2003;35:719–729.
356. Singel DJ, Stamler JS. Blood trafﬁc control. Nature 2004;430:297.
357. Hare JM. Nitroso-redox balance in the cardiovascular system. N Engl
J Med 2004;351:2112–2114.
358. Gonzalez NC, Wood JG. Alveolar hypoxia-induced systemic
inﬂammation: what low PO(2) does and does not do. Adv Exp Med
Biol 2010;662:27–32.
359. de Theije C, Costes F, Langen RC, Pison C, Gosker HR. Hypoxia and
muscle maintenance regulation: implications for chronic respiratory
disease. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2011;14:548–553.
360. Payen JF, Wuyam B, Levy P, Reutenauer H, Stieglitz P, Paramelle B, Le
Bas JF. Muscular metabolism during oxygen supplementation in
patients with chronic hypoxemia. Am Rev Respir Dis 1993;147:592–598.
361. Wuyam B, Payen JF, Levy P, Bensa¨ıdane H, Reutenauer H, Le Bas JF,
Benabid AL. Metabolism and aerobic capacity of skeletal muscle
in chronic respiratory failure related to chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Eur Respir J 1992;5:157–162.
362. England BK, Chastain JL, Mitch WE. Abnormalities in protein
synthesis and degradation induced by extracellular pH in BC3H1
myocytes. Am J Physiol 1991;260:C277–C282.
363. Franch HA, Raissi S, Wang X, Zheng B, Bailey JL, Price SR. Acidosis
impairs insulin receptor substrate-1-associated phosphoinositide
3-kinase signaling in muscle cells: consequences on proteolysis.
Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 2004;287:F700–F706.
364. Stitt TN, Drujan D, Clarke BA, Panaro F, Timofeyva Y, Kline WO, Gonzalez
M, Yancopoulos GD, Glass DJ. The IGF-1/PI3K/Akt pathway prevents
expression of muscle atrophy-induced ubiquitin ligases by inhibiting
FOXO transcription factors. Mol Cell 2004;14:395–403.
365. Van Vliet M, Spruit MA, Verleden G, Kasran A, Van Herck E, Pitta F,
Bouillon R, Decramer M. Hypogonadism, quadriceps weakness,
and exercise intolerance in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005;172:1105–1111.
366. Kamischke A, Kemper DE, Castel MA, L ¨uthke M, Rolf C, Behre HM,
Magnussen H, Nieschlag E. Testosterone levels in men with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease with or without glucocorticoid
therapy. Eur Respir J 1998;11:41–45.
367. Karadag F, Ozcan H, Karul AB, Yilmaz M, Cildag O. Sex hormone
alterations and systemic inﬂammation in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Int J Clin Pract 2009;63:275–281.
368. Laghi F, Langbein WE, Antonescu-Turcu A, Jubran A, Bammert C,
Tobin MJ. Respiratory and skeletal muscles in hypogonadal men
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2005;171:598–605.
369. Debigar ´e R, Marquis K, C ˆot ´e CH, Tremblay RR, Michaud A, LeBlanc
P, Maltais F. Catabolic/anabolic balance and muscle wasting in
patients with COPD. Chest 2003;124:83–89.
370. Bhasin S, Cunningham GR, Hayes FJ, Matsumoto AM, Snyder PJ,
Swerdloff RS, Montori VM; Task Force, Endocrine Society.
Testosterone therapy in men with androgen deﬁciency syndromes:
an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2010;95:2536–2559.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e54
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 42 (native) -----
371. Velloso CP. Regulation of muscle mass by growth hormone and IGF-I.
Br J Pharmacol 2008;154:557–568.
372. Bhasin S, Storer TW, Berman N, Callegari C, Clevenger B, Phillips J,
Bunnell TJ, Tricker R, Shirazi A, Casaburi R. The effects of
supraphysiologic doses of testosterone on muscle size and
strength in normal men. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1–7.
373. Lee SJ. Regulation of muscle mass by myostatin. Annu Rev Cell Dev
Biol 2004;20:61–86.
374. Elliott B, Renshaw D, Getting S, Mackenzie R. The central role of
myostatin in skeletal muscle and whole body homeostasis. Acta
Physiol (Oxf) 2012;205:324–340.
375. Roth SM, Walsh S. Myostatin: a therapeutic target for skeletal muscle
wasting. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2004;7:259–263.
376. Man WD, Natanek SA, Riddoch-Contreras J, Lewis A, Marsh GS,
Kemp PR, Polkey MI. Quadriceps myostatin expression in COPD.
Eur Respir J 2010;36:686–688.
377. Hayot M, Rodriguez J, Vernus B, Carnac G, Jean E, Allen D, Goret L,
Obert P, Candau R, Bonnieu A. Myostatin up-regulation is
associated with the skeletal muscle response to hypoxic stimuli.
Mol Cell Endocrinol 2011;332:38–47.
378. Ju CR, Chen RC. Serum myostatin levels and skeletal muscle wasting
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Respir Med 2012;106:
102–108.
379. Troosters T, Probst VS, Crul T, Pitta F, Gayan-Ramirez G, Decramer
M, Gosselink R. Resistance training prevents deterioration in
quadriceps muscle function during acute exacerbations of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2010;
181:1072–1077.
380. Schols AM, Soeters PB, Mostert R, Saris WH, Wouters EF. Energy
balance in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am Rev Respir
Dis 1991;143:1248–1252.
381. Goris AH, Vermeeren MA, Wouters EF, Schols AM, Westerterp KR.
Energy balance in depleted ambulatory patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: the effect of physical activity and
oral nutritional supplementation. Br J Nutr 2003;89:725–731.
382. King DA, Cordova F, Scharf SM. Nutritional aspects of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Proc Am Thorac Soc 2008;5:
519–523.
383. Remels AH, Gosker HR, Langen RC, Schols AM. The mechanisms of
cachexia underlying muscle dysfunction in COPD. J Appl Physiol
2013;114:1253–1262.
384. Decramer M, de Bock V, Dom R. Functional and histologic picture of
steroid-induced myopathy in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1996;153:1958–1964.
385. Schakman O, Gilson H, Kalista S, Thissen JP. Mechanisms of muscle
atrophy induced by glucocorticoids. Horm Res 2009;72:36–41.
386. Hamilton B. Vitamin D and human skeletal muscle. Scand J Med Sci
Sports 2010;20:182–190.
387. Dirks-Naylor AJ, Lennon-Edwards S. The effects of vitamin D on
skeletal muscle function and cellular signaling. J Steroid Biochem
Mol Biol 2011;125:159–168.
388. Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Dietrich T, Orav EJ, Hu FB, Zhang Y, Karlson
EW, Dawson-Hughes B. Higher 25-hydroxyvitamin D
concentrations are associated with better lower-extremity
function in both active and inactive persons aged . or =60 y.
Am J Clin Nutr 2004;80:752–758.
389. Ceglia L. Vitamin D and its role in skeletal muscle. Curr Opin Clin Nutr
Metab Care 2009;12:628–633.
390. Menant JC, Close JC, Delbaere K, Sturnieks DL, Trollor J,
Sachdev PS, Brodaty H, Lord SR. Relationships between serum
vitamin D levels, neuromuscular and neuropsychological
function and falls in older men and women. Osteoporos Int
2012;23:981–989.
391. Wicherts IS, van Schoor NM, Boeke AJ, Visser M, Deeg DJ, Smit J,
Knol DL, Lips P. Vitamin D status predicts physical performance
and its decline in older persons. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007;92:
2058–2065.
392. Boland R. Role of vitamin D in skeletal muscle function. Endocr Rev
1986;7:434–448.
393. Yoshikawa S, Nakamura T, Tanabe H, Imamura T. Osteomalacic
myopathy. Endocrinol Jpn 1979;26:65–72.
394. Sørensen OH, Lund B, Saltin B, Lund B, Andersen RB, Hjorth L,
Melsen F, Mosekilde L. Myopathy in bone loss of ageing:
improvement by treatment with 1 alpha-hydroxycholecalciferol and
calcium. Clin Sci (Lond) 1979;56:157–161.
395. Sato Y, Iwamoto J, Kanoko T, Satoh K. Low-dose vitamin D prevents
muscular atrophy and reduces falls and hip fractures in women after
stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Cerebrovasc Dis 2005;20:
187–192.
396. Boland R, de Boland AR, Ritz E, Hasselbach W. Effect of 1,25-
dihydroxycholecalciferol on sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium
transport in strontium-fed chicks. Calcif Tissue Int 1983;35:
190–194.
397. Boland R, de Boland AR, Marinissen MJ, Santillan G, Vazquez G,
Zanello S. Avian muscle cells as targets for the secosteroid
hormone 1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D3. Mol Cell Endocrinol 1995;
114:1–8.
398. Drittanti L, de Boland AR, Boland R. Stimulation of calmodulin
synthesis in proliferating myoblasts by 1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D3.
Mol Cell Endocrinol 1990;74:143–153.
399. Pointon JJ, Francis MJ, Smith R. Effect of vitamin D deﬁciency on
sarcoplasmic reticulum function and troponin C concentration of
rabbit skeletal muscle. Clin Sci (Lond) 1979;57:257–263.
400. Janssens W, Lehouck A, Carremans C, Bouillon R, Mathieu C,
Decramer M. Vitamin D beyond bones in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: time to act. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2009;
179:630–636.
401. Vogelmeier CF, Wouters EF. Treating the systemic effects of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Proc Am Thorac Soc 2011;8:
376–379.
402. Janssens W, Bouillon R, Claes B, Carremans C, Lehouck A,
Buysschaert I, Coolen J, Mathieu C, Decramer M, Lambrechts D.
Vitamin D deﬁciency is highly prevalent in COPD and correlates
with variants in the vitamin D-binding gene. Thorax 2010;65:
215–220.
403. Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Orav EJ, Dawson-Hughes B. Effect of
cholecalciferol plus calcium on falling in ambulatory older men and
women: a 3-year randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 2006;
166:424–430.
404. Jackson AS, Shrikrishna D, Kelly JL, Hart N, Moxham J, Polkey MI,
Kemp P, Hopkinson NS. Vitamin D and skeletal muscle strength
and endurance in COPD. Eur Respir J 2013;41:309–316.
405. Hopkinson NS, Li KW, Kehoe A, Humphries SE, Roughton M,
Moxham J, Montgomery H, Polkey MI. Vitamin D receptor
genotypes inﬂuence quadriceps strength in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Clin Nutr 2008;87:385–390.
406. Shrikrishna D, Astin R, Kemp PR, Hopkinson NS. Renin-angiotensin
system blockade: a novel therapeutic approach in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Clin Sci (Lond) 2012;123:487–498.
407. Song YH, Li Y, Du J, Mitch WE, Rosenthal N, Delafontaine P. Muscle-
speciﬁc expression of IGF-1 blocks angiotensin II-induced skeletal
muscle wasting. J Clin Invest 2005;115:451–458.
408. Russell ST, Wyke SM, Tisdale MJ. Mechanism of induction of muscle
protein degradation by angiotensin II. Cell Signal 2006;18:1087–1096.
409. Cohn RD, van Erp C, Habashi JP, Soleimani AA, Klein EC, Lisi MT,
Gamradt M, ap Rhys CM, Holm TM, Loeys BL, et al. Angiotensin II
type 1 receptor blockade attenuates TGF-beta-induced failure of
muscle regeneration in multiple myopathic states. Nat Med 2007;
13:204–210.
410. Danser AH, Schalekamp MA, Bax WA, van den Brink AM, Saxena PR,
Riegger GA, Schunkert H. Angiotensin-converting enzyme in the
human heart. Effect of the deletion/insertion polymorphism.
Circulation 1995;92:1387–1388.
411. Williams AG, Rayson MP, Jubb M, World M, Woods DR, Hayward M,
Martin J, Humphries SE, Montgomery HE. The ACE gene and
muscle performance. Nature 2000;403:614.
412. Myerson S, Hemingway H, Budget R, Martin J, Humphries S,
Montgomery H. Human angiotensin I-converting enzyme gene and
endurance performance. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1999;87:1313–1316.
413. Zhang B, Tanaka H, Shono N, Miura S, Kiyonaga A, Shindo M, Saku
K. The I allele of the angiotensin-converting enzyme gene is
associated with an increased percentage of slow-twitch type I
ﬁbers in human skeletal muscle. Clin Genet 2003;63:139–144.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e55

----- Page 43 (native) -----
414. Hopkinson NS, Nickol AH, Payne J, Hawe E, Man WD, Moxham J,
Montgomery H, Polkey MI. Angiotensin converting enzyme
genotype and strength in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004;170:395–399.
415. Folland J, Leach B, Little T, Hawker K, Myerson S, Montgomery H,
Jones D. Angiotensin-converting enzyme genotype affects the
response of human skeletal muscle to functional overload. Exp
Physiol 2000;85:575–579.
416. De Paepe B, Brusselle GG, Maes T, Creus KK, D’hose S, D’Haese N,
Bracke KR, D’hulst AI, Joos GF, De Bleecker JL. TNF alpha
receptor genotype inﬂuences smoking-induced muscle-ﬁbre-type
shift and atrophy in mice. Acta Neuropathol 2008;115:675–681.
417. Gosker HR, Langen RC, Bracke KR, Joos GF, Brusselle GG, Steele C,
Ward KA, Wouters EF, Schols AM. Extrapulmonary manifestations
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in a mouse model of
chronic cigarette smoke exposure. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2009;
40:710–716.
418. Tang K, Wagner PD, Breen EC. TNF-alpha-mediated reduction in
PGC-1alpha may impair skeletal muscle function after cigarette
smoke exposure. J Cell Physiol 2010;222:320–327.
419. Rinaldi M, Maes K, De Vleeschauwer S, Thomas D, Verbeken EK,
Decramer M, Janssens W, Gayan-Ramirez GN. Long-term nose-only
cigarette smoke exposure induces emphysema and mild skeletal
muscle dysfunction in mice. Dis Model Mech 2012;5:333–341.
420. Montes de Oca M, Loeb E, Torres SH, De Sanctis J, Hern ´andez N,
T ´alamo C. Peripheral muscle alterations in non-COPD smokers.
Chest 2008;133:13–18.
421. Orlander J, Kiessling KH, Larsson L. Skeletal muscle metabolism,
morphology and function in sedentary smokers and nonsmokers.
Acta Physiol Scand 1979;107:39–46.
422. Larsson L, Orlander J. Skeletal muscle morphology, metabolism and
function in smokers and non-smokers. A study on smoking-
discordant monozygous twins. Acta Physiol Scand 1984;120:
343–352.
423. Saey D, Michaud A, Couillard A, C ˆot ´e CH, Mador MJ, LeBlanc P,
Jobin J, Maltais F. Contractile fatigue, muscle morphometry, and
blood lactate in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2005;171:1109–1115.
424. Amann M, Blain GM, Proctor LT, Sebranek JJ, Pegelow DF, Dempsey
JA. Implications of group III and IV muscle afferents for high-
intensity endurance exercise performance in humans. J Physiol
2011;589:5299–5309.
425. Dempsey JA, Sheel AW, St Croix CM, Morgan BJ. Respiratory
inﬂuences on sympathetic vasomotor outﬂow in humans. Respir
Physiol Neurobiol 2002;130:3–20.
426. Harms CA, Babcock MA, McClaran SR, Pegelow DF, Nickele GA,
Nelson WB, Dempsey JA. Respiratory muscle work compromises
leg blood ﬂow during maximal exercise. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1997;
82:1573–1583.
427. Romer LM, Lovering AT, Haverkamp HC, Pegelow DF, Dempsey JA.
Effect of inspiratory muscle work on peripheral fatigue of locomotor
muscles in healthy humans. J Physiol 2006;571:425–439.
428. Simon M, LeBlanc P, Jobin J, Desmeules M, Sullivan MJ, Maltais F.
Limitation of lower limb VO(2) during cycling exercise in COPD
patients. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2001;90:1013–1019.
429. Vogiatzis I, Habazettl H, Aliverti A, Athanasopoulos D, Louvaris Z,
LoMauro A, Wagner H, Roussos C, Wagner PD, Zakynthinos S.
Effect of helium breathing on intercostal and quadriceps muscle
blood ﬂow during exercise in COPD patients. Am J Physiol Regul
Integr Comp Physiol 2011;300:R1549–R1559.
430. Hopkinson NS, Dayer MJ, Antoine-Jonville S, Swallow EB, Porcher R,
Vazir A, Poole-Wilson P, Polkey MI. Central and peripheral
quadriceps fatigue in congestive heart failure. Int J Cardiol 2013;
167:2594–2599.
431. Barr RG, Bluemke DA, Ahmed FS, Carr JJ, Enright PL, Hoffman EA,
Jiang R, Kawut SM, Kronmal RA, Lima JA, et al. Percent
emphysema, airﬂow obstruction, and impaired left ventricular ﬁlling.
N Engl J Med 2010;362:217–227.
432. Holverda S, Rietema H, Westerhof N, Marcus JT, Gan CT, Postmus
PE, Vonk-Noordegraaf A. Stroke volume increase to exercise in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is limited by increased
pulmonary artery pressure. Heart 2009;95:137–141.
433. Hilde JM, Skjørten I, Hansteen V, Melsom MN, Hisdal J, Humerfelt S,
Steine K. Haemodynamic responses to exercise in patients with
COPD. Eur Respir J 2013;41:1031–1041.
434. Vogiatzis I, Simoes DC, Stratakos G, Kourepini E, Terzis G, Manta P,
Athanasopoulos D, Roussos C, Wagner PD, Zakynthinos S. Effect
of pulmonary rehabilitation on muscle remodelling in cachectic
patients with COPD. Eur Respir J 2010;36:301–310.
435. Sahlin K. Muscle fatigue and lactic acid accumulation. Acta Physiol
Scand Suppl 1986;556:83–91.
436. Sahlin K. Metabolic factors in fatigue. Sports Med 1992;13:99–107.
437. Sahlin K, Tonkonogi M, S ¨oderlund K. Energy supply and muscle
fatigue in humans. Acta Physiol Scand 1998;162:261–266.
438. Sahlin K, S ¨oderlund K, Tonkonogi M, Hirakoba K. Phosphocreatine
content in single ﬁbers of human muscle after sustained
submaximal exercise. Am J Physiol 1997;273:C172–C178.
439. Mainwood GW, Renaud JM. The effect of acid-base balance on
fatigue of skeletal muscle. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 1985;63:
403–416.
440. Fitts RH. Cellular mechanisms of muscle fatigue. Physiol Rev 1994;74:
49–94.
441. Wilcox PG, Hards JM, Bockhold K, Bressler B, Pardy RL. Pathologic
changes and contractile properties of the diaphragm in
corticosteroid myopathy in hamsters: comparison to peripheral
muscle. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 1989;1:191–199.
442. Tracey KJ, Lowry SF, Beutler B, Cerami A, Albert JD, Shires GT.
Cachectin/tumor necrosis factor mediates changes of skeletal muscle
plasma membrane potential. J Exp Med 1986;164:1368–1373.
443. Kutsuzawa T, Shioya S, Kurita D, Haida M, Ohta Y, Yamabayashi H.
31P-NMR study of skeletal muscle metabolism in patients with
chronic respiratory impairment. Am Rev Respir Dis 1992;146:
1019–1024.
444. Jakobsson P, Jorfeldt L, Brundin A. Skeletal muscle metabolites and
ﬁbre types in patients with advanced chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), with and without chronic respiratory failure.
Eur Respir J 1990;3:192–196.
445. Hildebrand IL, Sylv ´en C, Esbj ¨ornsson M, Hellstr ¨om K, Jansson E.
Does chronic hypoxaemia induce transformations of ﬁbre types?
Acta Physiol Scand 1991;141:435–439.
446. Dekhuijzen PN, Aben KK, Dekker I, Aarts LP, Wielders PL, van
Herwaarden CL, Bast A. Increased exhalation of hydrogen peroxide
in patients with stable and unstable chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1996;154:813–816.
447. Steiner MC, Barton RL, Singh SJ, Morgan MD. Bedside methods
versus dual energy X-ray absorptiometry for body composition
measurement in COPD. Eur Respir J 2002;19:626–631.
448. Lukaski HC, Johnson PE, Bolonchuk WW, Lykken GI. Assessment of
fat-free mass using bioelectrical impedance measurements of the
human body. Am J Clin Nutr 1985;41:810–817.
449. Rutten EP, Spruit MA, Wouters EF. Critical view on diagnosing muscle
wasting by single-frequency bio-electrical impedance in COPD.
Respir Med 2010;104:91–98.
450. Engelen MP, Schols AM, Heidendal GA, Wouters EF. Dual-energy
X-ray absorptiometry in the clinical evaluation of body composition
and bone mineral density in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Clin Nutr 1998;68:1298–1303.
451. Lerario MC, Sachs A, Lazaretti-Castro M, Saraiva LG, Jardim JR. Body
composition in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
which method to use in clinical practice? Br J Nutr 2006;96:86–92.
452. Mathur S, Takai KP, Macintyre DL, Reid D. Estimation of thigh muscle
mass with magnetic resonance imaging in older adults and people
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Phys Ther 2008;88:
219–230.
453. HajGhanbari B, Hamarneh G, Changizi N, Ward AD, Reid WD. MRI-
based 3D shape analysis of thigh muscles patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease versus healthy adults. Acad Radiol
2011;18:155–166.
454. Coggan AR. Muscle biopsy as a tool in the study of aging. J Gerontol
A Biol Sci Med Sci 1995;50:30–34.
455. Bergstr ¨om J. Muscle electrolytes in man. Determination by neutron
activation analysis on needle biopsy specimens. A study on normal
subjects, kidney patients and patients with chronic diarrhoea.
Scand J Clin Lab Invest 1962;14:110.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e56
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 44 (native) -----
456. Bergstr ¨om J. Percutaneous needle biopsy of skeletal muscle in
physiological and clinical research. Scand J Clin Lab Invest 1975;
35:609–616.
457. Tarnopolsky MA, Pearce E, Smith K, Lach B. Suction-modiﬁed
Bergstr ¨om muscle biopsy technique: experience with 13,500
procedures. Muscle Nerve 2011;43:717–725.
458. Hayot M, Michaud A, Koechlin C, Caron MA, LeBlanc P, Pr ´efaut C,
Maltais F. Skeletal muscle microbiopsy: a validation study of
a minimally invasive technique. Eur Respir J 2005;25:431–440.
459. van Wetering CR, van Nooten FE, Mol SJ, Hoogendoorn M, Rutten-
Van M ¨olken MP, Schols AM. Systemic impairment in relation to
disease burden in patients with moderate COPD eligible for
a lifestyle program. Findings from the INTERCOM trial. Int J Chron
Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2008;3:443–451.
460. Kelly JL, Elkin SL, Fluxman J, Polkey MI, Soljak MA, Hopkinson NS.
Breathlessness and skeletal muscle weakness in patients undergoing
lung health screening in primary care. COPD 2013;10:40–54.
461. Robles PG, Mathur S, Janaudis-Fereira T, Dolmage TE, Goldstein RS,
Brooks D. Measurement of peripheral muscle strength in individuals
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic review.
J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev 2011;31:11–24.
462. Zanotti E, Felicetti G, Maini M, Fracchia C. Peripheral muscle strength
training in bed-bound patients with COPD receiving mechanical
ventilation: effect of electrical stimulation. Chest 2003;124:
292–296.
463. Hermans G, Clerckx B, Vanhullebusch T, Segers J, Vanpee G,
Robbeets C, Casaer MP, Wouters P, Gosselink R, Van Den Berghe
G. Interobserver agreement of Medical Research Council sum-
score and handgrip strength in the intensive care unit. Muscle
Nerve 2012;45:18–25.
464. Stone CA, Nolan B, Lawlor PG, Kenny RA. Hand-held dynamometry:
tester strength is paramount, even in frail populations. J Rehabil
Med 2011;43:808–811.
465. Kaelin ME, Swank AM, Adams KJ, Barnard KL, Berning JM, Green A.
Cardiopulmonary responses, muscle soreness, and injury during
the one repetition maximum assessment in pulmonary rehabilitation
patients. J Cardiopulm Rehabil 1999;19:366–372.
466. Casaburi R, Bhasin S, Cosentino L, Porszasz J, Somfay A, Lewis MI,
Fournier M, Storer TW. Effects of testosterone and resistance
training in men with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2004;170:870–878.
467. Mador MJ, Bozkanat E, Aggarwal A, Shaffer M, Kufel TJ. Endurance
and strength training in patients with COPD. Chest 2004;125:
2036–2045.
468. Mathur S, Makrides L, Hernandez P. Test-retest reliability of isometric
and isokinetic torque in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Physiother Can 2004;56:94–101.
469. Mafﬁuletti NA, Bizzini M, Desbrosses K, Babault N, Munzinger U.
Reliability of knee extension and ﬂexion measurements using the
Con-Trex isokinetic dynamometer. Clin Physiol Funct Imaging
2007;27:346–353.
470. Malaguti C, Napolis LM, Villaça D, Neder JA, Nery LE, Dal Corso S.
Relationship between peripheral muscle structure and function in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with different
nutritional status. J Strength Cond Res 2011;25:1795–1803.
471. Beauchamp MK, Sibley KM, Lakhani B, Romano J, Mathur S,
Goldstein RS, Brooks D. Impairments in systems underlying control
of balance in COPD. Chest 2012;141:1496–1503.
472. Vieira L, Bottaro M, Celes R, Viegas CA, e Silva CA. Isokinetic muscle
evaluation of quadriceps in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Rev Port Pneumol 2010;16:717–736.
473. Degens H, Sanchez Horneros JM, Heijdra YF, Dekhuijzen PN,
Hopman MT. Skeletal muscle contractility is preserved in COPD
patients with normal fat-free mass. Acta Physiol Scand 2005;184:
235–242.
474. Ju CR, Chen RC. Quadriceps strength assessed by magnetic
stimulation of femoral nerve in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Chin Med J (Engl) 2011;124:2309–2315.
475. Kufel TJ, Pineda LA, Mador MJ. Comparison of potentiated and
unpotentiated twitches as an index of muscle fatigue. Muscle Nerve
2002;25:438–444.
476. Tomazin K, Verges S, Decorte N, Oulerich A, Millet GY. Effects of coil
characteristics for femoral nerve magnetic stimulation. Muscle
Nerve 2010;41:406–409.
477. Hamneg ˚ard CH, Sedler M, Polkey MI, Bake B. Quadriceps strength
assessed by magnetic stimulation of the femoral nerve in normal
subjects. Clin Physiol Funct Imaging 2004;24:276–280.
478. Hopkinson NS, Sharshar T, Ross ET, Nickol AH, Dayer MJ, Porcher R,
Jonville S, Moxham J, Polkey MI. Corticospinal control of
respiratory muscles in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2004;141:1–12.
479. Mohamed-Hussein AA, Hamed SA, Abdel-Hakim N. Cerebral cortical
dysfunction in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: role of
transcranial magnetic stimulation. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2007;11:
515–521.
480. Ottenheijm CA, Heunks LM, Sieck GC, Zhan WZ, Jansen SM, Degens
H, de Boo T, Dekhuijzen PN. Diaphragm dysfunction in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005;
172:200–205.
481. Troosters T, Gosselink R, Janssens W, Decramer M. Exercise training
and pulmonary rehabilitation: new insights and remaining
challenges. Eur Respir Rev 2010;19:24–29.
482. Vivodtzev I, Gagnon P, Pepin V, Saey D, Laviolette L, Brouillard C,
Maltais F. Physiological correlates of endurance time variability
during constant-workrate cycling exercise in patients with COPD.
PLoS ONE 2011;6:e17007.
483. Mador MJ, Deniz O, Aggarwal A, Kufel TJ. Quadriceps fatigability after
single muscle exercise in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003;168:102–108.
484. Saey D, Troosters T. Measuring skeletal muscle strength and
endurance, from bench to bedside. Clin Invest Med 2008;31:
E307–E311.
485. Cifrek M, Medved V, Tonkovi ´c S, Ostoji ´c S. Surface EMG based
muscle fatigue evaluation in biomechanics. Clin Biomech (Bristol,
Avon) 2009;24:327–340.
486. Rondelli RR, Dal Corso S, Simões A, Malaguti C. Methods for the
assessment of peripheral muscle fatigue and its energy and
metabolic determinants in COPD. J Bras Pneumol 2009;35:
1125–1135.
487. Malaguti C, Nery LE, Dal Corso S, N ´apolis L, De Fuccio MB, Castro
M, Neder JA. Scaling skeletal muscle function to mass in patients
with moderate-to-severe COPD. Eur J Appl Physiol 2006;98:
482–488.
488. Ramirez-Sarmiento A, Orozco-Levi M, Guell R, Barreiro E, Hernandez
N, Mota S, Sangenis M, Broquetas JM, Casan P, Gea J. Inspiratory
muscle training in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: structural adaptation and physiologic outcomes. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2002;166:1491–1497.
489. Boushel R, Langberg H, Olesen J, Gonzales-Alonzo J, B ¨ulow J, Kjaer
M. Monitoring tissue oxygen availability with near infrared
spectroscopy (NIRS) in health and disease. Scand J Med Sci Sports
2001;11:213–222.
490. Berton DC, Barbosa PB, Takara LS, Chiappa GR, Siqueira AC, Bravo
DM, Ferreira LF, Neder JA. Bronchodilators accelerate the
dynamics of muscle O2 delivery and utilisation during exercise in
COPD. Thorax 2010;65:588–593.
491. Borghi-Silva A, Oliveira CC, Carrascosa C, Maia J, Berton DC,
Queiroga F Jr, Ferreira EM, Almeida DR, Nery LE, Neder JA.
Respiratory muscle unloading improves leg muscle oxygenation
during exercise in patients with COPD. Thorax 2008;63:910–915.
492. Vogiatzis I, Athanasopoulos D, Stratakos G, Garagouni C,
Koutsoukou A, Boushel R, Roussos C, Zakynthinos S. Exercise-
induced skeletal muscle deoxygenation in O-supplemented COPD
patients. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2009;19:364–372.
493. Siqueira AC, Borghi-Silva A, Bravo DM, Ferreira EM, Chiappa GR,
Neder JA. Effects of hyperoxia on the dynamics of skeletal muscle
oxygenation at the onset of heavy-intensity exercise in patients with
COPD. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2010;172:8–14.
494. Louvaris Z, Zakynthinos S, Aliverti A, Habazettl H, Vasilopoulou M,
Andrianopoulos V, Wagner H, Wagner P, Vogiatzis I. Heliox
increases quadriceps muscle oxygen delivery during exercise in
COPD patients with and without dynamic hyperinﬂation. J Appl
Physiol (1985) 2012;113:1012–1023.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e57

----- Page 45 (native) -----
495. L ´evy P, Wuyam B, P ´epin JL, Reutenauer H, Payen JF. [Skeletal
muscle abnormalities in chronic obstructive lung disease with
respiratory insufﬁciency. Value of P31 magnetic resonance
spectroscopy]. Rev Mal Respir 1997;14:183–191.
496. Spruit MA, Gosselink R, Troosters T, De Paepe K, Decramer M.
Resistance versus endurance training in patients with COPD and
peripheral muscle weakness. Eur Respir J 2002;19:1072–1078.
497. Bernard S, Whittom F, Leblanc P, Jobin J, Belleau R, B ´erub ´e C,
Carrier G, Maltais F. Aerobic and strength training in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1999;159:896–901.
498. O’Donnell DE, McGuire M, Samis L, Webb KA. General exercise
training improves ventilatory and peripheral muscle strength and
endurance in chronic airﬂow limitation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1998;157:1489–1497.
499. Ortega F, Toral J, Cejudo P, Villagomez R, S ´anchez H, Castillo J,
Montemayor T. Comparison of effects of strength and endurance
training in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am
J Respir Crit Care Med 2002;166:669–674.
500. Troosters T, Casaburi R, Gosselink R, Decramer M. Pulmonary
rehabilitation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2005;172:19–38.
501. Beauchamp MK, Janaudis-Ferreira T, Goldstein RS, Brooks D.
Optimal duration of pulmonary rehabilitation for individuals with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease - a systematic review.
Chron Respir Dis 2011;8:129–140.
502. Beauchamp MK, Nonoyama M, Goldstein RS, Hill K, Dolmage TE,
Mathur S, Brooks D. Interval versus continuous training in
individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease–a
systematic review. Thorax 2010;65:157–164.
503. Dolmage TE, Goldstein RS. Response to one-legged cycling in
patients with COPD. Chest 2006;129:325–332.
504. Dolmage TE, Goldstein RS. Effects of one-legged exercise training of
patients with COPD. Chest 2008;133:370–376.
505. Vogiatzis I, Terzis G, Nanas S, Stratakos G, Simoes DC, Georgiadou O,
Zakynthinos S, Roussos C. Skeletal muscle adaptations to interval
training in patients with advanced COPD. Chest 2005;128:3838–3845.
506. Vogiatzis I, Stratakos G, Simoes DC, Terzis G, Georgiadou O,
Roussos C, Zakynthinos S. Effects of rehabilitative exercise on
peripheral muscle TNFalpha, IL-6, IGF-I and MyoD expression in
patients with COPD. Thorax 2007;62:950–956.
507. Maltais F, LeBlanc P, Simard C, Jobin J, B ´erub ´e C, Bruneau J, Carrier
L, Belleau R. Skeletal muscle adaptation to endurance training in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 1996;154:442–447.
508. Troosters T, Gosselink R, Decramer M. Exercise training in COPD:
how to distinguish responders from nonresponders. J Cardiopulm
Rehabil 2001;21:10–17.
509. Bouchard C, Sarzynski MA, Rice TK, Kraus WE, Church TS, Sung YJ,
Rao DC, Rankinen T. Genomic predictors of the maximal O2 uptake
response to standardized exercise training programs. J Appl
Physiol (1985) 2011;110:1160–1170.
510. Pitta F, Troosters T, Probst VS, Langer D, Decramer M, Gosselink R.
Are patients with COPD more active after pulmonary rehabilitation?
Chest 2008;134:273–280.
511. Radom-Aizik S, Kaminski N, Hayek S, Halkin H, Cooper DM,
Ben-Dov I. Effects of exercise training on quadriceps muscle gene
expression in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. J Appl
Physiol (1985) 2007;102:1976–1984.
512. Gouzi F, Pr ´efaut C, Abdellaoui A, Roudier E, de Rigal P, Molinari N,
Laoudj-Chenivesse D, Mercier J, Birot O, Hayot M. Blunted muscle
angiogenic training-response in COPD patients versus sedentary
controls. Eur Respir J 2013;41:806–814.
513. Constantin D, Menon MK, Houchen-Wolloff L, Morgan MD, Singh SJ,
Greenhaff P, Steiner MC. Skeletal muscle molecular responses to
resistance training and dietary supplementation in COPD. Thorax
2013;68:625–633.
514. Rabinovich RA, Ardite E, Mayer AM, Polo MF, Vilar ´o J, Argil ´es JM,
Roca J. Training depletes muscle glutathione in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and low body mass index.
Respiration 2006;73:757–761.
515. Mercken EM, Hageman GJ, Schols AM, Akkermans MA, Bast A,
Wouters EF. Rehabilitation decreases exercise-induced oxidative
stress in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 2005;172:994–1001.
516. Mercken EM, Hageman GJ, Langen RC, Wouters EF, Schols AM.
Decreased exercise-induced expression of nuclear factor-kB-
regulated genes in muscle of patients with COPD. Chest 2011;139:
337–346.
517. Pascual-Guardia S, Wodja E, Gorostiza A, Lopez de Santamaria E,
Gea J, G ´aldiz JB, Sliwinski P, Barreiro E. Improvement in quality of
life and exercise capacity without muscular biology changes after
general training in patients with severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease [in Spanish]. Med Clin (Barc) 2013;140:200–206.
518. Laviolette L, Lands LC, Dauletbaev N, Saey D, Milot J, Provencher S,
LeBlanc P, Maltais F. Combined effect of dietary supplementation
with pressurized whey and exercise training in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: a randomized, controlled, double-blind pilot
study. J Med Food 2010;13:589–598.
519. Williams MA, Haskell WL, Ades PA, Amsterdam EA, Bittner V, Franklin
BA, Gulanick M, Laing ST, Stewart KJ; American Heart Association
Council on Clinical Cardiology; American Heart Association Council
on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism. Resistance
exercise in individuals with and without cardiovascular disease:
2007 update: a scientiﬁc statement from the American Heart
Association Council on Clinical Cardiology and Council on
Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism. Circulation 2007;116:
572–584.
520. O’Shea SD, Taylor NF, Paratz JD. Progressive resistance exercise
improves muscle strength and may improve elements of
performance of daily activities for people with COPD: a systematic
review. Chest 2009;136:1269–1283.
521. Houchen L, Steiner MC, Singh SJ. How sustainable is strength
training in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? Physiotherapy
2009;95:1–7.
522. Burtin C, Decramer M, Gosselink R, Janssens W, Troosters T.
Rehabilitation and acute exacerbations. Eur Respir J 2011;38:
702–712.
523. Puhan MA, Spaar A, Frey M, Turk A, Br ¨andli O, Ritscher D,
Achermann E, Kaelin R, Karrer W. Early versus late pulmonary
rehabilitation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients
with acute exacerbations: a randomized trial. Respiration 2012;83:
499–506.
524. Puhan MA, Gimeno-Santos E, Scharplatz M, Troosters T, Walters EH,
Steurer J. Pulmonary rehabilitation following exacerbations of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2011;10:CD005305.
525. Murphy N, Bell C, Costello RW. Extending a home from hospital care
programme for COPD exacerbations to include pulmonary
rehabilitation. Respir Med 2005;99:1297–1302.
526. Seymour JM, Moore L, Jolley CJ, Ward K, Creasey J, Steier JS, Yung B,
Man WD, Hart N, Polkey MI, et al. Outpatient pulmonary rehabilitation
following acute exacerbations of COPD. Thorax 2010;65:423–428.
527. Vivodtzev I, Lacasse Y, Maltais F. Neuromuscular electrical
stimulation of the lower limbs in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev 2008;28:79–91.
528. Sillen MJ, Speksnijder CM, Eterman RM, Janssen PP, Wagers SS,
Wouters EF, Uszko-Lencer NH, Spruit MA. Effects of
neuromuscular electrical stimulation of muscles of ambulation in
patients with chronic heart failure or COPD: a systematic review of
the English-language literature. Chest 2009;136:44–61.
529. Neder JA, Sword D, Ward SA, Mackay E, Cochrane LM, Clark CJ.
Home based neuromuscular electrical stimulation as a new
rehabilitative strategy for severely disabled patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Thorax 2002;57:
333–337.
530. Abdellaoui A, Pr ´efaut C, Gouzi F, Couillard A, Coisy-Quivy M, Hugon
G, Molinari N, Lafontaine T, Jonquet O, Laoudj-Chenivesse D, et al.
Skeletal muscle effects of electrostimulation after COPD
exacerbation: a pilot study. Eur Respir J 2011;38:781–788.
531. Dal Corso S, N ´apolis L, Malaguti C, Gimenes AC, Albuquerque A,
Nogueira CR, De Fuccio MB, Pereira RD, Bulle A, McFarlane N,
et al. Skeletal muscle structure and function in response to
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e58
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 46 (native) -----
electrical stimulation in moderately impaired COPD patients. Respir
Med 2007;101:1236–1243.
532. Vivodtzev I, Debigar ´e R, Gagnon P, Mainguy V, Saey D, Dub ´e A, Par ´e
ME, B ´elanger M, Maltais F. Functional and muscular effects of
neuromuscular electrical stimulation in patients with severe COPD:
a randomized clinical trial. Chest 2012;141:716–725.
533. Kim V, Benditt JO, Wise RA, Sharafkhaneh A. Oxygen therapy in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Proc Am Thorac Soc 2008;
5:513–518.
534. Nocturnal Oxygen Therapy Trial Group. Continuous or nocturnal
oxygen therapy in hypoxemic chronic obstructive lung disease:
a clinical trial. Ann Intern Med 1980;93:391–398.
535. Report of the Medical Research Council Working Party. Long term
domiciliary oxygen therapy in chronic hypoxic cor pulmonale
complicating chronic bronchitis and emphysema. Lancet 1981;1:
681–686.
536. Semenza GL. Oxygen sensing, homeostasis, and disease. N Engl J
Med 2011;365:537–547.
537. Gertz I, Hedenstierna G, Hellers G, Wahren J. Muscle metabolism in
patients with chronic obstructive lung disease and acute respiratory
failure. Clin Sci Mol Med 1977;52:396–403.
538. Jakobsson P, Jorfeldt L. Long-term oxygen therapy may improve
skeletal muscle metabolism in advanced chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease patients with chronic hypoxaemia. Respir Med
1995;89:471–476.
539. O’Donnell DE, D’Arsigny C, Webb KA. Effects of hyperoxia on
ventilatory limitation during exercise in advanced chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001;
163:892–898.
540. Maltais F, Simon M, Jobin J, Desmeules M, Sullivan MJ, B ´elanger M,
Leblanc P. Effects of oxygen on lower limb blood ﬂow and O2
uptake during exercise in COPD. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2001;33:
916–922.
541. Somfay A, Porszasz J, Lee SM, Casaburi R. Dose-response effect of
oxygen on hyperinﬂation and exercise endurance in
nonhypoxaemic COPD patients. Eur Respir J 2001;18:77–84.
542. Porszasz J, Emtner M, Goto S, Somfay A, Whipp BJ, Casaburi R.
Exercise training decreases ventilatory requirements and exercise-
induced hyperinﬂation at submaximal intensities in patients with
COPD. Chest 2005;128:2025–2034.
543. Emtner M, Porszasz J, Burns M, Somfay A, Casaburi R. Beneﬁts of
supplemental oxygen in exercise training in nonhypoxemic chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2003;168:1034–1042.
544. Nonoyama ML, Brooks D, Lacasse Y, Guyatt GH, Goldstein RS.
Oxygen therapy during exercise training in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007;2:CD005372.
545. Vermeeren MA, Creutzberg EC, Schols AM, Postma DS, Pieters WR,
Roldaan AC, Wouters EF; COSMIC Study Group. Prevalence of
nutritional depletion in a large out-patient population of patients
with COPD. Respir Med 2006;100:1349–1355.
546. Engelen MP, Schols AM, Baken WC, Wesseling GJ, Wouters EF.
Nutritional depletion in relation to respiratory and peripheral skeletal
muscle function in out-patients with COPD. Eur Respir J 1994;7:
1793–1797.
547. Yang L, Zhou M, Smith M, Yang G, Peto R, Wang J, Boreham J, Hu
Y, Chen Z. Body mass index and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease-related mortality: a nationally representative prospective
study of 220,000 men in China. Int J Epidemiol 2010;39:
1027–1036.
548. Sundh J, St ¨allberg B, Lisspers K, Montgomery SM, Janson C. Co-
morbidity, body mass index and quality of life in COPD using the
Clinical COPD Questionnaire. COPD 2011;8:173–181.
549. Katsura H, Yamada K, Kida K. Both generic and disease speciﬁc
health-related quality of life are deteriorated in patients with
underweight COPD. Respir Med 2005;99:624–630.
550. de Marco R, Accordini S, Marcon A, Cerveri I, Ant ´o JM, Gislason T,
Heinrich J, Janson C, Jarvis D, Kuenzli N, et al.; European
Community Respiratory Health Survey (ECRHS). Risk factors for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in a European cohort of
young adults. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011;183:891–897.
551. Weekes CE, Emery PW, Elia M. Dietary counselling and food fortiﬁcation
in stable COPD: a randomised trial. Thorax 2009;64:326–331.
552. Steiner MC, Barton RL, Singh SJ, Morgan MD. Nutritional
enhancement of exercise performance in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: a randomised controlled trial. Thorax 2003;
58:745–751.
553. Efthimiou J, Fleming J, Gomes C, Spiro SG. The effect of
supplementary oral nutrition in poorly nourished patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am Rev Respir Dis 1988;
137:1075–1082.
554. Creutzberg EC, Wouters EF, Mostert R, Weling-Scheepers CA, Schols
AM. Efﬁcacy of nutritional supplementation therapy in depleted
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Nutrition
2003;19:120–127.
555. Op den Kamp CM, Langen RC, Haegens A, Schols AM. Muscle
atrophy in cachexia: can dietary protein tip the balance? Curr Opin
Clin Nutr Metab Care 2009;12:611–616.
556. Baldi S, Aquilani R, Pinna GD, Poggi P, De Martini A, Bruschi C. Fat-
free mass change after nutritional rehabilitation in weight losing
COPD: role of insulin, C-reactive protein and tissue hypoxia. Int J
Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2010;5:29–39.
557. Engelen MP, Rutten EP, De Castro CL, Wouters EF, Schols AM, Deutz
NE. Supplementation of soy protein with branched-chain amino
acids alters protein metabolism in healthy elderly and even more in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Clin Nutr
2007;85:431–439.
558. Pison CM, Cano NJ, Ch ´erion C, Caron F, Court-Fortune I, Antonini
MT, Gonzalez-Bermejo J, Meziane L, Molano LC, Janssens JP,
et al.; IRAD Investigators. Multimodal nutritional rehabilitation
improves clinical outcomes of malnourished patients with chronic
respiratory failure: a randomised controlled trial. Thorax 2011;66:
953–960.
559. Creutzberg EC, Schols AM, Weling-Scheepers CA, Buurman WA,
Wouters EF. Characterization of nonresponse to high caloric oral
nutritional therapy in depleted patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;161:
745–752.
560. Sugawara K, Takahashi H, Kasai C, Kiyokawa N, Watanabe T, Fujii S,
Kashiwagura T, Honma M, Satake M, Shioya T. Effects of nutritional
supplementation combined with low-intensity exercise in
malnourished patients with COPD. Respir Med 2010;104:
1883–1889.
561. Sugawara K, Takahashi H, Kashiwagura T, Yamada K, Yanagida S,
Homma M, Dairiki K, Sasaki H, Kawagoshi A, Satake M, et al. Effect
of anti-inﬂammatory supplementation with whey peptide and
exercise therapy in patients with COPD. Respir Med 2012;106:
1526–1534.
562. Broekhuizen R, Wouters EF, Creutzberg EC, Weling-Scheepers CA,
Schols AM. Polyunsaturated fatty acids improve exercise capacity
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax 2005;60:
376–382.
563. van de Bool C, Steiner MC, Schols AM. Nutritional targets to enhance
exercise performance in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2012;15:553–560.
564. Rutten EP, Engelen MP, Gosker H, Bast A, Cosemans K, Vissers YL,
Wouters EF, Deutz NE, Schols AM. Metabolic and functional effects
of glutamate intake in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Clin Nutr 2008;27:408–415.
565. Marwood S, Jack S, Patel M, Walker P, Bowtell J, Calverley P. No
effect of glutamine ingestion on indices of oxidative metabolism in
stable COPD. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2011;177:41–46.
566. Saudny-Unterberger H, Martin JG, Gray-Donald K. Impact of
nutritional support on functional status during an acute
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 1997;156:794–799.
567. van Wetering CR, Hoogendoorn M, Broekhuizen R, Geraerts-
Keeris GJ, De Munck DR, Rutten-van M ¨olken MP, Schols AM.
Efﬁcacy and costs of nutritional rehabilitation in muscle-
wasted patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
in a community-based setting: a prespeciﬁed subgroup
analysis of the INTERCOM trial. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2010;11:
179–187.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e59

----- Page 47 (native) -----
568. Bhasin S, Jasuja R. Selective androgen receptor modulators as
function promoting therapies. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2009;
12:232–240.
569. Dalton JT, Barnette KG, Bohl CE, Hancock ML, Rodriguez D,
Dodson ST, Morton RA, Steiner MS. The selective androgen
receptor modulator GTx-024 (enobosarm) improves lean body
mass and physical function in healthy elderly men and
postmenopausal women: results of a double-blind, placebo-
controlled phase II trial. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle 2011;2:
153–161.
570. Bhasin S, Woodhouse L, Casaburi R, Singh AB, Bhasin D, Berman N,
Chen X, Yarasheski KE, Magliano L, Dzekov C, et al. Testosterone
dose-response relationships in healthy young men. Am J Physiol
Endocrinol Metab 2001;281:E1172–E1181.
571. Bhasin S, Woodhouse L, Casaburi R, Singh AB, Mac RP, Lee M,
Yarasheski KE, Sinha-Hikim I, Dzekov C, Dzekov J, et al. Older men
are as responsive as young men to the anabolic effects of graded
doses of testosterone on the skeletal muscle. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2005;90:678–688.
572. Dobs AS, Nguyen T, Pace C, Roberts CP. Differential effects of oral
estrogen versus oral estrogen-androgen replacement therapy on
body composition in postmenopausal women. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2002;87:1509–1516.
573. Svartberg J, Aasebø U, Hjalmarsen A, Sundsfjord J, Jorde R.
Testosterone treatment improves body composition and sexual
function in men with COPD, in a 6-month randomized controlled
trial. Respir Med 2004;98:906–913.
574. Schols AM, Soeters PB, Mostert R, Pluymers RJ, Wouters EF.
Physiologic effects of nutritional support and anabolic steroids in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. A placebo-
controlled randomized trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;152:
1268–1274.
575. Ferreira IM, Verreschi IT, Nery LE, Goldstein RS, Zamel N, Brooks D,
Jardim JR. The inﬂuence of 6 months of oral anabolic steroids on
body mass and respiratory muscles in undernourished COPD
patients. Chest 1998;114:19–28.
576. Yeh SS, DeGuzman B, Kramer T; M012 Study Group. Reversal of
COPD-associated weight loss using the anabolic agent
oxandrolone. Chest 2002;122:421–428.
577. Casaburi R, Make B, Piquette C, Kramer T, Ries A. Oxandrolone
increases weight and muscle mass in underweight COPD patients
[abstract]. Chest 2002;122:73S.
578. Creutzberg EC, Wouters EF, Mostert R, Pluymers RJ, Schols AM. A
role for anabolic steroids in the rehabilitation of patients with
COPD? A double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trial. Chest
2003;124:1733–1742.
579. Sharma S, Arneja A, McLean L, Duerksen D, Leslie W, Sciberras D,
Lertzman M. Anabolic steroids in COPD: a review and
preliminary results of a randomized trial. Chron Respir Dis 2008;
5:169–176.
580. Chavoshan B, Fournier M, Lewis MI, Porszasz J, Storer TW, Da X,
Rambod M, Casaburi R. Testosterone and resistance training
effects on muscle nitric oxide synthase isoforms in COPD men.
Respir Med 2012;106:269–275.
581. Hartman ML, Faria AC, Vance ML, Johnson ML, Thorner MO, Veldhuis
JD. Temporal structure of in vivo growth hormone secretory events
in humans. Am J Physiol 1991;260:E101–E110.
582. Giustina A, Veldhuis JD. Pathophysiology of the neuroregulation of
growth hormone secretion in experimental animals and the human.
Endocr Rev 1998;19:717–797.
583. Est´ıvariz CF, Ziegler TR. Nutrition and the insulin-like growth factor
system. Endocrine 1997;7:65–71.
584. Liu H, Bravata DM, Olkin I, Friedlander A, Liu V, Roberts B, Bendavid
E, Saynina O, Salpeter SR, Garber AM, et al. Systematic review:
the effects of growth hormone on athletic performance. Ann Intern
Med 2008;148:747–758.
585. Mador MJ, Bozkanat E. Skeletal muscle dysfunction in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Respir Res 2001;2:216–224.
586. Anand IS, Chandrashekhar Y, Ferrari R, Sarma R, Guleria R, Jindal SK,
Wahi PL, Poole-Wilson PA, Harris P. Pathogenesis of congestive
state in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Studies of body
water and sodium, renal function, hemodynamics, and plasma
hormones during edema and after recovery. Circulation 1992;86:
12–21.
587. Scalvini S, Volterrani M, Vitacca M, Clark AL, Solfrini R, Panzali AM,
Ferrari R, Levi GF. Plasma hormone levels and haemodynamics
in patients with chronic obstructive lung disease. Monaldi Arch
Chest Dis 1996;51:380–386.
588. Creutzberg EC, Casaburi R. Endocrinological disturbances in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur Respir J Suppl 2003;46:
76s–80s.
589. Zadik Z, Chalew SA, McCarter RJ Jr, Meistas M, Kowarski AA. The
inﬂuence of age on the 24-hour integrated concentration of growth
hormone in normal individuals. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1985;60:
513–516.
590. Wehrenberg WB, Janowski BA, Piering AW, Culler F, Jones KL.
Glucocorticoids: potent inhibitors and stimulators of growth
hormone secretion. Endocrinology 1990;126:3200–3203.
591. Veldhuis JD, Iranmanesh A. Physiological regulation of the human
growth hormone (GH)-insulin-like growth factor type I (IGF-I) axis:
predominant impact of age, obesity, gonadal function, and sleep.
Sleep 1996;19:S221–S224.
592. Graham MR, Baker JS, Evans P, Kicman A, Cowan D, Hullin D, Davies
B. Short-term recombinant human growth hormone administration
improves respiratory function in abstinent anabolic-androgenic
steroid users. Growth Horm IGF Res 2007;17:328–335.
593. Meinhardt U, Nelson AE, Hansen JL, Birzniece V, Clifford D, Leung
KC, Graham K, Ho KK. The effects of growth hormone on body
composition and physical performance in recreational athletes:
a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2010;152:568–577.
594. Pape GS, Friedman M, Underwood LE, Clemmons DR. The effect of
growth hormone on weight gain and pulmonary function in patients
with chronic obstructive lung disease. Chest 1991;99:1495–1500.
595. Gullett NP, Hebbar G, Ziegler TR. Update on clinical trials of growth
factors and anabolic steroids in cachexia and wasting. Am J Clin
Nutr 2010;91:1143S–1147S.
596. Burdet L, de Muralt B, Schutz Y, Pichard C, Fitting JW.
Administration of growth hormone to underweight patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. A prospective,
randomized, controlled study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;
156:1800–1806.
597. Suchner U, Rothkopf MM, Stanislaus G, Elwyn DH, Kvetan V,
Askanazi J. Growth hormone and pulmonary disease. Metabolic
effects in patients receiving parenteral nutrition. Arch Intern Med
1990;150:1225–1230.
598. Khorram O. Use of growth hormone and growth hormone
secretagogues in aging: help or harm. Clin Obstet Gynecol 2001;44:
893–901.
599. Clayton PE, Banerjee I, Murray PG, Renehan AG. Growth hormone,
the insulin-like growth factor axis, insulin and cancer risk. Nat Rev
Endocrinol 2011;7:11–24.
600. Root AW, Root MJ. Clinical pharmacology of human growth hormone
and its secretagogues. Curr Drug Targets Immune Endocr Metabol
Disord 2002;2:27–52.
601. Chappel S. Can GHRH or GH secretagogues re-initiate pituitary GH
pulsatility? Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 1999;50:547–556.
602. Wang Y, Tomlinson B. Tesamorelin, a human growth hormone releasing
factor analogue. Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2009;18:303–310.
603. Kojima M, Hosoda H, Date Y, Nakazato M, Matsuo H, Kangawa K.
Ghrelin is a growth-hormone-releasing acylated peptide from
stomach. Nature 1999;402:656–660.
604. Smith RG, Van der Ploeg LH, Howard AD, Feighner SD, Cheng K,
Hickey GJ, Wyvratt MJ Jr, Fisher MH, Nargund RP, Patchett AA.
Peptidomimetic regulation of growth hormone secretion. Endocr
Rev 1997;18:621–645.
605. Gnanapavan S, Kola B, Bustin SA, Morris DG, McGee P, Fairclough P,
Bhattacharya S, Carpenter R, Grossman AB, Korbonits M. The
tissue distribution of the mRNA of ghrelin and subtypes of its
receptor, GHS-R, in humans. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2002;87:
2988–2991.
606. Wren AM, Seal LJ, Cohen MA, Brynes AE, Frost GS, Murphy KG, Dhillo
WS, Ghatei MA, Bloom SR. Ghrelin enhances appetite and increases
food intake in humans. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001;86:5992–5995.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e60
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014

----- Page 48 (native) -----
607. Granata R, Isgaard J, Alloatti G, Ghigo E. Cardiovascular actions of
the ghrelin gene-derived peptides and growth hormone-releasing
hormone. Exp Biol Med (Maywood) 2011;236:505–514.
608. Tsch ¨op M, Smiley DL, Heiman ML. Ghrelin induces adiposity in
rodents. Nature 2000;407:908–913.
609. Neary NM, Small CJ, Wren AM, Lee JL, Druce MR, Palmieri C, Frost
GS, Ghatei MA, Coombes RC, Bloom SR. Ghrelin increases
energy intake in cancer patients with impaired appetite: acute,
randomized, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2004;
89:2832–2836.
610. Nagaya N, Itoh T, Murakami S, Oya H, Uematsu M, Miyatake K,
Kangawa K. Treatment of cachexia with ghrelin in patients with
COPD. Chest 2005;128:1187–1193.
611. Chopin L, Walpole C, Seim I, Cunningham P, Murray R, Whiteside E,
Josh P, Herington A. Ghrelin and cancer. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2011;
340:65–69.
612. Shiiya T, Nakazato M, Mizuta M, Date Y, Mondal MS, Tanaka M,
Nozoe S, Hosoda H, Kangawa K, Matsukura S. Plasma ghrelin
levels in lean and obese humans and the effect of glucose on
ghrelin secretion. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2002;87:240–244.
613. Cummings DE, Weigle DS, Frayo RS, Breen PA, Ma MK, Dellinger EP,
Purnell JQ. Plasma ghrelin levels after diet-induced weight loss or
gastric bypass surgery. N Engl J Med 2002;346:1623–1630.
614. Ying BW, Song XB, Fan H, Wang LL, Li YS, Cheng Z, Cheng H, Wen
FQ. Plasma ghrelin levels and weight loss in Chinese Uygur patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. J Int Med Res 2008;
36:1371–1377.
615. Itoh T, Nagaya N, Yoshikawa M, Fukuoka A, Takenaka H, Shimizu Y,
Haruta Y, Oya H, Yamagishi M, Hosoda H, et al. Elevated plasma
ghrelin level in underweight patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004;170:879–882.
616. Lainscak M, Andreas S, Scanlon PD, Somers VK, Anker SD. Ghrelin and
neurohumoral antagonists in the treatment of cachexia associated
with cardiopulmonary disease. Intern Med 2006;45:837–844.
617. Kodama T, Ashitani J, Matsumoto N, Kangawa K, Nakazato M.
Ghrelin treatment suppresses neutrophil-dominant inﬂammation in
airways of patients with chronic respiratory infection. Pulm
Pharmacol Ther 2008;21:774–779.
618. Ferdinandi ES, Brazeau P, High K, Procter B, Fennell S, Dubreuil P.
Non-clinical pharmacology and safety evaluation of TH9507,
a human growth hormone-releasing factor analogue. Basic Clin
Pharmacol Toxicol 2007;100:49–58.
619. US Food and Drug Administration. FDA labeling information. Egrifta
(tesamorelin for injection). FDA website. 2012 [accessed 2012].
Available from: http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/
label/2013/022505s004lbl.pdf
620. Grunfeld C, Dritselis A, Kirkpatrick P. Tesamorelin. Nat Rev Drug
Discov 2011;10:95–96.
621. Abribat T, Chapdelaine A, Gravel D. Th 9507, a new growth hormone-
releasing factor (GFR) analogue, is a powerful insulin-like growth
factor -1 (IGF-1) inducer in 50–60 year old healthy subjects
[abstract]. Endocrin Soc 2001;83:292.
622. Stanley TL, Chen CY, Branch KL, Makimura H, Grinspoon SK. Effects
of a growth hormone-releasing hormone analog on endogenous
GH pulsatility and insulin sensitivity in healthy men. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2011;96:150–158.
623. Schols AM, Maltais F, O’Donnell DE, Hernandez P, Tellier J, Lussier B,
Allas S, Chapdelaine A, Abribat T, Vachon L. Anabolic effects
and safety assessments of TH9507, a growth hormone releasing
factor (GRF) analog, in patients with COPD-associated muscle
wasting [abstract]. Eur Respir J 2004;24:292s.
624. Maltais F, O’Donnell DE, Schols AM, Hernandez P, Tellier J, Lussier B,
Allas S, Abribat T, Vachon L. Effect of TH9507, a growth hormone
releasing factor (GFR) analog, on functional performance in patients
with COPD. Eur Respir J 2004;24:245s.
625. Maltais F, O’Donnell DE, Schols AM, Hernandez P, Lussier B, Allas
S, Deslauriers N, Abribat T, Vachon L. Effect of TH9507, a growth
hormone-releasing factor (GFR) analogue, on health-related
quality of life and respiratory muscle function in patients with
COPD-associated wasting [abstract]. Proc Am Thorac Soc 2005;
2:A127.
626. US National Institutes of Health. Efﬁcacy and safety study of
tesamorelin in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
subjects with muscle wasting. 2012 [accessed 2012]. Available from:
http://clinicaltrialsfeeds.org/clinical-trials/show/NCT01388920
627. Yu H, Kim K. Direct nose-to-brain transfer of a growth hormone
releasing neuropeptide, hexarelin after intranasal administration to
rabbits. Int J Pharm 2009;378:73–79.
628. Mantovani G, Macci `o A, Lai P, Massa E, Ghiani M, Santona MC.
Cytokine involvement in cancer anorexia/cachexia: role of
megestrol acetate and medroxyprogesterone acetate on cytokine
downregulation and improvement of clinical symptoms. Crit Rev
Oncog 1998;9:99–106.
629. Yeh SS, Wu SY, Levine DM, Parker TS, Olson JS, Stevens MR,
Schuster MW. The correlation of cytokine levels with body weight
after megestrol acetate treatment in geriatric patients. J Gerontol
A Biol Sci Med Sci 2001;56:M48–M54.
630. Weisberg J, Wanger J, Olson J, Streit B, Fogarty C, Martin T, Casaburi
R. Megestrol acetate stimulates weight gain and ventilation in
underweight COPD patients. Chest 2002;121:1070–1078.
631. Branch JD. Effect of creatine supplementation on body composition
and performance: a meta-analysis. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab
2003;13:198–226.
632. Nissen SL, Sharp RL. Effect of dietary supplements on lean mass and
strength gains with resistance exercise: a meta-analysis. J Appl
Physiol (1985) 2003;94:651–659.
633. Fuld JP, Kilduff LP, Neder JA, Pitsiladis Y, Lean ME, Ward SA,
Cotton MM. Creatine supplementation during pulmonary
rehabilitation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax
2005;60:531–537.
634. Faager G, S ¨oderlund K, Sk ¨old CM, Rundgren S, Tollb ¨ack A,
Jakobsson P. Creatine supplementation and physical training in
patients with COPD: a double blind, placebo-controlled study.
Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2006;1:445–453.
635. Deacon SJ, Vincent EE, Greenhaff PL, Fox J, Steiner MC, Singh SJ,
Morgan MD. Randomized controlled trial of dietary creatine as an
adjunct therapy to physical training in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2008;178:
233–239.
636. Al-Ghimlas F, Todd DC. Creatine supplementation for patients with
COPD receiving pulmonary rehabilitation: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Respirology 2010;15:785–795.
637. Brass EP. Supplemental carnitine and exercise. Am J Clin Nutr 2000;
72:618S–623S.
638. Villaça DS, Lerario MC, Dal Corso S, Neder JA. New treatments for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease using ergogenic aids. J Bras
Pneumol 2006;32:66–74.
639. Borghi-Silva A, Baldissera V, Sampaio LM, Pires-DiLorenzo VA,
Jamami M, Demonte A, Marchini JS, Costa D. L-carnitine as an
ergogenic aid for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease submitted to whole-body and respiratory muscle training
programs. Braz J Med Biol Res 2006;39:465–474.
640. Wagner KR, Fleckenstein JL, Amato AA, Barohn RJ, Bushby K,
Escolar DM, Flanigan KM, Pestronk A, Tawil R, Wolfe GI, et al.
A phase I/IItrial of MYO-029 in adult subjects with muscular
dystrophy. Ann Neurol 2008;63:561–571.
641. Ferreira LF, Reid MB. Muscle-derived ROS and thiol regulation in
muscle fatigue. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2008;104:853–860.
642. Gosker HR, Bast A, Haenen GR, Fischer MA, van der Vusse GJ,
Wouters EF, Schols AM. Altered antioxidant status in peripheral
skeletal muscle of patients with COPD. Respir Med 2005;99:
118–125.
643. Goldfarb AH. Nutritional antioxidants as therapeutic and preventive
modalities in exercise-induced muscle damage. Can J Appl Physiol
1999;24:249–266.
644. Powers SK, DeRuisseau KC, Quindry J, Hamilton KL. Dietary
antioxidants and exercise. J Sports Sci 2004;22:81–94.
645. Reid MB, Haack KE, Franchek KM, Valberg PA, Kobzik L, West MS.
Reactive oxygen in skeletal muscle. I. Intracellular oxidant kinetics
and fatigue in vitro. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1992;73:1797–1804.
646. Supinski G, Nethery D, Stofan D, DiMarco A. Effect of free radical
scavengers on diaphragmatic fatigue. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1997;155:622–629.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
e61

----- Page 49 (native) -----
647. Mantovani G, Macci `o A, Madeddu C, Gramignano G, Lusso MR,
Serpe R, Massa E, Astara G, Deiana L. A phase II study with
antioxidants, both in the diet and supplemented, pharmaconutritional
support, progestagen, and anti-cyclooxygenase-2 showing efﬁcacy
and safety in patients with cancer-related anorexia/cachexia and
oxidative stress. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2006;15:
1030–1034.
648. Barreiro E, G ´aldiz JB, Mariñ ´an M, Alvarez FJ, Hussain SN, Gea J.
Respiratory loading intensity and diaphragm oxidative stress:
N-acetyl-cysteine effects. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2006;100:555–563.
649. Rahman I, MacNee W. Antioxidant pharmacological therapies for
COPD. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2012;12:256–265.
650. McKenna MJ, Medved I, Goodman CA, Brown MJ, Bjorksten AR, Murphy
KT, Petersen AC, Sostaric S, Gong X. N-acetylcysteine attenuates the
decline in muscle Na1,K1-pump activity and delays fatigue during
prolonged exercise in humans. J Physiol 2006;576:279–288.
651. Medved I, Brown MJ, Bjorksten AR, Murphy KT, Petersen AC,
Sostaric S, Gong X, McKenna MJ. N-acetylcysteine enhances
muscle cysteine and glutathione availability and attenuates fatigue
during prolonged exercise in endurance-trained individuals. J Appl
Physiol (1985) 2004;97:1477–1485.
652. Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Dawson-Hughes B, Staehelin HB, Orav JE, Stuck
AE, Theiler R, Wong JB, Egli A, Kiel DP, Henschkowski J. Fall
prevention with supplemental and active forms of vitamin D: a meta-
analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ 2009;339:b3692.
653. Stockton KA, Mengersen K, Paratz JD, Kandiah D, Bennell KL.
Effect of vitamin D supplementation on muscle strength:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Osteoporos Int 2011;
22:859–871.
654. Dawson-Hughes B. Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D and muscle atrophy
in the elderly. Proc Nutr Soc 2012;71:46–49.
655. Daly RM. Independent and combined effects of exercise and vitamin
D on muscle morphology, function and falls in the elderly. Nutrients
2010;2:1005–1017.
656. Bunout D, Barrera G, Leiva L, Gattas V, de la Maza MP, Avendaño M,
Hirsch S. Effects of vitamin D supplementation and exercise
training on physical performance in Chilean vitamin D deﬁcient
elderly subjects. Exp Gerontol 2006;41:746–752.
657. Kukuljan S, Nowson CA, Sanders K, Daly RM. Effects of resistance
exercise and fortiﬁed milk on skeletal muscle mass, muscle size,
and functional performance in middle-aged and older men: an
18-mo randomized controlled trial. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2009;107:
1864–1873.
658. Ringbaek T, Martinez G, Durakovic A, Thøgersen J, Midjord AK,
Jensen JE, Lange P. Vitamin d status in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease who participate in pulmonary
rehabilitation. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev 2011;31:261–267.
659. Lehouck A, Mathieu C, Carremans C, Baeke F, Verhaegen J, Van
Eldere J, Decallonne B, Bouillon R, Decramer M, Janssens W. High
doses of vitamin D to reduce exacerbations in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2012;156:
105–114.
660. Hornikx M, Van Remoortel H, Lehouck A, Mathieu C, Maes K, Gayan-
Ramirez G, Decramer M, Troosters T, Janssens W. Vitamin D
supplementation during rehabilitation in COPD: a secondary
analysis of a randomized trial. Respir Res 2012;13:84.
661. Coin A, Sergi G, Minicuci N, Giannini S, Barbiero E, Manzato E,
Pedrazzoni M, Minisola S, Rossini M, Del Puente A, et al. Fat-free
mass and fat mass reference values by dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry (DEXA) in a 20-80 year-old Italian population.
Clin Nutr 2008;27:87–94.
662. Lacasse Y, Goldstein R, Lasserson TJ, Martin S. Pulmonary
rehabilitation for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2006;4:CD003793.
663. Ferreira IM, Brooks D, Lacasse Y, Goldstein RS, White J. Nutritional
supplementation for stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005;2:CD000998.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
e62
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 189 Number 9 | May 1 2014