

----- Page 1 (native) -----
This is the submitted version of the article:
Dubal D.P., Chodankar N.R., Kim D.-H., Gomez-Romero P..
Towards flexible solid-state supercapacitors for smart and
wearable electronics. Chemical Society Reviews, (2018). 47. :
2065 - . 10.1039/c7cs00505a.
Available at: https://dx.doi.org/10.1039/c7cs00505a

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Recent Advances in Flexible Solid-State Supercapacitors: 
Substrates, Electrolytes, and Cell Designs 
 
 
Journal: Chemical Society Reviews 
Manuscript ID CS-SYN-07-2017-000505.R1 
Article Type: Synopsis 
Date Submitted by the Author: n/a 
Complete List of Authors: Dubal, deepak; Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, School of 
Materials Science and Engineering; Catalan Institute of Nanoscience and 
Nanotechnology, CIN2, ICN2 (CSIC-ICN), Bellaterra (Barcelona), Spain, 
NEO Energy-Oriented Materials Group 
Chodankar, Nilesh; Chonnam National University, Department of Chemical 
Engineering 
Kim, Do-Heyoung; Chonnam National University, School of Chemical 
Engineering 
Gomez-Romero, Pedro; Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Research Center 
(CSIC-ICN),  
  
 
 
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 3 (native) -----
1 
 
Recent Advances in Flexible Solid-State Supercapacitors: 
Substrates, Electrolytes, and Cell Designs 
Deepak P. Dubal,a, b** Nilesh R. Chodankar,c Do-Heyoung Kim,c* Pedro Gomez-Romero,b*  
 
a School of Chemical Engineering, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide,  
South Australia 5005, Australia 
b Catalan Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (ICN2), CSIC and The Barcelona 
Institute of Science and Technology, Campus UAB, Bellaterra, 08193 Barcelona, Spain 
c School of Chemical Engineering, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757, South 
Korea 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR FOOTNOTE  
Dr. Deepak Dubal and Prof. Pedro Gomez-Romero 
Tel.: +6183131535 Fax: +61883134373  
E-mail: dubaldeepak2@gmail.com (D. Dubal),  
pedro.gomez@cin2.es (P. Gomez-Romero) 
Page 1 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 4 (native) -----
2 
 
Abstract 
Flexible solid-state supercapacitors (FSSCs) are frontrunners in energy storage device 
technology and have attracted much attention due to recent significant breakthroughs in modern 
wearable electronics. Herein, we review the state-of-the-art advancements in FSSCs to provide 
new insights on mechanisms, emerging electrode materials, flexible gel electrolytes, and novel 
cell designs. The review begins with a short introduction on the fundamental understanding of 
charge storage mechanisms based on the structural properties of electrode materials. The next 
sections briefly summarize the latest progress in flexible electrodes (free standing and 
substrate-supported, including textile, paper, metal foil/wire, and polymer-based substrates) and 
flexible gel electrolytes (aqueous, organic, ionic liquids, and redox-active gels). Subsequently, a 
comprehensive summary of FSSC cell designs introduces some emerging electrode materials, 
including MXenes, metal nitrides, metal-organic frameworks, polyoxometalates, and black 
phosphorus. Some potential practical applications, such as piezoelectric, photo-, and shape-
memory supercapacitors are also discussed. The final section highlights current challenges and 
future perspectives on further research in this thriving field. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 5 (native) -----
3 
 
1. Introduction 
Over the past decade, with the continuous emergence of applications in various sectors 
(mobility, biomedical, consumer electronics, sports, clean energy, and environmental), flexible 
and wearable microelectronic devices and systems have gained significant importance [1, 2]. 
Thus, the commercialization of flexible electronics is posing new challenges to well-established 
energy storage systems [3]. For instance, new energy storage devices need to maintain a high 
performance under continuous mechanical deformation, such as bending, folding, twisting, and 
stretching, for long cycles. Moreover, recent progress in implantable/wearable healthcare 
devices (spirometers, sphygmomanometers, wristbands, etc.) advocates a new self-sustainable 
energy storage device that can harvest/store body energy (breathing, arm pressing, chest 
compression, etc.) and power smart electronics [4, 5]. The key challenge is to design and 
assemble flexible electrode materials with high energy and power densities and excellent long-
cycle stability with compatible electrolytes and separators in a flexible assembly. Safety and 
cost also need to be considered, especially for wearable and implantable devices. Thus, we 
believe that there will be a great demand for flexible energy storage systems for next generation 
implantable/wearable electronics. 
Supercapacitors (SCs) are promising electrochemical energy storage devices that have 
attracted significant interest in both academia and industry during the past several decades 
because of their superior energy density (compared to conventional capacitors), good power 
density (compared to batteries), fast charge/discharge rates, and long cycle life [6, 7]. Currently, 
SCs are extensively used in many applications such as consumer electronics, transportation, 
military and aerospace, grid balancing, and power backup to protect, enhance, and/or replace 
batteries in these applications [8-10]. The history and origin of SCs has been extensively 
discussed in literature [9, 10]. In brief, the first SC patent was granted in 1957, when Becker 
from General Electric Corp. proposed a high-surface-area carbon-coated metallic current 
collector in H2SO4 solution. Sohio was the first to commercialize SCs in 1969 [7-10]. Between 
Page 3 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 6 (native) -----
4 
 
1975 and 1981, Conway [10] proposed a new concept of energy storage in SCs using a RuO2 
film in aqueous H2SO4 electrolyte. The charge storage mechanism was referred to as a 
“pseudocapacitor,” and was based on a non-faradaic process derived from surface redox 
reactions. In the 1990s, SCs became prominent when they began to be used, along with 
rechargeable batteries, to provide additional power in electrical vehicles (EVs) and hybrid 
electric vehicles (HEVs). These SCs captured and stored energy from regenerative braking and 
supplied vehicle acceleration power. 
Traditional SCs exhibit clumsy bulk shapes (a separator sandwiched between two 
electrodes sealed in a liquid electrolyte) that present some major drawbacks for practical 
wearable application. For example, the liquid electrolyte requires high-standard safety 
encapsulation materials and technology to prevent leakage of toxic electrolytes. Moreover, 
because SC components can only be assembled in a few shapes/sizes, such as button and 
spiral wound cylinders, it is difficult to integrate them with other functional systems on the 
electronic motherboard. Thus, to transcend these limitations, flexible solid-state supercapacitors 
(FSSCs) have emerged as a new class of energy storage devices and have attracted 
considerable attention in recent years [11-12]. FSSC devices comprise flexible electrodes, a 
solid-state gel-electrolyte, a separator, and flexible packaging material similar to that of 
conventional SCs. The main advantage of FSSCs over conventional SCs is the use of a solid-
state gel electrolyte and flexible electrodes that can be assembled in any shape/size with thin, 
light, and smart designs, thereby increasing their potential for application to flexible and 
wearable electronics. 
Research on solid-state SCs began with the study of carbon and conducting polymer 
(CP)-based materials post 1990 [13]. The studies were continued in the beginning of the 20th 
century with some major contributions [14]. In these studies, the solid-state SCs were typically 
assembled by sandwiching a polymer gel electrolyte between two electrode pellets or films 
[active materials deposited on substrates e.g. stainless steel (SS)] and pressed together into 
Page 4 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 7 (native) -----
5 
 
one device. This approach of first fabricating the electrodes and polymer electrolyte separately 
and subsequently assembling them together poses two major shortcomings: first, the reduction 
in thickness of the entire device is limited due to the use of thick solid-state gel electrolytes (the 
thinnest membrane prepared in a Petri dish was 0.15 mm) and metallic current collectors. Thus, 
the middle polymer gel electrolyte needs to be as thin as possible but thick enough to separate 
the two electrodes. Second, because the solid electrodes are in contact with the solid-state 
electrolyte 
under 
pressure, 
only 
the 
part 
of 
the 
electrode 
near 
the 
geometric 
electrode/electrolyte interface can be well utilized. However, the last few years have witnessed 
several innovative strategies to address previous challenges and new excellent breakthrough 
investigations have been reported [15-16]. The graphs shown in Figure 1 (a, b) depicts the 
number of articles published so far with corresponding number of citations (source: Scopus). 
The remarkable increasing trend in the number of articles published per year together with the 
outstanding number of citations suggests the prominence of next generation FSSC technology.  
Currently, although many excellent reviews on FSSCs are available [1, 15-18], few give 
a complete picture that comprises the nature of the substrates, electrolytes, and cell design [16] 
and instead focus on these features, separately [18, 19]. In addition, the last few years have 
witnessed the emergence of many new materials for FSSC application, including two-
dimensional (2D) materials and polyoxometalates (POMs), metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), 
which have yet to be summarized. Thus, a systematic summary of the latest innovations in 
FSSCs, which covers a fundamental understanding, new emerging materials, and novel cell 
designs is highly required. Accordingly, this review briefly describes the latest scientific progress 
in FSSCs and is divided into sections that discuss novel insights on charge storage 
mechanisms, flexible substrates, flexible electrolytes (gel electrolytes), and novel cell designs 
with new electrode materials together with their corresponding applications (Figure 2). 
Particularly, the first section highlights recently developed findings on ionic charge storage 
mechanisms and transport pathways. Next, we present a summary of recent progress in the 
Page 5 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 8 (native) -----
6 
 
development of flexible substrates, including metallic foil/mesh/wire-, conventional and carbon 
paper-, carbon fabric-, yarn-, and polymer-based substrates. Section third focused on recent 
advancements in polymer gel electrolyte synthesis and the corresponding effect on 
electrochemical performances. Various gel electrolytes, such as aqueous, organic, ionic liquid, 
and redox-active gels, are briefly discussed. Section fourth is a review of the different cell 
designs including symmetric and asymmetric configurations. It also introduces novel materials 
such as MXenes, metal nitrides, POMs, black phosphorus (BP), and MOF-derived materials. A 
brief description on the various negative electrode materials used in all solid-state asymmetric 
SCs is also provided. The last section details state-of-the-art research in device innovation for 
next generation SCs including piezoelectric, photo-SCs, and shape-memory SCs. To facilitate 
further research and development, some future research trends and directions are also 
discussed. Overall, the goal of this review is to provide readers with a comprehensive summary 
of recent advancements in FSSCs in terms of new electrode materials, gel electrolytes, and 
novel cell designs. 
 
2. Novel insights on Charge Storage Mechanisms 
Several reviews provide brief descriptions about the charge storage mechanisms and 
basic electrochemistry of SCs [7, 20]. However, this is not the scope of this review and herein, 
we only discuss recently reported insights. According to previous studies, SCs are generally 
classified into two broad categories [20, 21], namely electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) 
and pseudocapacitors. In EDLCs, the electrical charge is stored at the electrode/electrolyte 
interface. The separation of charges is a physical process without any faradaic reactions on the 
electrode surface. Thus, EDLC capacitance strongly depends on the surface properties, such as 
pore size distribution and specific surface area (SSA), of the electrodes [5, 20, 21]. It was 
recommended that the pore size in porous EDLCs should be approximately twice the ionic size 
of the electrolytes to allow full access into the pore walls. Moreover, the solvated ions do not 
Page 6 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 9 (native) -----
7 
 
enter into the pores if the size exceeds the pore dimensions. However, other works have 
experimentally invalidated this assumption and reported record-breaking specific capacitance 
values by decreasing the pore width for pores smaller than double the size of the bare ions [22, 
23]. Ultimately, there is no clear correlation between the SSA and the specific capacitance, 
implying that the capacitance cannot be increased by increasing the SSA and average pore size 
[24]. As presented in Figure 3 (a), the specific capacitance normalized by SSA, suggesting the 
effect of pore size, irrespective of surface area. Notably, the volumetric capacitance increased 
~1.5-fold (from 55 to 80 F/cm3) when microporous carbon with pores <1 nm were employed 
[22]. According to the Monte Carlo simulation, the anomalous increase in capacitance with 
decreasing pore width can be ascribed to the exponential screening of the electrostatic 
interactions of the ions inside the pore as well as the image-charge ionic attraction to the pore 
surface [25]. Thus, it was recently reported that the pore size and carbon nanostructure (rather 
than the SSA) played an important role in increasing the specific capacitance [26]. Due to recent 
developments in various advanced in-situ spectroscopic and simulation techniques, the 
understanding of the physical processes and origin of the charge storage mechanisms in 
carbon-based materials is of special interest.  
Conway’s work suggests that various faradaic reactions can result in capacitive 
electrochemical features as shown in Figure 3 (b)  [10] such as (1) underpotential deposition, (2) 
redox pseudocapacitance (normally observed in RuO2.nH2O), and (3) intercalation 
pseudocapacitance (observed in V2O5, TiO2, Nb2O5). A brief description on “pseudocapacitance 
in metal oxides” can be found in recent literature [27]. Underpotential deposition is defined as 
the adsorption of metal ions onto the surface of other metal ions well above their redox 
potential. For example, the adsorption of lead onto the surface of a gold electrode [21, 28]. In 
redox pseudocapacitance, the charge is stored through surface or near-surface charge transfer 
reactions. An intercalation pseudocapacitance mechanism has been recently proposed whereby 
Page 7 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 10 (native) -----
8 
 
electrolyte ion intercalation in the tunnels or layers of a redox-active material is accompanied by 
a faradaic charge transfer without a change in the original crystal structure.  
The charge kinetics of pseudocapacitive materials can be characterized by estimating 
the capacitive and diffusion-controlled charge contributions to the total charge stored by the 
electrode using cyclic voltammetric data at various scan rates. Generally, the charge storage 
mechanism can be determined from the dependence of the current (i) on the scan rate (v) [29]: 
b
a
i
ν
=
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 
where a and b are adjustable parameters and b is determined from the slope of the plot 
of log(i) vs. log(ν). Typically, b = 0.5 and corresponds to the diffusion-controlled faradaic 
intercalation process, suggesting typical battery behavior where the current is proportional to the 
square root of the sweep rate (ν1/2) according to the equation: 
)
(
)
/
(
2
/
1
2
/
1
2
/
1
2
/
1
*
bt
RT
nF
D
nFAC
i
χ
π
α
ν
=
  
(2) 
where C* is the surface concentration of the electrode material, α is the transfer 
coefficient, D is the chemical diffusion coefficient, n is the number of electrons involved in the 
electrode reaction, A is the surface area of the electrode material, F is the Faraday constant, R 
is the molar gas constant, T is the temperature, and the function (bt) represents the normalized 
current. On the other hand, for the capacitive process, the current response is directly 
proportional to the scan rate (b = 1). Generally, the total charge stored in the electrode is the 
sum of the currents resulting from capacitive (k1ν) and diffusion-controlled (k2ν1/2) faradic 
processes. Thus, equation (1) can be modified to:  
2
/
1
2
1
ν
ν
k
k
i
+
=
 
 
(3) 
The current at a fixed potential is therefore equal to the sum of the capacitive (k1ν) and 
diffusion-controlled (k2ν 1/2) contributions [6a]. Constants k1 and k2 can be determined by plotting 
Page 8 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 11 (native) -----
9 
 
i/ν1/2 versus ν1/2 and measuring the slope and the y-axis intercept point of the straight line, 
respectively. 
Notably, there are no standardized methods to evaluate the capacitive performance of 
SC electrode materials used in different techniques (three-electrode vs. two-electrode 
configurations, different electrode thickness, CC discharge vs. CV curves, discharge current 
intensity, and voltage scan rate) that yield widely varying results. There are many excellent 
reviews explaining these issues in great detail [30]. Moreover, the performance of macroscale 
SCs is usually evaluated by their gravimetric capacitance, energy, and power densities [31]. On 
the other hand, for microscale supercapacitors (MSCs), the mass of active materials is often 
very small and the limited space is a key constraint. Thus, volumetric/areal capacitance and 
energy and power densities based on volume/area are more meaningful evaluating parameters. 
Furthermore, for portable and wearable device applications, the performance stability of the 
FSSCs under different mechanical bending, twisting, compressing, stretching, and extreme 
environmental conditions (high or low temperature and moisture) is also an important 
performance metric. These conditions mainly depend on the substrates and polymer gel 
electrolytes. Thus, the third section briefly describes advancement in flexible substrates for 
FSCs. 
 
3. Current advances and challenges in flexible electrodes  
The most crucial factor in fabricating flexible SCs is the use of flexible electrodes 
(flexible substrate) with high electrical conductivity to ensure fast charge-discharge. Considering 
recent developments, the fabrication of flexible electrodes can be divided into two main 
categories: (i) flexible free-standing films of active materials and (ii) supporting/depositing active 
materials on flexible substrates. In this section, we highlight recent developments in flexible 
electrodes for all-solid-state SCs.  
 
Page 9 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 12 (native) -----
10 
 
3.1 Free-standing flexible electrodes 
An emerging approach for fabricating flexible electrodes is to develop free-standing or 
self-standing films of active materials. This approach avoids the use of current collectors, 
conductive additives, and binders, considerably reducing the weight of the final device. Thus, 
the complete volume is utilized, leading to excellent volumetric capacitance and energy density 
of the SC devices. From a volumetric perspective, manufacturing solid-state SC devices with 
free-standing electrodes has been demonstrated as an excellent strategy for the best utilization 
of the materials [32]. Recently, numerous solution-processing methods have been presented to 
fabricate free-standing SC electrodes based on carbon materials [33], especially carbon 
nanoparticles, graphene [34], and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) [35]. Compared to other carbon 
materials, CNTs are excellent electrode materials, especially for FSSCs, due to their high SSA 
(1240–2200 m2/g), high electrical conductivity (104–105 S/cm), and controllable regular pore 
structure [36]. Moreover, CNTs possess a high aspect ratio, which provides long continuous 
conductive paths and ensures high flexibility. Vacuum filtration is one of the most widely used 
methods in CNT film preparation that can be easily achieved in a laboratory with simple 
equipment. However, the areas of CNT films prepared via this process are limited by the size of 
the filter. The resultant flexible CNT film, also known as buckypaper, presented desirable 
conductivity and specific areas and can be directly used as both the current collector and the 
active material for the FSSC [35]. Thus, Kang et al. [37] deposited CNTs onto a bacterial 
nanocellulose substrate through a vacuum filtering process to afford paper with high flexibility, a 
large SSA (460 m2/g), and good chemical stability (Figure 4 (a, b)). The assembled FSSC 
exhibited a high specific capacitance of 46.9 F/g at a scan rate of 0.1 V/s and excellent stability 
with <0.5% loss of capacitance after 5000 charge-discharge cycles at a high current density of 
10 A/g shown in Figure 4 (c).  
With many similarities to CNTs, including a large SSA, good electronic and mechanical 
properties, and chemical stability [38], graphene has also been investigated for its potential as 
Page 10 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 13 (native) -----
11 
 
an electrode in SCs [39]. Recently, Weng et al. [40] prepared graphene-cellulose paper (GCP) 
membranes by vacuum filtration of the graphene suspension, which exhibited great advantages 
for use as freestanding and binder-free electrodes for flexible SCs. These GCP-based SCs 
exhibited a high areal capacitance of 46 mF/cm2 for the complete device under highly bent 
conditions. Freestanding, flexible, and transparent graphene paper was also prepared from a 
microwave plasma-enhanced CVD process for optoelectronic application, [41]. SCs based on 
flexible transparent graphene exhibited good electrochemical performance with high specific 
capacitance (3.3 mF/cm2), volumetric energy (430 µWh/cm3), and power density (190 mW/cm3). 
The remarkable electrochemical performance of the device was attributed to the ultrathin 
graphene flakes that provide large effective areas, good conductivity, and 3D transport paths for 
both ions and electrons. Despite these successful results, the individual graphene sheets begin 
to aggregate and restack during the fabrication process due to the interplanar π−π interactions 
and van der Waals forces between the graphene layers. This agglomeration reduces the 
surface area of the graphene films and the diffusion of the electrolyte ions, which results in a 
decrease in the electrochemical performance. Therefore, a number of strategies have been 
developed to prevent aggregation of the graphene sheets to increase the surface area and 
promote transport of electrolyte ions. These include the addition of spacers [42] and crumpling 
of the graphene sheets [43]. 
Wang et al. [44] reported the synthesis of reduced graphene oxide/carbon black 
(rGO/CB) hybrid self-standing films by a simple vacuum filtration method. The restacking of 
individual graphene sheets was considerably reduced by the CB spacers, resulting in a 
significant increase in electrochemical performance due to an open structure for charge storage 
and ion transport. The synthetic effects of the rGO sheets, CB, and the interlayer water led to a 
large accessible surface area for the electrolyte. Moreover, the uniformly distributed CB 
particles between the graphene layers prevented compact restacking of the rGO sheets and 
also provided electrical contact between the base planes of the rGO sheets. As-fabricated FSCs 
Page 11 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 14 (native) -----
12 
 
with an rGO/CB hybrid film and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)/H2SO4 gel on a Au-coated polyethylene 
terephthalate (PET) substrate presented a specific capacitance of 112 F/g at a scan rate of 5 
mV/s and excellent rate performance with a specific capacitance of 79.6 F/g at a high scan rate 
of 1 V/s. Moreover, the FSSC exhibited good cycling stability with 94% capacitance retention 
after 3000 cycles in the normal state and 2000 cycles in the bent state. However, CB is only an 
additive and can only contribute a very small amount of capacitance to the whole device. 
Furthermore, compared to the intercalation method, solution-based strategies could be more 
effective in reducing the agglomeration of graphene sheets in terms of simplicity, effectiveness, 
processing, and cost of materials. In this context, Choi et al. [45] developed functionalized rGO 
films by functionalizing graphene with Nafion using a supramolecular assembly approach (see 
Figure 4 (d)). The tight integration of the amphiphilic Nafion species prevents restacking of the 
individual graphene nanosheets (GNSs) and improves the interfacial wettability between the 
electrodes and electrolyte. Subsequently, the interconnected functionalized rGO networks 
provide continuous transport pathways for fast-ion transport. FSSCs based on functionalized 
rGO thin films with solvent-cast Nafion electrolyte membranes were thus fabricated. The specific 
capacitance for the functionalized rGO species was determined as 118.5 F/g and remained 
almost constant (90% retention at 30 A/g) with changes in current density ranging from 1 to 30 
A/g. Flexibility was demonstrated by bending the device at high tensile strain during the 
operation as shown in  Figure 4 (e). In addition, the bending experiment also demonstrated that 
there was no significant reduction in the initial capacitance at a bending radius of 2.2 mm, 
indicating good mechanical stability of the rGO-based FSSC (Figure 4 (f)). Yu and Dai [46] 
reported the synthesis of poly(ethyleneimine)-modified graphene sheet/acid-oxidized CNT 
hybrid films with interpenetrating network carbon structures and well-defined nanopores. The 
resulting free-standing multilayered CNT/graphene hybrid film exhibited a near-rectangular CV, 
even at an exceedingly high scan rate of 1 V/s, with an average specific capacitance of 120 F/g 
(three-electrode).  
Page 12 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 15 (native) -----
13 
 
Due to the dependence of the carbon materials on electrical double-layer charge 
storage, the electroactive surface area, pore size distribution, and transport resistance of the 
electrolyte ions restricts their reversible capacitance. Thus, the actual gravimetric specific 
capacitance of carbon materials is usually <300 F/g and leads to a lower energy density [47]. To 
further increase the energy density, pseudocapacitive materials, with much higher capacitances 
than those of carbon materials due to redox reactions, have attracted great interest as potential 
substitutes for carbonaceous materials [6]. The commonly explored pseudocapacitor materials 
include transition metal oxides and hydroxides [48] such as RuO2 [49], MnO2 [50], Fe3O4 [51], 
and Nb2O5 [52] as well as CPs such as polyaniline (PAni) [53], polypyrrole (PPy) [54], and 
polythiophene (PT) [55]. However, these materials exhibit a number of disadvantages including 
particle aggregation, poor electrical conductivity (metal oxides), structural degradation, and poor 
cycling stability. On the other hand, carbon-based materials exhibit high electrical conductivity 
and a large surface area and make suitable scaffolds to support these pseudocapacitive 
materials. Hence, a combination of these high capacitance materials with flexible carbon 
materials should provide better performance results. 
  
In this context, freestanding metal oxides/nitrides, polymer/CNT, and graphene hybrid 
electrodes were fabricated by simple methods, utilizing the synergistic effects from the high 
electrochemical performance of pseudocapacitive materials and the high conductivity and 
mechanical consolidation of the CNTs and graphene. Thus, mesoporous vanadium nitrite 
nanowire (VNNW)/CNT hybrid electrodes were fabricated by a simple vacuum filtration method 
[56]. Notably, the device composed of VNNW/CNT hybrid electrodes and a PVA/H3PO4 gel 
electrolyte only weighed 15 mg (whole device) and exhibited a high volume capacitance of 7.9 
F/cm3 and energy and power densities of 0.54 mWh/cm3 and 0.4 W/cm3, respectively, at a 
current density of 0.025 A/cm3. Likewise, 3D intertwined nitrogen-doped carbon encapsulated 
mesoporous vanadium nitrite (MVN@NC) NWs were prepared by hydrothermal formation of 
V2O5 NWs and subsequent DA polymerization, vacuum filtration, and annealing under NH3 [57]. 
Page 13 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 16 (native) -----
14 
 
Thus, the paper-like free-standing MVN@NC NW electrode exhibited a thickness of 45 µm 
without any mechanical support or additives. FSSCs were fabricated by sandwiching two 
freestanding MVN@NC NW film electrodes with PVA, sodium polyacrylate (PAAS), and KOH 
gel electrolyte (PVA/PAAS/KOH). This delivered a remarkable volumetric capacitance of 10.9 
F/cm3 at a current density of 0.051 A/cm3 and a high energy density of 0.97 mWh/cm3 with a 
power density of 2.72 W/cm3 based on the entire cell volume. These excellent electrochemical 
performances can be attributed to the MVN NWs that provide abundant active sites that are 
accessible for charge storage and the N-doped carbon shell that suppresses electrochemical 
dissolution of the inner MVN NWs in an alkaline electrolyte.  
In addition to metal oxides/nitrites, many efforts have been made to fabricate self-
standing films of CPs such as PAni, PPy, and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT). 
Among these compounds, PAni, known for its ease of synthesis, low cost, environmental 
friendliness, and potentially large pseudocapacitance originating from its redox reactions, is one 
of the most promising electrode materials for SC application [58]. However, PAni exhibits severe 
mechanical degradation caused by swelling and shrinkage during the doping and dedoping 
processes, which greatly limits its application as an electrode material for SCs. Therefore, to 
harvest the high capacitance of PAni while maintaining good cyclic stability, it is usually 
combined with carbon-based materials such as graphene and CNTs. Chi et al. [59] developed a 
new type of nanohybrid based on a 3D graphene hydrogel-loaded PANi supported on 
freestanding graphene paper by an inkjet printing method. The electrochemical performance of 
the FSSCs based on these electrodes were surprisingly improved with a specific capacitance of 
864 F/g at a current density of 1 A/g and an areal capacitance of 190.6 mF/cm2 at a current 
density of 0.5 mA/cm2. Owing to the synergistic effect of the different components in this 
nanohybrid paper, the FSC exhibited an excellent energy density of 24.02 Wh/kg (at a power 
density of 400.33 W/kg), remarkable flexibility, and 96% cycling performance of over 1000 
cycles. Chen et al. [60] reported the electrodeposition of PPy on a freestanding vacuum-filtered 
Page 14 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 17 (native) -----
15 
 
CNT film as another example of a CP/carbon composite. The CNT/PPy freestanding film 
exhibited good mechanical properties (ultimate tensile strength: 16 MPa). Thus, FSSCs based 
on robust CNT/PPy films exhibited good flexibility, a high volumetric capacitance (4.9 F/cm3; 
considering total volume of the device), and 95% long cycling stability after 10,000 cycles. In 
addition, the FSSC device displayed an energy density of 0.26 mWh/cm3 and a power density of 
0.15 W/cm3, both of which are acceptable values for practical application.  
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(styrenesulfonate) 
(PEDOT/PSS) 
is 
also 
considered as a promising material for SCs, mainly due to its high conductivity, good chemical 
and electrochemical stabilities, and excellent dispersibility in various solvents [61]. Liu et al. [62] 
prepared flexible rGO-PEDOT/PSS films by a simple bar-coating method. Notably, the device 
based on an rGO-PEDOT/PSS electrode retained 100% electrochemical performance under 
complete bending (180°) and rolled up (1000-fold) conditions. Moreover, a high areal 
capacitance of 448 mF/cm2 was achieved at a scan rate of 10 mV/s when using a composite 
electrode with high mass loading (8.49 mg/cm2), indicating its potential in practical applications. 
In addition to graphene and CNT-based free-standing films, Li et al. [63] have recently 
developed a novel method for the synthesis of thick PEDOT:PSS films with the highest 
conductivity (1400 S/cm) and a low sheet resistance of 0.59 ohm/sq. An FSSC based on the 
PEDOT:PSS film delivered a volumetric capacitance of 50.1 F/cm3 at a current density of 0.1 
A/cm3. Interestingly, the device sustained a high volumetric capacitance of 32.9 F/cm3, even at 
an extremely high current density of 100 A/cm3, suggesting exceptional rate capabilities. 
Moreover, the device displayed an outstanding volumetric energy density of 6.80 mWh/cm3 at a 
power density of 100 mW/cm3. Surprisingly, the device maintained an energy density of 3.54 
mWh/cm3 at a high power density of 12815 mW/cm3, 3.15 mWh/cm3 at a power density of 
16160 mW/cm3, and 3.15 mWh/cm3 at a very high power density of 16160 mW/cm3. Thus, the 
outstanding electrochemical properties of the FSCs were attributed to the excellent conductivity 
of the free-standing PEDOT:PSS films.  
Page 15 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 18 (native) -----
16 
 
3.2 Substrate-supported flexible electrodes 
The thickness of the electrode materials used in FSSCs is lower (<50 µm); the 
freestanding active material films are relatively fragile and can flake off the electrode after 
prolonged bending. To overcome this problem, many efforts have been made to support the 
active materials on flexible substrates. In this section, we provide a brief description of recent 
advancements in support substrates. These include coating and growing of active materials on 
flexible, porous, and light-weight substrates such as flexible metal substrates (SS, nickel, and 
titanium), carbon-based electrodes, and porous materials (conventional paper, textiles, and 
cable-type electrodes and bendable plastics).  
3.2.1 Flexible metal substrates 
Metal substrates have been extensively used as electrode substrates for SCs because 
they exhibit high electrical conductivity and good mechanical properties [64-67]. Various metal 
substrates such as SS [64], copper (Cu) [65], nickel (Ni) [66], and titanium (Ti) [67] provide high 
strength, good conductivity, and ease of preparation. In addition, the electrode configuration of 
electroactive materials that are directly synthesized on the substrate surface leads to an 
increase in SC energy density and flexibility. On the other hand, conventional powder-formed 
materials require additional binders, resulting in low energy density and mechanical durability 
[68]. Chodankar et al. [69] prepared porous nanostructured MnO2 directly on a flexible SS 
substrate by chemical bath deposition (CBD) (Figure 5 (a-b)). FSSCs based on these flexible 
MnO2 electrodes were assembled with a carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC)-Na2SO4) gel electrolyte 
and afforded a specific capacitance of 145 F/g with a specific energy of 16 Wh/kg. Moreover, 
the device displayed almost negligible loss in capacitance under different bending conditions as 
well as long-term stability over 2500 cycles. More importantly, a series combination of two 
MnO2-FSC devices easily glowed up two light-emitting diodes (LEDs) for 135 s, further 
confirming the significant potential for application in different portable electronic devices. 
Nanoporous 3D Cu(OH)2 nanorods grown directly on copper foil provide a large amount of 
Page 16 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 19 (native) -----
17 
 
active sites for redox reactions that can be easily accessed by electrolyte ions [70]. The flexible 
and foldable asymmetric SCs based on Cu(OH)2 as positive and activated carbon (AC) as 
negative electrodes delivered a high energy density of 3.68 mWh/cm3 and a high power density 
of 5314 mW/cm3. Practical applicability was displayed by lightning 26 LEDs with the tandem 
device. Similarly, Sheng et al. [71] reported interpenetrating graphene electrodes fabricated by 
electrochemical deposition of vertical GO on gold foil. The double-layer capacitor comprising 
these graphene electrodes exhibited a specific capacitance of 283 mF/cm2 and a short resistor-
capacitor time constant of 1.35 ms.  
Despite these advancements, the conducting substrates used in FSSC electrodes (SS, 
Cu, and Al foil) are usually much thicker and heavier than the coated active material. Therefore, 
even if the gravimetric specific capacitance based only on the active materials is increased, the 
low mass loading will only lead to a marginal increase in capacitance for the whole device. 
Furthermore, the charges in the thick electrode materials cannot be conveniently transferred to 
the surface of the conducting substrates, thereby greatly decreasing the rate capability and 
capacitance of SCs with thick electrodes. This problem can be solved by using a 3D conductive 
structure as substrate to increase the loading mass of the electrode. Many studies have 
proposed the use of porous metallic substrates such as mesh or foams [72]. Huang et al. [73] 
demonstrated an easy and cost-effective strategy to fabricate stretchable SCs with high 
performance and excellent cycling stability by electrochemical deposition of PPy on smartly 
tailored stretchable SS meshes (Figure 5 (c)). The fabricated FSSC exhibited a capacitance up 
to 170 F/g at a specific current of 0.5 A/g and could be effectively enhanced to 214 F/g with a 
20% strain. Notably, the device can be operated at a very high scan rate up to 10 V/s in 
aqueous electrolytes. This value is significantly higher than that normally employed in PPy-
based SCs. Furthermore, under stretching conditions (0% and 20% strains) the device still 
achieved significant capacitance retentions of 98% and 87%, respectively, at a very high 
specific current of 10 A/g after 10,000 cycles (Figure 5 (d)). The CV curves recorded at 10 mV/s 
Page 17 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 20 (native) -----
18 
 
completely overlapped when the device was knotted, folded, and bent (Figure 5 (e); inset: 
corresponding digital photographs).This remarkable performance was attributed to the open 
porosity of the highly utilized PPy materials and the high electric conductivity of the mesh. Zhou 
et al. [74] prepared a core-shell heterostructure based on layered titanate NWs coated with 
nickel hydroxide nanosheets on a titanium mesh (K2Ti4O9@Ni(OH)2/Ti) by a simple nickel ion 
exchange reaction. The FSSCs were assembled with a K2Ti4O9@Ni(OH)2/Ti flexible electrode 
and KOH/PVA solid-state electrolyte. The device exhibited a specific capacitance of 5.8 mF/cm2 
at 5 mV/s with a retention rate of 92.5% after 2000 cycles and 92.7% after 10,000 cycles. 
Moreover, the K2Ti4O9@Ni(OH)2/Ti FSCs cell displayed an energy density of 4.8 mWh/cm3 (0.72 
mWh/cm2) at a power density of 1.1 mW/cm3 (0.16 mW/cm2) and still retained 7.5 mWh/cm3 
(1.13 mWh/cm2) at a power density of 0.32 mW/cm3 (0.048 mW/cm2). Notably, FSSCs 
displayed excellent mechanical integrity with no significant change in electrochemical 
performance after mechanical stress of more than 200 intentional bends to a radius of ~1.5 cm. 
Likewise, NiCo2O4 nanowire arrays (NWAs) on different flexible substrates, including nickel 
foam, carbon cloth, Ti-foil, and polytetrafluoroethylene tape, were prepared by Wang et al. [75]. 
The FSSC device assembled with the NiCo2O4 NWs on Ni-foam provided an areal capacitance 
of 161 mF/cm2 at 1 mA/cm2 with a capacity retention of 82% (137 mF/cm2) after increasing the 
current density eightfold (8 mA/cm2). In addition, the device exhibited good cycling stability 
under twisted and bent conditions over 3000 cycles. This high performance was attributed to the 
highly conductive 3D macroporous Ni foam, which enables efficient charge transport and 
accessible diffusion of the electrolyte. Recently, a hierarchical PPy@Co-Ni layered double 
hydroxide (CoNi-LDH) core–shell array was prepared by a two-step electrosynthetic method 
[76]. In this integrated configuration, the PPy core provided excellent conductivity, while the Co-
Ni LDH shell acted as a protection layer to enhance the structural stability. The asymmetrical 
FSSC cell (PPy@LDH//RGO) presented an energy density of 46 Wh/kg at a power density of 
2.4 kW/kg as well as the highest cycling stability (15.4% increase in capacitance after 20,000 
Page 18 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 21 (native) -----
19 
 
cycles). The synergistic effect in this hierarchical core–shell nanostructure contributes towards 
the promising overall performance of the all-solid-state asymmetric SC device.  
3.2.2 Paper-based substrates 
 
Taking into consideration their conductivity and porosity, metallic porous substrates are 
considered good candidates for flexible SC application. However, the lower corrosive resistance 
of the metal limits this applicability. In addition, the heavy nature of the metallic current collector 
unusually increases the weight of the whole flexible SC device. On the other hand, carbon-
based supporting substrates such as carbon paper, foam, and cloth exhibit higher electrical 
conductivity, lower corrosive resistance, and most importantly, better flexibility and lower weight. 
Thus, they are better candidates for the flexible SCs application. This section summarizes 
recent advancements in carbon-based flexible substrates for FSCs. 
Carbon paper consists of regular arrangements of carbon microfibers (CMFs) into flat 
sheets with enormous nanoscale pores that provide a large surface area to host the electrode 
material. The single carbon fibers present in carbon paper are well connected to each other to 
form a conducting network that allows the formation of appropriate pore channels. These 
channels create an efficient electron transportation path as well as effective electrolyte access 
to the electrochemically active materials. Likewise, carbon nanofoams consist of a cluster-
assembly of carbon strings in the form of a loose 3D web. Due to their porosity, mechanical 
integrity, and good conductivity, they have been widely used as substrates in fuel cells, SCs, 
and other applications. [77].  
Various forms of paper are widely used in our daily life for hygiene and sanitation 
purposes, packaging, and decorating. In addition, paper applications have been expanded to 
flexible electronic devices such as photodiodes, transistors, circuits, and displays. Recently, 
several studies have demonstrated that paper can also be an excellent support for loading 
active materials to fabricate high performance SCs. Tao et al. [78] reported a solid-state SC with 
conventional Xerox paper by simple pencil drawing. The thin graphite sheets on paper provided 
Page 19 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 22 (native) -----
20 
 
effective channels for electron transmission with a low resistance of 95 Ω/sq. The conductive 
organic material of PPy coated onto thin graphite sheets acted as the electrode material of the 
device. The as-fabricated SC exhibits a high specific capacitance of 52.9 F/cm3 at a scan rate of 
1 
mV/s. 
In 
another 
investigation, 
high-purity single-walled 
carbon 
nanotube 
(SWCNT)/graphene flake ink was cast by a rod-rolling method on conventional paper and 
applied to the SCs [79]. Interestingly, at room temperature, the paper with the 
SWCNT/graphene ink provided lower sheet resistance (90.5 Ω/sq) than the paper with SWCNT 
(440.2 Ω/sq). Similarly, Zhang et al. [80] developed a new flexible SC in which the multi-walled 
carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) were coated onto microfibrillated cellulose (MFC) doped with 
solid polyelectrolyte [polyethylene oxide (PEO) and lithium chloride]. In this design, the 
MWCNTs acted as the active material while the MFC coated with polyelectrolyte served the 
dual role of electrolyte and separator. Both the electrode and separator sheets afforded good 
conductivities (~8.2×10-4 S/cm and 6.8×10-4 S/cm) and hence, an acceptable specific 
capacitance of 154.5 mF/cm2 at 20 mV/s. In addition, the paper-based device displayed 
excellent mechanical properties with a tensile strength of 1 MPa and a Young's modulus of 123 
MPa, which are significantly better than those observed for conventional liquid or gel-based soft 
SCs.  
The performance of these paper-based SCs is still limited but can be further enhanced 
by adding pseudocapacitive materials in carbon-based SCs. Yun et al. [81] reported an FSSC 
based on PAni/Au/paper structures that could be easily scaled-up to large-scale production. 
Interestingly, the device enhanced the energy density to 0.01 Wh/cm3 (comparable to that of 
AC-based SCs with an aqueous electrolyte) and a power density of ~3 W/cm3. Furthermore, the 
cell exhibited excellent long-term cycling stability over 10,000 charge/discharge cycles with 
100% Coulombic efficiency. On the other hand, metal oxides are the best pseudocapacitive 
candidates to combine with carbon materials and hold great promise in increasing the overall 
Page 20 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 23 (native) -----
21 
 
performance of the device. Recently, a paper-based asymmetric device was also developed 
with Ni/MnO2 filter paper as the positive electrode and Ni/AC filter paper as the negative 
electrode, separated by a PVA-Na2SO4 electrolyte [82]. Impressively, the asymmetric device 
exhibited a volumetric energy density of 0.78 mWh/cm3 as well as superior flexibility under 
different bending conditions with practical demonstration (see Figure 5 (f)). A paper-based all-
solid-state flexible planar SC using a PEDOT:PSS-CNT/Ag electrode was accomplished using 
the inkjet printing technique [83]. The device delivered the best rate capability up to 10,000 
mV/s and a fast frequency response (relaxation time constant τ0: 8.5 ms). A high volumetric 
specific capacitance of 23.6 F/cm−3 with long cycle stability of ~92% capacitance retention after 
10,000 cycles was also displayed.  
3.2.3 Textile substrates 
 
Textile-based electronics such as e-textiles, smart textiles, and wearable electronics can 
be potentially utilized in the future for high-tech sportswear, workwear, portable energy systems, 
health monitoring systems, and military camouflage [84]. These integrated devices for wearable 
electronics need an energy source and thus, textile-based SCs hold great promise for 
application in these systems (Figure 6 (a)). Common textiles such as cotton, polyester, and 
acrylonitrile are reusable, cheap, flexible, and hydrophilic [85]. When considering flexibility and 
stretchability, textile-based substrates have many advantages over paper based-substrates [85]. 
For example, the porous structure of these textiles provides abundant support for the loading of 
active materials and facilitates the rapid absorption of electroactive materials due to their 
hydrophilic nature. This results in a much higher areal mass loading of active materials and 
therefore a higher areal power and energy density [86]. Low cost and highly efficient textile-
based SCs are already being integrated into prototype wearable electronics. For instance, CNTs 
have been directly grown on carbon cloth to fabricate conducting electrodes with 3D porous 
network architecture [87]. The assembled FSSCs exhibited extraordinary electrochemical 
performances including a capacitance of 106 F/g (areal capacitance: 38.75 mF/cm2), an 
Page 21 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 24 (native) -----
22 
 
ultralong cycle life (100,000-fold; 99% capacitance retention), a high energy density (2.4 
µWh/cm2), and a high power density (19 mW/cm2). In addition, the device sustained its excellent 
performance even under very harsh conditions such as shape deformation (bending, folding, 
etc.), high mechanical pressure (63 kPa), and a wide temperature window (up to 100 °C). 
Nitrogen-doped single crystalline silicon carbide nanowires (SiCNWs), directly grown on flexible 
carbon fabric by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method as shown in Figure 6 (b) [88]. The 
FSSC cell fabricated with this unique material displayed an areal capacitance of 4.7 mF/cm2, 
which translates into an excellent power density of 72.3 mW/cm2 (considerably higher than that 
observed in electrolytic capacitors) and an energy density of 0.12 µWh/cm2 together with 
superior rate ability and cyclability (~100% after 10,000 cycles; Figure 6 (c-e)). Notably, the 
SiCNW-based textile FSSC can be operated at an ultrahigh rate (up to 30 V/s), which is two 
orders of magnitude higher than that of conventional SCs. Further attempts were made to 
improve the electrochemical performances of textile-based SCs by fabricating hybrid composite 
materials such as carbon-metal oxides and/or CPs. Jin et al. [89] introduced a novel approach 
for the functionalization of carbon fabric by a simple acid-oxidation and heat-treatment method. 
This approach created oxygen-functional groups on the carbon fabric that in turn added extra 
capacitance through a pseudocapacitive mechanism and provided additional potential window. 
Thus, the symmetric cells fabricated with these functionalized electrodes could be cycled in a 
voltage window up to 1.6 V and provided a capacitance of 134.8 F/cm2 (or 2.41 F/cm3) with an 
energy density of 0.83 mWh/cm3 and a power density of 1.58 W/cm3. These values are higher 
than those observed for most previously reported CF-based SCs. MnO2 is the most successful 
and promising pseudocapacitive material in terms of cost-effectiveness, high performance, and 
environmental friendliness. A lightweight MnO2/CNT-based textile SC was developed by Ko et 
al. [90]. A very simple fabrication process was implemented, comprising the deposition of 
MWCNTs onto commercial textiles using the “dip and dry” method and subsequent 
Page 22 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 25 (native) -----
23 
 
electrodeposition of MnO2 nanosheets onto the MWCNTs. Due to the strong van der Waals 
forces and carboxyl groups, MWCNTs strongly adhered to the surface of the textile fibers 
through hydrogen bonds and washing and other mechanical processes did not damage these 
textiles. Interestingly, the FSSC cell displayed a specific capacitance of 324 F/g at 0.5 A/g 
and an energy density of 7.2 Wh/kg with excellent cycling stability of ~100% capacity 
retention over 5000 cycles. Recently, Javed et al. [91] developed a zinc sulfide-based textile 
SC using a hydrothermal method. The ZnS-textile-based symmetric SC exhibited excellent 
electrochemical performance with a high specific capacitance of 540 F/g (areal capacitance: 
56.25 F/cm2) at a scan rate of 5 mV/s with good rate capability and excellent cycling stability 
(94.6% retention of the initial capacitance after 5000 cycles) at a constant current density of 0.8 
mA/cm2. A high energy density of 51 Wh/kg at a power density of 205 W kg was also achieved, 
indicating excellent ion accessibility and charge storage ability. Wang et al. [92] reported the 
growth of vertically aligned graphene nanosheets (VAGNs) decorated with Co3O4 nanoparticles 
directly on the carbon fabric for extraordinary SSCs as presented in Figure 6 (f). The 
Co3O4@VAGNs hybrid exhibited an excellent specific capacitance of 3480 F/g (close to the 
theoretical value of 3560 F/g). This value was attributed to the VAGN supported onto the carbon 
fabric, which served as an excellent backbone. A solid-state symmetric cell based on a 
Co3O4/VAGN/carbon fabric cell delivered a capacitance of 580 F/g under normal and bending 
conditions with good cycling ability (86.2% capacitance retention after 20,000 cycles; Figure 6 
(g-i)). Moreover, the cells exhibited an excellent energy density of 80 Wh/kg that was 
maintained at 27 Wh/kg at a high power density of 20 kW/kg.  
3.2.4 Yarn-like (fiber) substrates 
Fiber SCs are small lightweight 1D wires with diameters ranging from micrometers to 
millimeters. Fiber SCs have several advantages over conventional planar SCs, including great 
design versatility (allows fabrication into various desired shapes that can be located at different 
places), high flexibility (allows them to be woven or knitted into smart textiles with excellent 
Page 23 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 26 (native) -----
24 
 
wearability), and good compatibility with other energy harvesting devices and sensors to form 
integrated multifunctional systems [93, 94]. Generally, planar SCs are fabricated as a bulk 
powder or thin film. On the other hand, yarn-electrode assembly is usually constrained by the 
geometrical configuration and mechanical flexibility of the substrates. Normally, highly 
conductive fibers such as metal wires and carbon-based fibers are used as a current collector to 
grow different nanomaterials that can be directly used as electrodes in SCs. Interestingly, they 
also present a large specific volume power density that cannot be attained by planar SCs. For 
fiber SCs, the structures are numerous and much effort has been made in designing novel 
device constructions. One simple design consists of two fiber electrodes coated with gel 
electrolyte in parallel, with a space on the flexible substrate. Graphene-based materials are 
more suitable for wire- or yarn-based SCs due to their excellent electrical conductivity and 
mechanical flexibility. Recently, Huang et al. [95] developed a graphene fiber-based SC from 
wet-spun graphene fibers. The graphene fibers, which were several meters in length, were wet-
spun in a coagulation bath of CaCl2 aqueous ethanol solution and subsequently reduced with 
hydrazine. Two different-sized fibers (diameters: 35 µm and 100 µm), prepared from hydrogen 
iodide (HI) and dihydrogen dihydride (N2H4) reducing agents, displayed electrical conductivities 
of 10,000 S/m and 700 S/m, respectively (Figure 7 (a, b)). The planar cell design was used to 
fabricate fiber-based SCs (Figure 7 (c)) with a capacitance of 2.5 mF/cm2 and 3.3 mF/cm2 at 0.1 
mA/cm2 for the 100-µm and 35-µm fibers, respectively, demonstrating the adverse effect of 
large-sized fibers. The capacitance of the graphene fiber electrode can be further improved by 
combining it with a conjugated polymer. To this end, the graphene fibers were uniformly coated 
with PAni. Surprisingly, the resultant fiber SC displayed a capacitance of 66.6 mF/cm2, 
representing a 22-fold improvement. Likewise, Kou et al. [96] developed a yarn SC using a 
coaxial wet-spinning strategy to prepare polyelectrolyte-wrapped (CMC) carbon nanomaterial 
(graphene, CNTs, and their mixture) core-sheath fibers that could be directly applied as 
contactable and interweaving yarn SC electrodes as illustrated in Figure 7 (d-e). The 
Page 24 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 27 (native) -----
25 
 
polarized optical image reveals the presence of homogeneous CMC on the GO core-sheaths. 
The CMC is ionically conductive, while the presence of the electrically insulating 
polyelectrolyte avoids any risk of short-circuits. First, GO@CMC core-shell fibers were 
prepared by mixing aqueous solutions of graphene oxide (GO) and CMC into a mixture of 
ethanol/water solution with CaCl2. The GO was further reduced by acid to afford the rGO@CMC 
fibers. These presented a conductivity of 7000 S/m, while being completely insulated when 
measured from the CMC side. The solid-state flexible two-ply yarn SC displayed 
a capacitance 
and 
energy 
density 
of 
177 mF/cm2 (158 F/cm3) 
and 
3.84 µWh/cm2 (3.5 mWh/cm3), respectively, which are superior to values afforded by 
commercial capacitors (Figure 7 (f)).  
In addition to self-assembled CNT and graphene fibers and their composite fiber 
electrodes, wire electrodes can also be fabricated by directly growing active materials on the 
fiber conductive current collectors. Carbon, nickel, and titanium fibers are commonly 
employed as conductive substrates, while the metal oxides include ZnCo2O4, NiCo2O4, 
Co3O4, and Ni(OH)2 [97]. 
Although the above-discussed SCs exhibit many advantages, they are not real fiber-SCs 
due to the use of planar substrates as support. True yarn or fiber SCs should be of single wire 
form or cable-type architecture. Recently, Wang et al. [97] developed a fiber SC by assembling 
two nickel wires anchored with a NiCo2O4 nanosheet, whereby one wire was wound around the 
other and a PVA–KOH gel electrolyte filled the middle space. No obvious change was recorded 
in the electrochemical performance of the device under harsh bent conditions due to the unique 
spring-like structure of the material. However, there is possibility of electrolyte damage during 
bending due to the stress between the metal current collectors. Similarly, titania nanotubes were 
grown on titanium NWs by the anodization method [98]. In this configuration, pseudocapacitive 
titania nanotubes provided a high surface area and also acted as a separator between the Ti-
fiber and the outmost CNT yarn or sheet. These electrodes, processed in FSSCs with a CNT 
Page 25 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 28 (native) -----
26 
 
sheet electrode, displayed a capacitance of 1.84 mF/cm2, which is approximately triple that 
afforded with a single CNT yarn electrode. Remarkably, this wire-shaped SC can be 
successfully woven into various textiles and connected in series or parallel to meet a large 
variety of specific energy demands. 
The mechanical stability of a fiber SC can be further improved by fabricating cable-type 
SCs using plastic and carbon fibers instead of metal fibers as the substrate for active materials. 
A cable-type fiber SC based on PPy-MnO2/SWCNT-coated carbon fibers as the electrode was 
assembled with excellent mechanical stability [99]. In this composite, the conducting SWCNT 
backbone provided excellent conductivity, while the active mesoporous flower-like MnO2 
nanoplates and PPy conductive wrapping layer improved the electrical conductivity and added 
extra pseudocapacitance. However, this kind of SC design exhibits low capacitance due to 
reduced utilization of the active materials. Therefore, it is very important to choose a proper cell 
design that maximizes the use of the active materials. To this end, a novel fiber SC with a 
coaxial structure that possesses the highest contact area between the active materials has 
attracted significant interest. Yu et al. designed a coaxial SC using CuO@AuPd@MnO2 core-
shell nanowhiskers grown on copper wire and foil as inner and outer electrodes, respectively 
[100]. The as-fabricated coaxial SCs take full advantage of both the inner and outer active 
materials, thus providing many more electrochemically active sites for the reversible redox 
reactions. Notably, high flexibility was also exhibited and electrochemical performance could be 
well retained when tested under different bending angles.  
Preparing an industrially weavable and knittable conductive yarn with high capacitance 
is still a challenge. To this end, soft conductive yarns were produced by a scalable method with 
the use of a twist-bundle-drawing technique. These yarns are sufficiently mechanically robust to 
be knitted into a cloth by a commercial cloth knitting machine as illustrated in Figure 8 (a, c) 
[101]. Furthermore, these conductive yarns were coated with rGO and subsequently, MnO2 
nanosheets and PPy were deposited on it. The cable-type SCs fabricated with these composite 
Page 26 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 29 (native) -----
27 
 
yarns exhibited capacitances of 31 mF/cm (length capacitance) and 411 mF/cm2 in an all solid-
state two-electrode cell, which are considerably higher than previously reported values (Figure 8 
(b)). Moreover, the symmetric solid-state SC displayed energy densities of 9.2 µWh/cm2 and 1.1 
mWh/cm3 (both normalized to the whole device) with a long cycle life over 5000 cycles. Finally, 
a large-sized (15 cm x 10 cm) yarn-type FSSC was assembled on a loom and a woolen wrist 
band was knitted to form a pattern as demonstrated in Figure 8 (d). Moreover, many yarn-
FSSCs were fabricated to elucidate the effect of the number of yarns. Recently, Le et al. [102] 
developed a coaxial-fiber FSSC, comprising MWCNTs coated onto CMF bundles as the core 
electrode, with carbon nanofiber (CNF) paper as an outer electrode and polymer gel as the 
electrolyte (Figure 8 (e)). The devices exhibited a length capacitance of 6.3 mF/cm with a 230-
µm sized core electrode and an energy density of 0.7 µWh/cm (9.8 µWh/cm2) at a power density 
of 13.7 µW/cm (189.4 µW/cm2), as depicted in Figure 8 (f). Moreover, negligible changes in the 
CV characteristics (Figure 8 (g)) were observed after severe bending (180°), revealing that the 
components of the devices (CMFs, MWCNTs, and CNFs) soaked with polymer gel electrolyte 
are highly flexible.  
Thus, many fiber/yarn/cable-type SCs have been successfully explored. The discussed 
results suggest that textile-based energy storage systems with high energy density and 
mechanical robustness can be achieved using a binder free approach with nanostructured metal 
oxides as active materials and CNT graphene fibers as substrates. Moreover, there is a great 
need for the development of new nanostructured active materials with high electron 
conductivity, abundant electrochemical sites, and novel fiber current collectors with strong 
mechanical stability and ultra-high flexibility to develop fiber-shaped flexible energy storage 
devices and wire-based integrated energy systems with excellent performances. 
 
 
Page 27 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 30 (native) -----
28 
 
3.2.5 Polymer based non-conducting substrates  
Low-cost, excellent bendability and comparatively light plastic substrates such as PET 
[103], polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) [104], and ethylene/vinyl acetate copolymer (EVA) films 
[105] are considered as a promising support for active materials. PET is widely used due to its 
easy availability, excellent water and moisture repellent properties, and transparent nature. 
Several works on PET-based flexible SCs have been reported [106]. A transparent FSSC based 
on graphene was also attempted [107]. A cell with an optical transmittance of ~67% at a 
wavelength range of 500–800 nm was realized, suggesting great potential for application in 
transparent flexible electronics. In addition, the cell exhibited good flexibility with a retention of 
92.4% of its initial capacitance under a bending angle of 80°. The decrease in capacitance 
under bending was ascribed to the buckling of the graphene electrode during compression. On 
the other hand, a two-fold increase in the graphene-based FSSC was reported by Choi et al. 
[108] where functionalized reduced graphene oxide (f-rGO) thin films were used as the 
electrode and solvent-cast Nafion electrolyte membranes as the electrolyte and separator. 
Moreover, the f-rGO cell exhibited a relaxation time that was four-fold faster than that of the 
rGO-based cell as well as higher capacitive behavior at the low-frequency region. These results 
were attributed to facilitated ionic transport at the electrical double layer due to the interfacial 
engineering of rGO via Nafion. However, the capacitance of graphene is still limited, thereby 
hindering the use of these thin films in a wide-range of applications. Fei et al. [109] explored a 
new strategy of mixing CB with graphene and using cross-linked PVA-H2SO4 porous gel 
electrolytes. In this composite, CB nanoparticles were uniformly distributed in the GNSs, thereby 
greatly improving the active surface area and ion transportation in pristine graphene. In addition, 
the porous PVA-H2SO4 membrane improved the equilibrium swelling ratio of the electrolyte and 
provided interconnected ion transport channels. The symmetric cell was designed by casting a 
graphene/CB composite on PET foil and afforded a specific capacitance of 144.5 F/g at 0.5 A/g 
with good capacitance retention (67.9% from 0.2 to 4 A/g). More importantly, when the effect of 
Page 28 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 31 (native) -----
29 
 
temperature was investigated, a capacitance retention of 78.3% after 1000 cycles was 
displayed at 70 °C. A new on-chip MSC based on MnOx/Au multilayers on a PET substrate was 
introduced by Si et al. [110]. The digital photograph of the assembled device is presented in 
Figure 9 (a). These MSCs exhibited an energy density of 1.75 mWh/cm3 and a maximum power 
density of 3.44 W/cm3 (Figure 9b). Moreover, at a high scan rate of 1 V/s, the device displayed a 
volumetric capacitance of 32.8 F/cm3, which is almost two-fold higher than that of the bare MnOx 
electrode (19.23 F/cm3). These excellent electrochemical responses correspond to the improved 
electrical conductivity of MnOx due to the incorporation of gold. The MnOx/Au multilayered MSC 
also exhibited good long-term cycling stability with a capacitance retention rate of 74.1% over 
15,000 cycles (Figure 9 (c)). Notably, the cell provides good flexibility with negligible change in 
the CV shapes under different bending conditions (Figure 9 (d)), suggesting great potential for 
application in integrated micro-devices. On the other hand, Xiao et al. [111] developed a core-
shell structure by depositing MnO2 on carbon fiber and a planar self-powered SC device was 
assembled on a PET substrate. The device exhibited excellent electrochemical performances 
including a high rate capability with a scan rate up to 20 V/s, high volume capacitance of 2.5 
F/cm3, and an energy density of 0.22 mWh/cm3. Figure 9 (e and f) display the digital 
photographs of a MnO2@carbon fiber single cell under different bending conditions and its 
corresponding CV curves, respectively. Interestingly, in these CV curves, no significant change 
can be observed under different bending conditions. To meet the energy and power 
requirements, cells packaged either in series, parallel, or a combination of both may be a viable 
solution. Figure 9 (g) presents a module fabricated from 3 cells connected in series integrated 
with a triboelectric generator through which the SC can be charged. Interestingly, a practical 
demonstration was provided where the movement of a human hand (Figure 9 (h)) charged the 
SC and powered a LED. These results suggested great potential for application in self-powered 
micro/nanosystems.  
Page 29 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 32 (native) -----
30 
 
Kurra et al. [112] proposed an FSSC fabrication procedure based on PEDOT on a 
plastic polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) substrate using conventional photolithography and 
electrochemical deposition techniques. Surfactant-assisted electropolymerization allows the 
synthesis of porous conducting PEDOT electrodes. The electrodes were first tested in aqueous 
H2SO4 electrolytes and displayed excellent electrochemical performances (tunable frequency 
response and energy density). Specifically, an ultrahigh scan rate capability up to 500 V/s was 
achieved with a crossover frequency of 400 Hz at a phase angle of ~45°, values comparable to 
those afforded by carbonaceous-based materials. When PEDOT SCs were tested with a 
polymer gel electrolyte, they presented an areal cell capacitance of 5 mF/cm2 with a volumetric 
stack capacitance of 33 F/cm3 (retention: ≤80% over 10,000 cycles with 100% Coulombic 
efficiency). Moreover, the device exhibited an energy density of 7.7 mWh/cm3, a value that is 
comparable to that afforded by lithium-based thin film batteries and superior to the current state-
of-the-art carbon and metal oxide-based FSCs. Polyimide (PI) is another polymeric substrate 
that has recently gained much attention for its potential as a flexible substrate in FSCs [113]. 
Recently, In et al. [114] developed a flexible MSC based on laser carbonization of PI sheets. 
Localized pulsed laser irradiation rapidly converts the pristine PI surface into an electrically 
conductive porous carbon structure under ambient conditions. Thus, the PI sheet acts as a 
flexible substrate as well as a precursor for carbonization. The electrical properties and 
morphology of the carbon nanostructure were optimized by various laser parameters. The FSC 
was fabricated by drawing interdigitated electrode patterns directly on the PI sheets and using a 
PVA-phosphoric acid mixture as the gel electrolyte. The device exhibited a specific capacitance 
of 800 µF/cm2 at a voltage scan rate of 10 mV/s with good capacitance retention under 
mechanical bending. Interestingly, this laser-based patterning technique avoids the use of 
tedious photolithographic patterning of porous carbon and metal current collectors. Similarly, 
Peng et al. [115] prepared two FSCs based on porous vertically aligned in-plane graphene on a 
PI substrate using a laser induction technique. The device displayed a capacitance of 9.11 
Page 30 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 33 (native) -----
31 
 
mF/cm2 at a current density of 0.01 mA/cm2 with excellent cycle stability (98% retention over 
8000 cycles). Moreover, the areal capacitance was well-maintained after 7000 bending cycles at 
a radius of 14 mm, suggesting negligible effect from repeated bending.  
Several other flexible polymer substrates were tested as substrates for SSCs such as 
polycarbonates (PCs) [116], polyethersulfone (PES) [117], and parylene [118]. To date, the 
afforded results reinforce the assertion that polymersubstrate-based FSCs are promising 
candidates as energy storage devices in flexible, portable, and wearable electronics. However, 
despite their high flexibility and good ion accessibility, the electrical conductivity of these 
electrodes has been limited by the insulating properties of the substrates used, which affect the 
charge-discharge rate of the SCs. In addition, the total SC device weight increased due to the 
use of insulating substrates, leading to a decrease in capacitance per unit weight. Table 1 lists 
various flexible substrates used for the fabrication of solid-state devices and their respective 
electrochemical performances [70, 72, 75, 76, 91, 109, 110, 119-172]. 
 
4. Recent trends in the development of gel electrolytes 
Solid-state electrolytes are key components in SCs and considerably affect 
electrochemical properties such as energy density, rate capability, and cycling stability [14, 15, 
20, 26]. The advantages of SCs based on solid-state electrolytes over those based on 
conventional liquid electrolytes include easy and inexpensive packaging, simple fabrication 
steps, and no leakage of toxic electrolytes. In addition, solid-state electrolytes provide good 
mechanical stability that allows different flexible and bendable SCs to be successfully 
assembled in various applications. They also play a dual role in SC devices such as ionic 
conducting media and electrode separators. The key to develop high performance FSSCs is a 
suitable solid-state electrolyte that exhibits high ionic conductivity; high chemical, 
electrochemical, and thermal stabilities; good mechanical strength; and dimensional stability. 
Three main types of solid-state electrolytes are used in SCs, namely ceramic electrolytes (CEs) 
Page 31 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 34 (native) -----
32 
 
[173], gel-polymer electrolytes (GEs) [174], and polyelectrolytes (PE). Among these, GEs are 
extensively employed in SCs due to their relatively high ionic conductivity (10-4 to 10-3 S/cm 
under ambient conditions) [174].  
Normally, GEs are composed of a polymeric host (PVA), a solvent as the plasticizer, and 
a conducting electrolytic salt where the polymer serves as a medium that swells in the solvent 
and the ions travel through the solvent. Some studies have termed these GEs as quasi-solid-
state electrolytes due to the presence of a liquid phase [175]. Polymer matrices are also 
commonly used to prepare GEs for FSCs. These include PVA [176], poly(methyl methacrylate) 
(PMMA) [177], poly(polyacrylate) (PAA) [178], poly(amine-ester) (PAE) [179], PEO [180], 
polyacrylonitrile (PAN), poly-(ethylene glycol) blending poly(acrylonitrile) (PAN-b-PEG-b-PAN) 
[181], poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVdF), and poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) 
(PVdFco-HFP) [182]. On the other hand, based on the electrolyte salts, the GEs are classified 
as Li-ion GEs (e.g. LiCl), proton conducting GEs (e.g. H2SO4, H3PO4), and alkaline GEs (e.g. 
KOH). These exhibit a low dissociation energy and provide free/mobile ions. In this section, we 
discuss current advancements in GEs to develop different-shaped and high performance FSCs. 
The section is divided into four sub-sections: (1) Aqueous gel polymer electrolytes (AGEs), (2) 
Organic gel polymer electrolytes (OGEs), (3) Ionic liquid gel polymer electrolytes (IL-GEs), and 
(4) Redox-active gel polymer electrolytes (RGEs).  
4.1 Aqueous gel polymer electrolytes (AGE) 
 
As specified before, AGEs have been extensively studied for their potential in FSSC 
application due to their high ionic conductivity, low-cost, and non-toxicity. AGEs comprise a host 
polymer matrix (PVA, PMMS, PAA, and PEO), water as a plasticizer, and an electrolytic salt that 
can be a strong acid (H2SO4 and H3PO3), strong alkaline (KOH), or neutral (LiCl, Na2SO4). 
AGEs are also known as hydrogel polymer electrolytes where 3D polymeric networks trap water 
molecules through the surface tension. The degree of plasticization depends on the 
compositional polymer/plasticizer ratio that affects the glass-transition temperature of the AGEs.  
Page 32 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 35 (native) -----
33 
 
Generally, high performance FSSCs require good interfacial contact between the 
electrode and gel-electrolyte, thus, the interfacial features of the AGE and electrode materials 
are key components. PVA has been widely investigated as a polymer matrix for AGEs due to its 
ease of preparation, high hydrophilicity, good film forming properties, non-toxic characteristics, 
and low cost [183]. On the other hand, the selection of the electrolyte salt generally depends on 
the electrode materials. Several neutral AGEs, such as PVA/LiCl [184], PVA/Na2SO4 [185], and 
PVA/NaNO3 [186], have been investigated as promising electrolytes for FSSCs for different 
electrode materials. For instance, Li et al. [187] developed a neutral AGE with PVA as the 
polymer host, LiCl as the electrolyte, and water as the plasticizer for CNF-based films. The 
resultant symmetric device could be reversibly cycled in a wide voltage window of 1.8 V with a 
specific capacitance of 137.5 F/g at a scan rate of 5 mV/s. Moreover, ~93.1% capacitance 
retention was observed with almost constant Coulombic efficiency over 5000 cycles at 1 A/g, 
demonstrating an ideal movement of charge carriers and excellent electrochemical capacitive 
behavior. Subsequently, a practical demonstration was provided by fabricating internal series-
connected SCs that afforded an extended voltage range up to 3.6 V. The Nyquist plot 
suggested that the equivalent series resistance (Rs) of the device was 3.35 Ω, illustrating the 
excellent effective interfacial area of the active materials for the electrolyte and the low internal 
resistance of the series-connected device. Thus, this neutral LiCl/PVA AGE effectively 
suppressed the chemical dissolution and irreversible electrochemical oxidation reaction of the 
electrode and mechanically stabilized the electrode during cycling. Similarly, PVA/LiCl AGE was 
recently used in a polypyrrole/carbon quantum dot (PPy/CQD) composite material synthesized 
on carbon cloth [188]. The device exhibited good capacitance (315 mF/cm2) and good cycling 
stability (85.7% after 2000 cycles at 2 mA/cm2). Other PVA-based neutral electrolytes such as 
PVA/LiNO3 
and 
PVA/LiOH 
have 
also 
been 
developed 
to 
enhance 
the 
intercalation/deintercalation performance of metal oxide and polymer electrodes [184, 189]. 
Notably, for some electrode materials such as vanadium oxide and vanadium nitride (VN), the 
Page 33 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 36 (native) -----
34 
 
AGEs provided greatly enhanced cycling stability over aqueous electrolytes, suggesting the 
importance of interfacial contacts between the electrode and AGE electrolyte. In addition to 
PVA-based Li-ion AGEs. Lian et al. [190] have recently developed a polyacrylamide-LiCl 
(PAM/LiCl) AGE for CNT-coated graphite electrodes. The as-prepared PAM/LiCl AGE exhibited 
an amorphous structure with excellent ionic conductivity <10 mS/cm. Moreover, this neutral 
electrolyte system exhibited a high overpotential for both hydrogen and oxygen evolution 
reactions, providing a wide voltage window of 1.5 V for the CNT-graphite-based symmetric cell. 
The device also displayed excellent cycling stability with 90% capacitance retention over 10,000 
cycles and excellent rate capability up to 5 V/s.  
The relatively higher mobility of protons compared to that of Li+ ions holds great promise 
to transport charges at ultrafast rates during charge/discharge processes in SCs. The proton 
conducting AGEs are prepared by mixing a polymer matrix with water (plasticizer) and proton-
donor salts such as H3PO4 and H2SO4. To date, many proton-conducting AGEs, including 
PVA/H3PO4 [191] and PVA/H2SO4 [192], have been investigated. These AGEs exhibit ionic 
conductivities ranging from 10-4 to 10-2 S/cm at ambient temperature. Normally, proton 
conducting AGEs are applied to carbon-based materials such as graphene [193], CNTs [87], 
graphene ribbons [194], AC cloths [195], and graphene/porous carbon aerogels [196]. These 
advanced carbon nanostructures facilitate proton transport into the porous electrodes, 
suggesting enhancement in electrochemical performance and high utilization of the active 
materials. Recently, Chen et al. [197] tested different electrolytes (H2SO4, H3PO4, KOH, NaOH, 
KCl, and NaCl) with a PVA-based AGE for application to graphene-based FSCs. 
Electrochemical analyses suggested that the PVA/H3PO4 AGE exhibited a relatively higher 
capacitive performance. Lian et al. have developed a novel proton-conducting heteropoly acid 
AGE for high rate SCs [198, 199]. For example, the SiWA/PVA/H3PO4 AGE developed for a 
graphite-based device exhibited excellent performance and shelf life [198]. Compared to Nafion, 
the SiWA/PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte displayed significantly higher conductivity, achieving a 
Page 34 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 37 (native) -----
35 
 
value of 8 mS/cm at room temperature. Moreover, the as-assembled device was successfully 
charged/discharged at a very high rate (20 V/s) with a time constant of 10 ms. To further 
improve the environmental stability of the SiWA/PVA/H3PO4 gel-electrolyte, nano-SiO2 was 
incorporated into the AGE [200]. In gel electrolytes, SiO2 can function as a plasticizer, cross-
linker, and water-retaining agent [201]. The addition of SiO2 in SiWA/PVA/H3PO4 significantly 
enhanced water retention and displayed consistent proton conductivity (16 mS/cm) over the 
parent gel electrolyte. It also exhibited a cross-linking effect on the PVA polymer. The symmetric 
cell 
was 
assembled 
from 
SS 
foils 
as 
electrodes 
and 
a 
nano-SiO2-incorporated 
SiWA/PVA/H3PO4 AGE and demonstrated a high rate capability of 5,000 V/s in CV curves with 
good environmental stability and excellent cycle life (up to 100,000 cycles). Likewise, Lian et al. 
further developed another heterpoly acid AGE based on PVA and phosphotungstic acid 
(H3PW12O40, PWA) and applied it to an asymmetric cell based on graphite and RuO2 [202]. The 
PVA/PWA electrolyte provided a wide voltage window of 1.5 V and also contributed extra 
capacitance through the pseudocapacitance of the electrochemical reactions. Thus, the PVA-
HPA electrolyte shows great promise for application in both symmetric and asymmetric FSCs 
due to its good ionic conductivity and stability. Recently, H5BW12O40 (BWA)/PVA was developed 
as an effective electrolyte for FSSCs based on CNT-graphite electrodes and its electrochemical 
properties were compared to those of the SiWA/PVA electrolyte [203]. The structures of BWA 
and SiWA (Figure 10 (a)) suggest that except for the central atoms, the overall structures are 
the same. The electrolytes exhibited an ionic conductivity trend of BWA (78 mS/cm) >SiWA (60 
mS/cm) >H2SO4 (30 mS/cm) as illustrated in Figure 10 (b). Due to the high ionic movements 
and number of dissociated ions, the device with the BWA/PVA electrolyte exhibited high 
capacitance. Moreover, this device was successfully cycled in a wide voltage window of 1.6 V 
(higher than that of the SiWA/PVA electrolyte, 1.4 V) while maintaining its high proton 
conductivity. It also displayed a very stable performance with no significant decay in 
capacitance after 5000 cycles (Figure 10 (c)). Several other polymer matrices have also been 
Page 35 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 38 (native) -----
36 
 
investigated. Kim et al. [204] tested the electrochemical performance of RuO2-based FSSCs 
using different acrylic hydrogel electrolytes such as poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), potassium 
polyacrylate (PAAK), and poly(2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonic acid) (PAMPS). They 
discovered that the capacitance of RuO2 decreased in the following trend: PAMPS/H2O 
>PAA/H2SO4 >PAAK/H2SO4 >PAMPS/H2SO4. Moreover, due to the favorable proton hosting in 
the PAMPS side chain, RuO2-based SCs with PAMPS exhibited a relatively high specific 
capacitance.  
PVA-based electrolytes exhibit fluidity and thermal aging problems at high temperatures. 
Recently, Chen et al. [205] investigated the effect of temperature (between -5 °C and 55 °C) on 
the electrochemical performances of CNT-based FSCs with a PVA/H2SO4 gel-electrolyte. They 
observed that the conductivity of the gel electrolyte increased (from 5.52 mS/cm to 46 mS/cm) 
with an increase in temperature (Figure 10 (d)). Consequently, the capacitance was also 
enhanced with an increase in temperature due to the reduction in internal resistance via the 
acceleration of electrolyte ion transport/adsorption and surface modification of the electrode. 
About 24.3% and 32.6% enhancement was observed when the temperature changed from -5 °C 
to 25 °C and 25 °C to 55 °C, respectively, at 0.2 mA/cm2. It was further concluded that the PVA-
based gel electrolyte exhibited excellent cycling stability at low temperatures but was not 
suitable at temperatures >40 °C due to aging of the electrolyte (Figure 10 (e)). The digital 
photograph of the device at 55 °C displayed a color change in the PVA-H2SO4 gel electrolyte 
from transparent to brown, suggesting aging of the electrolyte as seen from Figure 10 (f). To 
limit the fluidity of the PVA-based gel electrolytes at high temperatures, Fei et al. [109] 
developed a cross linked PVA/H2SO4 hydrogel (SEM image in Figure 10 (g)). The PVA/H2SO4 
membrane was modified by poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) as a pore-forming agent to enhance 
their swelling ratio in the H2SO4 electrolyte; glutaraldehyde (GA) was employed as crosslinking 
agent. The ionic conductivity of the cross-linked PVA/H2SO4 electrolyte was determined as 24.9 
mS/cm at 20 °C and further increased with an increase in temperature. The as-fabricated cell 
Page 36 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 39 (native) -----
37 
 
with a graphene/CB nanocomposite electrode and cross-linked PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte 
exhibited good cycling stability with 78.3% capacitance retention after 1000 cycles at a high 
temperature of 70 °C (Figure 10 (h)). The photographs did not display any significant change in 
the color of cross-liked PVA/H2SO4 gel, while the bare PVA-H2SO4 turned brown suggesting 
aging at high temperatures (Figure 10 (i)). 
 
With recent advancements in alkaline rechargeable batteries and SCs the development 
of alkaline gel polymer electrolytes is of great importance [206]. Among the different electrolyte 
salts, KOH is by far the most widely investigated salt for OH- ion-conducting AGE application, 
due to its low-cost and environmentally friendly nature [207]. Several noteworthy investigations 
on KOH-based gel electrolytes for FSSCs have been reported [208]. For instance, Yang et al. 
have prepared a PVA/KOH gel electrolyte for SCs as well as Ni–MH and Zn–air batteries [209]. 
These alkaline PVA/KOH electrolytes exhibited a high ionic conductivity of 10-2 S/cm. Likewise, 
Zhang et al. [210] developed self-standing α-Fe2O3/rGO hybrid films by a vacuum filtration 
method and assembled symmetric FSSCs with a PVA/KOH gel-electrolyte. The device exhibited 
a high volumetric capacitance of 16.45 F/cm3, leading to an energy density of 1.46 mWh/cm3 
and a power density of 199.8 mW/cm3. In addition, the device with the AGE displayed excellent 
flexibility with almost no change in capacitance, even when the cell was bent to 180°. Similarly, 
Lewandowski et al. [211] developed a PEO/KOH gel electrolyte and reported good ionic 
conductivity ranging from 10-4 to 10-3 S/cm by controlling the PEO/KOH/ water ratio. To further 
improve the ionic conductivity of the PVA/KOH gel-electrolyte, additives or fillers such as SiO2 
[212] and GO [213] were incorporated. Thus, to improve ionic conduction, Huang et al. 
incorporated electrically insulating GO in a boron cross-linked PVA/KOH gel electrolyte for AC-
based SCs. They discovered that at low levels of GO doping, the ionic conductivity of the cross-
linked PVA/KOH gel increased (from 100 to 200 mS/cm), while high GO doping afforded a 
decreasing trend. This decrease in ionic conductivity with an increase in GO doping was 
attributed to ion channel blocking due to aggregation of the GO nanosheets. Interestingly, the 
Page 37 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 40 (native) -----
38 
 
device with GO-doped boron cross-linked PVA/KOH exhibited 29% higher specific capacitance 
than that with the parent KOH aqueous electrolyte. Various reports with KOH as salt and 
different polymer matrices as host, such as poly(epichlorohydrin-co-ethylene oxide) P(ECH-co-
EO)/KOH [214], PEO/KOH [215], and PAAK/KOH [216], have been investigated.  
 
Despite significant advancements in KOH-based alkaline gel electrolytes, these 
compounds still exhibit KOH crystallization under ambient conditions, suggesting environmental 
instability. The performance of SCs with PVA/KOH gel electrolytes considerably degrades over 
time due to the hydration of the KOH/PVA electrolyte [217]. To tackle the issue of environmental 
instability, Li and Lian [218] replaced KOH with tetraethylammonium hydroxide. Moreover, OH- 
ion transportation in the polymer matrix depends on the crystallinity, hydrophilicity, and 
functional group electronegativity of the polymer hosts. Thus, different polymer host matrices 
such as PVA, PEO, and PAA were tested to check their compatibility with TEAOH and achieve 
a gel electrolyte with high ionic conductivity TEAOH-PVA- and TEAOH-PAA-based SCs 
achieved an ionic conductivity of 5 mS/cm and an ultra-high rate of 5000 V/s that was attributed 
to the amorphous nature of TEAOH-PVA and TEAOH-PAA polymers with high water contents 
(12% and 46%, respectively). Moreover, no significant change in ionic conductivity was 
observed after 6 weeks of shelf-storage, suggesting excellent environmental stability.  
4.2 Organic gel electrolytes (OGEs): GEs are promising candidates for FSSCs, however, their 
narrow operating voltage window limits their wide application. The focus has therefore shifted to 
OGEs. The synthetic strategy for OGEs plays an important role in determining the mechanical 
properties and ionic conductivity of the systems. Generally, an OGE comprises a physical blend 
of a high molecular weight polymer (PMMA, PVDF-HFP) gelated with a conducting salt 
dissolved in a non-aqueous solvent. Such OGEs overcome low interface formation and improve 
ionic conductivity. Organic solvents such as propylene carbonate (PC) [177], ethylene 
carbonate (EC), dimethyl formamide (DMF) [219], and their mixtures (PC-EC [220] and PC-EC-
DMC [221]) have been used as common plasticizers to improve the working voltage range. 
Page 38 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 41 (native) -----
39 
 
Thus, the cell voltage was increased to 2.5–3 V [222] a value that is significantly higher than 
that observed for AGE-based cells. This increase in cell voltage consequently improves the 
energy density of the device [223]. For example, Huang et al. [224] developed an OGE using a 
PEO-PAN blend (PAN-b-PEG-b-PAN) as host, DMF as plasticizer, and LiClO4 as an electrolytic 
salt for an AC-based SC. The PAN-b-PEG-b-PAN/DMF/LiClO4 OGE exhibited an ionic 
conductivity of 6.9 mS/cm and excellent compatibility with carbon electrodes. The fabricated cell 
exhibited a capacitance of 101 F/g at 0.125 A/g and delivered an energy level of 11.5 Wh/kg at 
a high power of 10 kW/kg over a voltage window of 2.1 V. Moreover, the cell displayed good 
stability with very small decay in capacitance over 30,000 cycles. The ionic conductivity is 
strongly influenced by the electrolyte salt and salt/host polymer ratio [225]. Thus, several 
different salts such as LiClO4 [226], LiPF6 [227], and TBAPF6 [228] have been investigated in 
OGEs. For instance, Ramasamy et al. [229] investigated two different OGEs, namely PEO/PC-
sodium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (NaTFSI) and PEO/PC-EC-DMC-NaTFSI, for use in 
AC-based SCs. Both gel electrolytes exhibited good ionic conductivity (0.54 mS/cm and 0.76 
mS/cm, respectively), while the mixed gel electrolyte displayed higher ionic conductivity and 
thus, better electrochemical performances. Moreover, the cells operated in a wide voltage 
window of 2.5 V with high specific capacitance and good efficiency at a low charge rate (specific 
capacitance: 24 F/g, power: 0.52 kW/kg, and energy density: 18.7 Wh/kg). Other alkali metal 
ions such as Mg have been investigated in OGEs [230]. To improve the ionic conductivity, Jain 
et al. [231] incorporated SiO2 particles into a PVDF-HFP/Mg(ClO4)2-PC electrolyte for carbon-
based SCs. The resulting OGE exhibited an ionic conductivity of 5.4 mS/cm at room 
temperature as well as good mechanical and dimensional stability. Although these OGEs 
performed better than dry polymer electrolytes in terms of ionic conductivity, their mechanical 
stability was generally compromised. Therefore, considerable effort has been made to improve 
the mechanical stability of OGEs with particular interest in mimicking the liquid-like electrode-
electrolyte interface [232]. An interesting new strategy to prepare high ionic conducting and 
Page 39 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 42 (native) -----
40 
 
mechanically stable OGEs has recently been proposed in which a liquid electrolyte (LiClO4/PC) 
is entrapped in a poly(2-hydroxy-3-phenoxypropyl acrylate) matrix via an in situ polymerization 
method [233]. Thus, this new OGE integrates the qualities of liquid, dry polymer, and quasi-solid 
electrolytes in a single system. Moreover, they entrapped ~80% (v/v) of the liquid electrolyte (3 
M LiClO4/PC) and presented an ionic conductivity of 4.7 mS/cm, comparable to those of non-
aqueous liquid electrolytes. Large-scale FSSC cells (area 16 cm2) with high AC and OGE mass-
loading (4 mg/cm2) were designed and demonstrated a capacitance of 111 F/g at a current 
density of 1 mA/cm2 in a potential window of 2.5 V, indicating the industrial potential of the 
system. 
4.3 Ionic-liquid based gel polymer electrolytes (ILGE): ionic liquid-based gel electrolytes 
exhibit some additional advantages over aqueous and organic electrolytes, including high ionic 
conductivities, non-volatility, non-flammability, and wide potential windows (up to 3.5 V); 
therefore, they are considered suitable for use in flexible and stretchable energy storage 
devices. Several ILGEs have been investigated for use in FSSCs [234], with the ILGE 
properties (conductivity and working voltage window) relying on the nature of the IL and polymer 
host matrix. Similar to AGE and OGE, various polymer hosts were investigated for ILGE, 
including PVDF-HFP [235], PVA [236], and PEO [237]. Recently, Tamilarasan et al. [238] 
prepared an ILGE using 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide as 
supporting electrolyte and PAN as polymer host (PAN/[BMIM][TFSI]). This electrolyte exhibited 
an ionic conductivity of 2.42 mS/cm at ambient temperature along with good mechanical 
strength and thermal stability. The graphene-based FSSC comprising the PAN/[BMIM][TFSI] 
ILGE displayed a maximum energy density of 32.3 Wh/kg and power density 82 kW/kg with 
good cycling stability. Zhang et al. [239] developed a flexible ILGE using 1-butyl-3-
methylimidazolium chloride (BMIMCl) as ionic liquid, Li2SO4 as additive, and PVA as polymer 
host. The afforded ILGE presented a high ionic conductivity of 37 mS/cm and high fracture 
strain at 100% elongation. Moreover, the fabricated FSSC with AC as electrode and a PVA-
Page 40 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 43 (native) -----
41 
 
Li2SO4:BMIMCI gel electrode displayed a maximum energy density of 10.6 Wh/kg and a power 
density of 3400 W/kg. Notably, the ionic conductivity remained stable even after bending at an 
angle of 180°. To improve the conductivity of the gel-electrolyte, Yang et al. [240] made two 
major contributions by preparing GO-doped ILGEs such as P(VDF-HFP)) as the polymer matrix, 
the ionic liquid 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIMBF4) as the supporting 
electrolyte, and GO as the ionic conducting promoter. The ionic conductivity for 1 wt% GO-
doped P(VDF-HFP)-EMIMBF4 ILGE was determined as ~25 mS/cm, which was attributed to the 
3D distribution of the GO network throughout the gel that acts as an ion ‘‘highway’’ to facilitate 
ionic transportation. Interestingly, the device based on the AC electrode and P(VDF-HFP)-
EMIMBF4 ILGE displayed an energy density of 32.4 Wh/kg at a power density of 6.6 kW/kg, 
suggesting excellent performance. For patterned MSCs, it is important to select a polymer that 
can be easily patterned on any substrate. Poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA) is a 
nondegradable hydrophilic polymer that in an ILGE can be patterned on any substrate using a 
photolithographic process [241]. Kim et al. [242] developed an ILGE using 1-ethyl-3-
methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide ([EMIM][TFSI]) as IL electrolyte and PEGDA 
as polymer host. The afforded ILGE presented an ionic conductivity of 9.4 mS/cm at room 
temperature and demonstrated excellent electrochemical performances when used in CNT-
based FSCs. The flexible MSC exhibited a stack capacitance of 5.3 F/cm3 at a scan rate of 10 
mV/s and an energy density of 2.9 mWh/cm3 at a power density of 50 mW/cm3 and a high 
potential window of 2 V. Moreover, the flexible MSC exhibited excellent cyclability with ~80% 
capacitance retention over 30,000 cycles. However, the preparation of an IL-gel-electrolyte with 
high ionic conductivity and good mechanical properties is still challenging. Zhong et al. [243] 
prepared a cross-linked [EMIM][TFSI] ionic liquid with PEO and benzophenone (Bp) followed by 
ultraviolet (UV) irradiation. The resultant [EMIM][TFSI]-based ILGE exhibited an ionic 
conductivity of 6.7 mS/cm with a high capacitance of 70.84 F/g, a wide and stable 
electrochemical window of 3.5 V, and an energy density of 30.13 Wh/kg.  
Page 41 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 44 (native) -----
42 
 
An ideal IL-gel electrolyte should exhibit good compressive stress, good tensile strength, 
and puncture resistance. Liu et al. [244] developed an IL-mask hybrid gel electrolyte using 
BMIMBF4 as ionic liquid, N,N-dimethylacrylamide (DMAA) and methylene-bis-acrylamide 
(MBAA) as polymer host, and TiO2 nanoparticles. These nanoparticles initiated in-situ 
polymerization through UV irradiation to form a hybrid ILGE that comprised the high mechanical 
strength of the masked substance and the good thermal characteristics of the ILGE. The 
fabricated FSC exhibited a stable capacitive performance, even under a high pressure of 3236 
kPa. Moreover, due to the good thermal stability of the composite gel electrolyte, the FSSC 
comprising an AC electrode could be operated at high temperatures ranging from 25 °C to 200 
°C.  
Many pseudocapacitive materials require proton CP gel electrolytes such as RuO2, 
PANi, and PPy [245]. Recently, Lian et al. [246] developed protic ionic liquids (PILs) and binary 
systems of PILs with different cations and PIL eutectic compositions. Three PILs, namely 1-
ethyl-3-methylimidazolium hydrogen sulfate (EMIHSO4), 1-methylimidazolium hydrogen sulfate 
(MIHSO4), and imidazolium hydrogen sulfate (ImHSO4), were prepared. The ILGEs comprising 
EMIHSO4-MIHSO4 and EMIHSO4-ImHSO4 binary mixtures with a PEO polymer host exhibited 
ionic conductivities of 1.7 mS/cm and 2.5 mS/cm, respectively. Moreover, the eutectic binary 
PIL mixtures exhibited a liquidus range from −70 °C to +150 °C. The specific capacitances of 
the RuO2-based cell using MIHSO4-ImHSO4, EMIHSO4-ImHSO4, and EMIHSO4 were 
determined as 67 mF/cm2, 44 mF/cm2, and 26 mF/cm2, respectively, suggesting a higher proton 
contribution of the MI and Im cations (over that of EMI) to the electrochemical oxidation and 
reduction of RuO2. Similarly, Gao et al. [247], prepared a 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium 
bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide–poly(vinylidene fluoride)-hexafluoropropylene {[EMIM][NTf2]–
PVdF(HFP)} ILGE and applied it to MnO2/CNT/carbon nano-onions. The FSSCs exhibited an 
energy density of 16.4 Wh/kg at a power density of 33.3 kW/kg when the [EMIM][NTf2]–
PVdF(HFP) gel electrolyte was employed. Moreover, these SCs exhibited high electrochemical 
Page 42 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 45 (native) -----
43 
 
performances under large mechanical stress, making the devices suitable for application to 
flexible electronics. 
4.4 Redox-active solid electrolytes: An emerging strategy to improve the electrochemical 
performance of a device is to modify/add redox-active species to the electrolyte to maximize the 
capacitance and consequently, the energy density of the device. Redox additives can add extra 
pseudocapacitance through reversible faradaic reactions and fast electron transfer at the 
electrode-electrolyte interface, resulting in significant enhancement of the specific capacitance. 
[248]. A typical charge storage mechanism in a redox-active electrolyte is presented in Figure 
11 (a) using potassium iodide (KI) as an example. Notably, the iodide can produce redox pairs 
(I-/I3
- and I2/IO3
-) during the electrochemical process. The ionic sizes of I-, I3
- (I3
- solvated by four 
water molecules), and IO3
- (IO3
- solvated by three water molecules) are 0.39 nm, 0.63 (1.8) nm, 
and 0.57 (1.4) nm, respectively [249]. Thus, due to their small ionic sizes, these ions can easily 
access the micropores and small mesopores of the porous electrode. A number of redox 
couples such as iodides (KI) [250, 183], K3Fe(CN)6 [251], and Na2MoO4 [252]; organic redox 
mediators such as hydroquinone [253], P-phenylenediamine (PPD) [254], and p-benzenediol 
[250]; and methylene blue (MB) [255], anthraquinone-2,7-disulfonate (AQDS) [256], and indigo 
carmine (IC) [257] have been investigated in solid-state gel electrolytes (Figure 11 (b-e)). This 
approach of adding redox-species in gel electrolytes effectively improves the performance of the 
device. Feng et al. [258] prepared a bromamine acid sodium (BAAS)-doped PVA-H2SO4 gel 
electrolyte that presented good ionic conductivity (21.4 mS/cm). The FSSC device assembled 
with AC electrodes displayed a good energy density (30 Wh/kg) for PVA-H2SO4-BAAM that was 
almost twofold higher than that without BAAM doping. The same group also investigated the 
redox additive 1-anthraquinone sulfonic acid sodium (AQQS) incorporated with a PVA-H2SO4 
gel electrolyte [259]. The resultant redox-gel electrolyte exhibited excellent mechanical strength 
and a high ionic conductivity of 28.5 mS/cm. Notably, the device exhibited a remarkably stable 
capacitive performance with the gel electrolyte, even under a large tensile strain (100%), a high 
Page 43 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 46 (native) -----
44 
 
pressure of 2000 kPa, and fold states. In our previous investigation, we demonstrated a double 
hybrid strategy using hybrid electrodes (rGO-POMs such as PMo12 and PW12) and a hybrid 
electrolyte (HQ-doped PVA-H2SO4 gel electrolyte) [260]. The symmetric cells based on rGO-
PMo12 and rGO-PW12 could be reversibly cycled in a wide voltage window of 1.6 V and 
exhibited energy densities of 1.7 mWh/cm3 and 2.38 mWh/cm3, respectively; these values are 
double those afforded in the absence of the HQ electrolyte. Yarn and fiber SCs have gained 
considerable attention for application in wearable applications. Pan et al. [261] assembled a 
CNT-mesoporous carbon (CNT-MC) fiber SC using a 2-mercaptopyridine (PySH)-doped PVA-
H2SO4 gel-electrolyte. The resulting FSC, based on two aligned CNT-MC hybrid electrodes with 
a redox-gel electrolyte, exhibited excellent capacitances (length, areal, and volumetric 
capacitances of 17.51 mF/cm, 507.02 mF/cm2, and 184.37 mF/cm3, respectively) that were nine 
times higher than those afforded in the absence of PySH.  
  
Kim et al. [262] utilized a p-nitroaniline-doped PVA-KOH (PVA-KOH-PNA) gel electrolyte 
in an asymmetric cell with SiC/Fe3O4 negative and SiC positive electrodes. Notably, the unique 
integration of hybrid electrode materials with a redox active gel electrolyte into a single device 
manifested several excellent features such as good specific capacitance (97.6 F/g at a scan 
rate of 5 mV/s) and good rate capability (72.58% retention after increasing the scan rate from 5 
to 500 mV/s). Moreover, the cell could deliver an enhanced energy of 48.94 Wh/kg at a power 
density of 463.64 W/kg and excellent mechanical flexibility. Similarly, the specific capacitance of 
a fiber SC based on RGO exhibited a threefold improvement when sodium molybdate 
(Na2MoO4) was employed as a redox-active electrolyte [263]. The molybdate species (MoO4
2-) 
form polymeric ions (H2MoO4) in an acidic medium (PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte) with a +VI 
oxidation state. H2MoO4 can react with H+ ions via Mo(VI)/Mo(V) and Mo(VI)/Mo(IV) as possible 
redox couples. 
To increase the operation cell voltage, Zhang et al. [264] investigated two redox 
mediators, namely ferrocene (fc) and 4-oxo-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinooxy (4-oxo-TEMPO) 
Page 44 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 47 (native) -----
45 
 
with a tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate/PMMA-PC gel electrolyte for PEDOT-based SCs. 
The resultant gel exhibited ionic conductivities of 1.89 and 1.73 mS/cm, respectively, suggesting 
that the introduction of a redox mediator also improves the ionic conductivity of the gel-
electrolyte. The maximum energies and power densities for fc- and 4-oxo TEMPO-based 
organic gel electrolytes were determined as 27.4 Wh/kg and 17.3 kW/kg and 20.8 Wh/kg and 
14.8 kW/kg, respectively. Zhou et al. [265] developed a PEO/LiClO4-acetonitrile organic gel with 
two different redox mediators, NaI/I2 and K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6. The cells with NaI/I2 and 
K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 could deliver specific energy densities of 49.1 Wh/kg and 33.6 Wh/kg, 
respectively. Recently, Kim et al. fabricated flexible MSCs using an OGE with a redox-active 
species (HQ) based on PMMA-PC-LiClO4 and MWCNTs on a PET substrate [266]. The 
incorporation of HQ significantly enhanced the specific capacitance and the energy density of 
the MSCs, with the latter being ~35-fold higher than that of MSCs without the HQ additive. 
 
As described in the previous section, ILGEs are of special interest in the FSSC field due 
to their wide voltage window, inflammability, and good flexibility. Jang et al. [267] prepared a 
redox-active EMIMBF4-IL-incorporated PVA-H3PO4 gel-electrolyte and investigated the ionic 
conductivity of the PVA/H3PO4/IL gel polymer electrolyte at various EMIMBF4 weight 
percentages. They discovered that the ionic conductivity of the GE increased with an increase in 
EMIMBF4 inclusion from 27.3 mS/cm (PVA/H3PO4) to a maximum of 39.3 mS/cm for 100 wt% 
EMIMBF4 addition. The improved ionic conductivity was attributed to the plasticizing effect of the 
ionic liquid. The incorporation of EMIMBF4 in the PVA/H3PO4 electrolyte effectively increased 
the specific capacitance of the AC-based FSC to 271 F/g at 0.5 A/g, a much higher value than 
that of the bare PVA/H3PO4 cell (103 F/g). Moreover, the FSC with the PVA/H3PO4/EMIMBF4 
(50%) electrolyte exhibited high energy and power density values of 54.3 Wh/kg and 23.88 
kW/kg, respectively. 
  
This section described the pros and cons of different GEs, namely aqueous, organic, 
ionic liquid, and redox-active species-based gel electrolytes. Different parameters such as ionic 
Page 45 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 48 (native) -----
46 
 
conductivity, nature of electrolyte, and mechanical stability affected the overall electrochemical 
performance of the devices. Thus, to assemble high performance flexible SCs, suitable gel 
electrolytes with good ionic conductivity and mechanical stability must be used. Different 
combinations of polymer host matrices and electrolytic salts together with their corresponding 
ionic conductivities are summarized in Table 2 [176, 226, 230, 268-274]. This list can act as a 
guide for the selection of suitable gel electrolytes in FSCs. 
 
5. Progress towards cell designs and an introduction to novel materials 
 
Previous sections provide the comprehensive summary of the flexible substrates and 
flexible polymer gel electrolytes used in FSCs.  The performance of FSCs devices is strongly 
depends on electrode materials and electrolytes. On the other hand, the device configuration is 
one of the factors defines the performance of FSCs devices. Thus, according to the 
arrangement of electrodes, FSCs can be classified into two categories such as solid-state 
symmetric SCs (SSCs) and solid-state asymmetric SCs (ASCs). Several materials such as 
nano-carbons (CNTs, graphene etc.), transition metal oxide/hydroxides/sulfides, conducting 
polymers have been widely investigated as a promising electrode materials for FSCs. 
Additionally, several new electrode materials such as MXenes, MOFs, POMs and black 
phosphorous (BP) are recently introduced as frontrunners in FSCs as shown in Figure 12. 
Following section provides the brief summary of the recent progress in these two configurations 
and strategies involved to improve the overall device performance with new designs and 
emerging new materials. 
5.1. Advances in solid-state symmetric (SSCs) devices 
5.1.1 Carbon-based SSCs 
A symmetric device is fabricated from electrodes of the same material with the same 
mass. Carbon materials exhibit excellent properties including electrical conductivity, flexibility, 
low-cost, and light weight, which make them ideal candidates for SSC application. Several 
Page 46 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 49 (native) -----
47 
 
works on SSCs based on carbon materials such as CNTs [37, 275] and graphene [40, 41, 44, 
45] have been reported to date. Miao et al. [276] developed a flexible SSC based on 
freestanding nitrogen-doped porous CNFs derived from electrospun PAN/polyaniline core-shell 
composite nanofibers. The device achieved a specific capacitance of 260 F/g at a current 
density of 0.5 A/g (areal capacitance: 0.35 F/cm2; volume capacitance: 4.3 F/cm3) as well as a 
high rate capability with 54% capacitance retention of the initial capacitance at 8 A/g. Moreover, 
the device delivered an energy density of 9.2 Wh/kg (0.61 mWh/cm3) at 0.25 kW/kg (17 
mW/cm3) and exhibited good cycling stability with 86% capacitance retention after 10,000 
cycles. The flexibility test did not reveal any significant changes in the performance of device 
after repeated deformation (bindings). SWCNTs are considered the best candidates for SSCs 
due to their good electrical and mechanical properties as well as their good corrosion 
resistance. Yuksel et al. [228] cast SWCNT onto PDMS substrates to assemble transparent and 
flexible SSCs as illustrated in Figure 13 (a, b). Interestingly, the flexible SSCs exhibited an 
optical transmittance of 82% for 0.02 mg SWCNTs, while the high conductance of the SWCNT 
thin films eliminated the use of extra charge collectors. The specific capacitance, maximum 
power, and energy density were determined as 34.2 F/g, 21.1 kW/kg, and 18 Wh/kg, 
respectively, for 0.08-mg SWCNT devices (see Figure 13 (b)). Moreover, high bendability 
without any significant deterioration in device properties was attained (<6% loss in the initial 
capacitance over 500 charge/discharge cycles). Similarly, an interdigitated pattern of vertically 
aligned CNTs was coated on a thin PC substrate via a maskless laser-assisted dry transfer 
method [277]. The flexible SSC was fabricated with an ionogel, an ionic liquid in a semi-solid 
matrix gel electrolyte. The assembled SC device reached a maximum specific capacitance of 
430 µF/cm at a scan rate of 0.1 V/s. Moreover, the flexibility test suggested a capacitance 
retention >90% over the full 1000 bending cycles, implying great potential for application in 
foldable energy storage devices. Paper-based substrates show greater promise as supports 
Page 47 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 50 (native) -----
48 
 
than other polymer substrates such as PPET and PDMS due to their porous nature that readily 
integrates with carbon materials.  
Graphene is another promising carbon isotope that has attracted much attention in the 
field of flexible SSCs due to its relatively higher mechanical and electrical properties and 
exceptionally larger surface areas when compared to other carbon materials. Recently, El-Kady 
et al. [278] developed a new strategy to fabricate graphene-based flexible SCs whereby the 
restacking of graphene was effectively avoided. The GO was directly reduced by using a 
standard LightScribe DVD optical drive. The afforded graphene films exhibited a high electrical 
conductivity (1738 S/m) and SSA (1520 m2/g), allowing their direct use as SCs electrodes. The 
flexible SSC was assembled with PVA-H3PO4 as a gel electrolyte and displayed an ultrahigh 
energy density value while maintaining the high power density and excellent cycle stability of the 
SCs (>97% over 10,000 cycles). Moreover, the as-fabricated device exhibited an excellent 
calendar life since no significant decay in capacitance was observed after 4 months. In addition, 
the device exhibited only 5% loss in the initial capacitance when tested in the bent state for 
more than 1000 cycles. This was attributed to the high mechanical flexibility of the electrodes 
along with the interpenetrating network structure between the graphene electrodes and the 
gelled electrolyte. Likewise, an interconnected 3D graphene hydrogel with exceptional electrical 
conductivity (192 S/m) and mechanical robustness was developed by Xu et al. [279]. Initially, 
silver paste was coated on the PI substrate, onto which 3D graphene and a gel electrolyte were 
sequentially casted. The steps involved in the preparation of the electrodes and FSC are 
presented in Figure 13 (c). Exceptional electrochemical properties, including a high gravimetric 
specific capacitance of 186 F/g for a 120-µm thick electrode (up to 196 F/g for a 42-µm thick 
electrode) and an unprecedented areal specific capacitance of 372 mF/cm2 (≤402 mF/cm2 for a 
185-µm thick electrode), were afforded. Moreover, no considerable change in the CV curves 
was observed, even under harsh bending conditions (Figure 13 (d)), suggesting excellent 
flexibility. Notably, only 8.4% decay in specific capacitance was observed after 10,000 
Page 48 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 51 (native) -----
49 
 
charge/discharge cycles with a coulombic efficiency of 98.8–100% throughout testing under the 
bent state (150°) (Figure 13 (e)). Gao et al. [280] fabricated a flexible SSC based on a CNF-rGO 
hybrid aerogel with a PVA-H2SO4 gel electrolyte. The assembled SSC device displayed a 
specific capacitance of 203 F/g at a current density of 0.7 mA/cm2 that was maintained at 134 
F/g after an increase in current density to 11.2 mA/cm2, suggesting excellent rate capability 
(66%). These characteristics were attributed to the highly open continuous pore structure that 
facilitates ionic diffusion. Moreover, the device exhibited excellent performance with an areal 
capacitance, maximum areal power, and areal energy density of 158 mF/cm2, 15.5 mW/cm2, 
and 20 mWh/cm2, respectively.  
5.1.2 Metal oxide/Nitride/Sulfide-based SSCs 
 
Normally, 
carbon-based 
materials 
exhibit 
a 
lower 
capacitance 
than 
pseudocapacitive/faradaic materials due to their electrostatic (non-faradaic) charge storage 
mechanism. On the other hand, pseudocapacitive/faradaic materials store charge through fast 
and reversible surface redox reactions and hence, exhibit considerably large capacitance values 
(300–2000 
F/g) 
[281]. 
This 
category 
normally 
comprises 
transition 
metal 
oxides/hydroxides/sulfides/nitrites [282] and CPs such as PANi, PPy, and PEDOT [283]. Among 
the different transition metal oxides, RuO2 is the first and most studied material due to its wide 
potential window of 1.2 V, highly reversible redox reactions spanning three distinct oxidation 
states, high proton conductivity, remarkably high specific capacitance, and a long cycle life [49]. 
Ferris et al. [284] prepared a porous gold/RuO2 electrode through a two-step procedure where 
the gold current collectors were sculptured using the hydrogen bubble dynamic template 
synthesis followed by electrodeposition of the hydrous ruthenium oxide. Figure 14 (a, b) 
illustrates the top side and cross-sectional SEM images of the electrodeposited RuO2, 
suggesting a cracked mud-like morphology. Subsequently, a flexible SSC was assembled using 
gold/RuO2 electrodes with a PVA-H3PO4 gel electrolyte comprising silicotungstic acid. A 
remarkable cell capacitance of 1220 mF/cm2 with a very low IR-drop voltage (38 mV) was 
Page 49 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 52 (native) -----
50 
 
afforded at 1.5 mA/cm2. Moreover, the cell delivered an excellent speciﬁc energy density of 
0.126 mWh/cm2 (7.9 mWh/cm3) and a maximum power density of 7.9 mW/cm2 (493.8 mW/cm3) 
(Figure 14 (c)) with a signiﬁcant capacitance retention of ~95% after 2000 cycles. These 
encouraging electrochemical properties were attributed to the porous current collectors that 
provide a mechanical and conductive framework to afford durable 3D hydrous RuO2. Similarly, 
the same group also fabricated vertically aligned carbon nanowalls decorated with porous 
ruthenium oxide for SSCs [285]. The RuO2-decorated carbon nanowalls  electrode, consisting of 
thin carbon sheets assembled from graphene domains, delivered a specific energy density of 49 
µWh/cm2, comparable to that of state-of-the-art lithium ion micro-batteries but with much higher 
power (10–20 mW/cm2) and lifetime (up to 2000 cycles at 1.5 mA/cm2) values (Figure 14 (d-f)). 
However, the high cost, toxic nature, use of acidic electrolytes, and lower natural abundance of 
RuO2 hampers its potential for practical application. Thus, significant efforts have been directed 
towards finding suitable low-cost metal oxides as alternatives. Manganese-based oxides are 
widely recognized as highly promising alternative electrode materials for RuO2 due to their low-
cost and high theoretical specific capacitance (~1400 F/g). Due to the significant potential of 
MnO2, several SSCs have been developed in recent years [105, 86]. Chodankar et al. [69] 
fabricated an SSC with MnO2 nanoflakes grown on an SS substrate and a PVP-LiClO4 gel 
electrolyte. Interestingly, the cell could be cycled in a wide voltage window of 1.6 V and hence, 
exhibited an energy density of 23 Wh/kg at a power density of 1.9 kW/kg. Recently, flexible 
SSCs were fabricated by electrodeposition of ultrathin MnO2 nanosheets on commercial carbon 
fiber yarns [286]. Two hybrid MnO2-coated carbon fiber electrodes were assembled together in 
parallel with a PVP-Na2SO4 gel electrolyte. The assembled flexible device exhibited a high 
volumetric energy density of 3.8 mWh/cm3 at a power density of 89 mW/cm3 with good flexibility, 
(no significant change in CV curves over 2000 cycles in the bending state). In addition, the 
device displayed superior long cycle stability with a capacity retention of 85.8% over 10000 
cycles. A practical demonstration was also provided by lightning a commercial LED using the 
Page 50 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 53 (native) -----
51 
 
integrated SCs, suggesting strong potential for application as flexible energy storage devices. 
However, the relatively low electrical conductivity of MnO2 (10-5 to 10-6 S/cm) and its cycling 
stability limit its electrochemical performances. An effective approach to improve the electrical 
conductivity and stability of MnO2 electrodes is to combine them with other highly conductive 
materials such as carbon-based materials and/or CPs. Shi et al. [287] decorated an amorphous 
MnO2 nanoparticle on MWCNT fiber and applied it to SSC devices. This unique amorphous 
MnO2@MWCNT fiber provided good mechanical reliability, high electrical conductivity, and fast-
ion diffusion. Impressively, the volumetric capacitance for the amorphous MnO2@MWCNT fiber-
based device was determined as 10.9 F/cm3 (specific length capacitance: 28.9 µF/cm; 
gravimetric capacitance: 10.3 F/g) at a current density of 0.1 A/cm3. Notably, the device retained 
~63% of its initial capacitance when the current density was increased from 0.1 A/cm3 to 5 
A/cm3, suggesting excellent rate capability. In addition, the device could deliver an energy 
density of 1.5 mWh/cm3 at a power density of 50 mW/cm3. The flexibility test did not display any 
significant changes in the CV curves for the MnO2@MWCNT fiber-based cell in a highly curved 
shape (180° folded). Moreover, very little decay (<10%) in the initial capacitance was observed 
over 15,000 charge-discharge cycles. Graphene can also be combined with MnO2 to improve 
the overall electrochemical performance of the SSC cell. Ma et al. [288] developed hierarchical 
MnO2 NW/graphene hybrid fibers with a mesoporous structure and large SSA (139.9 m2/g) 
using the wet-spinning method. Synergic charge storage from both the pseudocapacitive MnO2 
and EDLC graphene improved the final device performance. The SSC cell fabricated by twisting 
two MnO2/graphene fibers with a PVA-H3PO4 gel electrolyte exhibited a volumetric capacitance 
of 66.1 F/cm3 (normalized by the total volume of the two fiber electrodes) and excellent cycling 
stability with 96% capacitance retention over 10,000 cycles. In addition, high energy (5.8 
mWh/cm3) and power (510 mW/cm3) densities were also achieved, suggesting great potential 
for application in wearable electronics. Many other MnO2-based hybrid devices were 
investigated for SSCs [289].  
Page 51 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 54 (native) -----
52 
 
 
Due to their high specific capacitance, vanadium-based oxides are also considered as 
promising alternative materials to RuO2 in flexible SSCs [290]. Kim et al. [291] fabricated an on-
chip SSC on a PET substrate with hybrid electrodes of MWNT/V2O5 NW composites. The 
patterned SSC based on MWNT/V2O5 electrodes exhibited an excellent volumetric capacitance 
of 80 F/cm3 with an energy density of 6.8 mWh/cm3 in a PVA-LiCl electrolyte. The cell 
maintained 82% of the capacitance over 10,000 cycles at a current density of 11.6 A/cm3. In 
addition, bending analysis suggested a small capacitance loss of only 6% over 1000 bending 
cycles at a bending radius of 7 mm. Finally, a practical demonstration was provided by 
operating a SnO2 NW UV sensor.  
 
Nickel- and cobalt-based binary and ternary materials have gained much attention as 
electrode materials for SSCs due to their high capacitance through faradaic reactions. Recently, 
Qian et al. prepared NiO nanosheets on flexible carbon fibers using pre-deposited ZnO 
nanoparticle films as a seed-layer that was subsequently removed [292]. The device displayed a 
specific capacitance of 20 mF/cm2 at 0.1 mA/cm2 that was maintained over 10000 cycles (100% 
retention), suggesting excellent cycling stability. The CV curves tested under different curvature 
conditions (bending angles: 60°, 90°, 120°, 180°, and twist) afforded very small changes to the 
CV curves, confirming outstanding mechanical flexibility. Ni-Co-based oxides (NiCo2O4) are low-
cost ternary metal oxides with superior conductivity (from 0.05 to 10-6 S/cm) over that of single 
component nickel (2 × 10-2 S/cm) or cobalt oxides (333 S/cm), which makes them suitable for 
SCs. Recently, Wang et al. [75] designed flexible SSCs using two NiCo2O4 NWAs supported on 
Ni foam as the electrodes and PVA/KOH as electrolyte. The as-fabricated SSCs displayed a 
high cell areal capacitance of 161 mF/cm2 at 1 mA/cm2. In addition, good cycling stability (100% 
capacity retention) over 3000 cycles was achieved, even after the device was subjected to 
harsh mechanical conditions including both twisted and bent states. Likewise, Zheng et al. [293] 
assembled SSCs with a CNT/NiCo2O4 hybrid paper electrode and PVA/KOH gel electrolyte. A 
sandwich-like CNT/NiCo2O4 hybrid paper was prepared from a layer of conductive CNT 
Page 52 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 55 (native) -----
53 
 
buckypaper coated with honeycomb-like NiCo2O4 nanosheets on both sides. This CNT/NiCo2O4 
SSC device delivered a high areal capacitance of 337.3 mF/cm2 (specific capacitance: 268.4 
F/g) at a discharge current density of 0.1 mA/cm2. An excellent volumetric energy of 1.17 
mWh/cm3 and a power density of 2430 mW/cm3 were also demonstrated. On the other hand, a 
porous vanadium doped-zinc-nickel-cobalt ternary oxide (VZnNiCo) was grown on nickel foil for 
flexible SSCs [294]. Interestingly, the SSC based on VZnNiCo-based electrodes exhibited a 
capacitance of 590 mF/g, which is fourfold higher than that of NiCo2O4/NiCo2O4- and twofold 
higher than that of ZnNiCo//ZnNiCo-based SSCs. This significant increase in capacitive 
response was attributed to the synergistic redox reactions of all the ions and the direct growth of 
the unique porous nanostructure on the flexible current collector that provides excellent ion 
diffusion efficiency with a high electrochemically active surface area. Moreover, the device 
delivered a volumetric capacitance of 0.463 mF/cm2 with an energy density of 0.93 mWh/cm2 
and a power density of 75 mW/cm2. The SSC also revealed excellent cycling stability with 94% 
capacitance retention after 5000 cycles. The constant area under the CV curves at different 
bending angles suggests that mechanical deformation has no impact on the electrochemical 
activity of the flexible SC, thereby providing a stable capacitive response. Several other 
materials including ZnCo2O4 [97, 295], MnFe2O4/graphene [296], and CoMn-layered double 
hydroxide [138] have been investigated as promising electrode materials for SSCs.  
 
Metal nitrides such as titanium nitride (TiN) and VN are an emerging class of electrode 
materials for high-performance SCs due to their excellent electrical conductivity (4000–55500 
S/cm) [297]. Xiao et al. [298] prepared flexible freestanding mesoporous VNNWs on CNTs to 
realize MVNN/CNT hybrid electrodes. A synergic combination of the high electrochemical 
performance of MVNNs and the high conductivity and mechanical consolidation of the CNTs 
was achieved. The SSC cell was constructed based on freestanding MVNN/CNT hybrid 
electrodes with an H3PO4-PVA electrolyte and exhibited a high volume capacitance of 7.9 F/cm3 
and energy and power density values of 0.54 mWh/cm3 and 0.4 W/cm3, respectively, at a 
Page 53 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 56 (native) -----
54 
 
current density of 0.025 A/cm3. In addition, the device displayed 82% capacity retention over 
10,000 cycles and demonstrated excellent flexibility with almost no change in the CV shapes 
under different bending conditions. Recently, Ma et al. [299] developed a freestanding 
multilayered film electrode with alternately stacked mesoporous Mo2N nanobelts and rGO 
nanosheets (MMNNB/rGO). The SSC was then fabricated by sandwiching two thin and flexible 
freestanding MMNNB/rGO hybrid electrodes with PVA-H3PO4-silicotungstic acid (SiWA) gel 
electrolyte. The cell exhibited a high volumetric capacitance of 15.4 F/cm3 as well as energy and 
power densities of 1.05 mWh/cm3 and 0.035 W/cm3, respectively, based on the volume of the 
entire cell. In addition, the flexible SC retained 85.7% of the initial capacitance after 4000 cycles, 
suggesting good cycling stability. However, most of these metal nitrites exhibited poor cycling 
stabilities due to the irreversible electrochemical oxidation of metal nitrites during the 
charging/discharging cycles. Lu et al. [300] demonstrated the electrochemical cycling 
stabilization of TiN NWs by using a PVA/KOH gel electrolyte. The polymer electrolyte 
suppressed the oxidation reaction on the electrode surface. As a result, the TiN NW-based 
SSCs displayed extraordinary stability up to 15000 cycles (82% capacity retention) and a high 
volumetric energy density of 0.05 mWh/cm3. These results open up new opportunities in the 
development of high-performance metal nitrite-based SSCs. Similarly, many other metal 
sulfides [301] and metal phosphates [302] have been explored for their excellent potential as 
electrode materials for SSCs.  
5.1.3 Conducting polymer-based SSCs 
CPs such as PANi, PPy, and PEDOT are another class of pseudocapacitive materials 
with great potential to provide excellent specific capacitance [303]. Xiao et al. [304] designed a 
new rGO/PANi/rGO sandwich-structured nanohybrid paper and explored its potential as an 
electrode for SSCs. Initially, the free-standing graphene paper was prepared by a printing 
technique and bubbling delamination method and displayed high electrical conductivity (340 
S/cm2), light weight (1 mg/cm2), and excellent mechanical properties. Subsequently, PANi was 
Page 54 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 57 (native) -----
55 
 
electropolymerized on graphene paper with successive deposition of a thin graphene layer by 
dip coating to form a sandwich-structured graphene/PAni/graphene paper. Interestingly, this 
unique approach improved the energy storage capacity and enhanced the rate performance and 
cycling stability of the electrode. Thus, the as-obtained SSC exhibited an excellent capacitance 
of 120 mF/cm2, which was maintained at 62% after an increase in current density from 0.1 to 10 
mA/cm2, and an energy density of 5.4 mWh/cm3 (10.79 Wh/kg). PPy is another CP extensively 
used as an electrode material in SCs. This compound has good environmental stability, a low-
cost synthetic procedure, good conductivity, unusual doping/dedoping chemistry, and high 
redox pseudocapacitive charge storage [54]. A simple “soak and polymerization” method was 
employed to prepare highly conductive paper through PPy coating on common printing paper 
[305]. The as-fabricated porous flexible paper exhibited an electrical conductivity of 15 S/cm and 
a low sheet resistance of 4.5 Ω/sq. The flexible SSC cell assembled from the PPy/paper 
composite exhibited an areal capacitance of 0.42 F/cm2 with an energy density of 1 mWh/cm3 at 
a power density of 0.27 W/cm3 (normalized to the volume of the whole cell). The electrode for 
the SSC was prepared by decorating PPy NWs on rGO sheets [306]. The maximum 
capacitance for the PPy NW/graphene composite-based SSC was determined as 434.7 F/g at a 
current density of 1 A/g; this is almost quadruple that observed for the rGO-based SSC (117.2 
F/g). Notably, a specific capacitance of 361.1 F/g (83%) was retained after an increase in 
current density to 20 A/g, suggesting excellent rate capability attributed to the high dispersibility, 
large effective surface area, and high electric conductivity (457.6 S/m) of the composite. In 
addition, the as-fabricated SSC exhibited an energy density of 60.37 Wh/kg at a power density 
of 0.5 kW/kg and excellent cycling stability with 88.1% capacitance retention over 5000 cycles, 
suggesting exceptional mechanical flexibility. Recently, Liu et al. [307] proposed a chemical 
polymerization and filtering method to coat flexible bacterial cellulose (BC) paper with PANi and 
graphene. BC paper with a 3D fibrous network exhibited an appreciable areal capacitance (4.16 
F/cm2), excellent tensile strength (65.4 MPa), and high flexibility. Moreover, the SSC cell 
Page 55 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 58 (native) -----
56 
 
exhibited stable behavior in the bent state and provided an energy density of 0.12 mWh/cm2 at 
a power density of 0.1 W/cm2.  
5.1.4 MXene-based SSCs 
The revolutionary discovery of graphene realized the unusual electronic, mechanical, 
and optical properties of 2D materials, triggering extensive research in the past few years [308]. 
MXenes, the term collectively used for transition metal carbides, carbonitrides, and nitrides 
(Nb2C, Ti3C2, Ti3CN, Ti4N3, etc.) are the latest addition to the family of 2D materials and have 
received much attention since their discovery in 2011 [309]. These compounds have a general 
formula of Mn+1XnTx (n = 1–3), where M represents an early transition metal (Ti, V, Nb, Cr, and 
Mo), X is carbon and/or nitrogen, and Tx corresponds to the surface terminations (hydroxyl, 
oxygen, and fluorine) [309, 310]. Their various unique properties, such as high conductivity, 
good mechanical properties, and hydrophilicity make them promising candidates for energy 
storage applications. For example, depending on its synthetic route, Ti3C2Tx displays an 
electronic conductivity ranging from <1,000 S/cm to 6,500 S/cm [311].  
 MXenes are commonly prepared by selective etching of element “A” (mostly Al) from 
their layered precursors (MAX phases) using wet chemistry routes such as etching in HF [309, 
312] or acidic solutions of fluoride salts (LiF in HCl) [313]. Among the many MXenes, Ti3C2Tx is 
one of the most widely studied materials for FSSC application [314, 315]. Recently, transparent 
thin films of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets with transmittance values of 93% (~4 nm) and 29% (~88 nm) 
and respective conductivities of ~5736 and ~9880 S/cm were fabricated [314]. Subsequently, a 
transparent solid-state asymmetric cell (72% transmittance) was assembled using Ti3C2Tx and 
SWCNT films as positive and negative electrodes, respectively (Figure 15 a, b). Notably, the cell 
displayed a capacitance of 1.6 mF/cm2 with a long cycle life (no capacitance decay over 20,000 
cycles) (Figure 15 (c)). Moreover, almost fivefold improvement in the energy density was 
recorded when compared to the symmetric cell based on Ti3C2Tx. The exclusive layered 
structure of MXenes is thought to effectively prevent dense stacking in graphene and CPs, 
Page 56 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 59 (native) -----
57 
 
resulting in relatively porous structures that are favorable for ion transport. In this context, an 
ultra-thin SSC (size of the whole device: 149 µm based on a PPy intercalated Ti3C2 film was 
assembled (Figure 15 d)). Notably, the intercalated Ti3C2 effectively prevented dense stacking in 
PPy and the electrochemical performances (Figure 15 e) including the capacitance (35 
mF/cm2), cycling stability, and deformation tolerance, were significantly advanced (Figure 15 f). 
[315]. Moreover, the strong interconnections between the PPy backbones and Ti3C2 layers offer 
highways for charge-carrier transport, greatly facilitating the pseudocapacitive process. 
Similarly, a freestanding film comprising hybrid inks based on Ti3C2Tx nanosheets and graphene 
was developed and applied to the SSCs [316]. The assembled SSCs with the MXene/graphene 
hybrid film delivered a volumetric capacitance of 216 F/cm3 at a current density of 0.1 A/cm3. 
Moreover, the device exhibited a volumetric energy density of 3.4 mWh/cm3 at a power density 
of 200 mW/cm3, maintained at 1.4 mWh/cm3 at a high power density of 1600 mW/cm3. In this 
unique hybrid electrode, the small-sized MXene between the graphene layers acted as an 
active material and ideal “buffer” for enhanced electrolyte shuttling as well as a conducting 
spacer that prevented the irreversible π–π stacking between the graphene sheets.  
5.1.5 Polyoxometalates (POM)-based SSCs 
A new class of faradaic electrode materials known as POMs, is emerging as a molecular 
frontrunner in the field of energy storage systems [317]. POMs are nanometric oxide clusters 
with reversible redox activities that can be used as building blocks for energy storage 
applications. These materials comprise a 3D framework of redox-active molecular clusters that 
combine oxygen and early transition metals (Mo, V, Nb, Ta, and W) at their highest oxidation 
states. POMs are molecular oxides that contain tens to hundreds of metal atoms that reach 
nuclearities as high as 368 metal atoms in one single cluster molecule. Moreover, they are well-
suited to achieve a high capacity for energy storage applications due to their fast and reversible 
multi-electron redox reactions [318]. Nonetheless, the best known, most stable, and widely 
Page 57 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 60 (native) -----
58 
 
investigated species are solid acids (or anions in their deprotonated form) with the general 
formula Hn[AM12O40] (A: Si or P and M: V, Mo, or W). Notably, POM clusters (simple Keggin 
type), phosphomolybdate (PMo12), and phosphotungstate (PW12) represent the ultimate degree 
of dispersion for an oxide nanocluster as all 12 MO6 moieties (M: Mo or W) are at the surface of 
the cluster; this makes them ideal active materials for SCs [319]. Indeed, the development of 
hybrid materials made of CPs and POMs for SSCs has been tackled by our group [317, 320] 
and others [319, 321]. The anchoring of anionic POMs within the network of CPs and/or on the 
surface of nanocarbons (graphene and CNTs) has led to the synthesis of hybrid materials in 
which the inorganic clusters maintain their integrity and activity while benefiting from the 
conducting properties of the hybrid composite structure. A ternary nanocomposite based on 
polypyrrole- Phosphomolybdic acid/reduced graphene oxide (PPy-PMo12/rGO) was developed 
for the realization of a high-performance SSC [322]. The flexible cell assembled on an Au-
coated PET and a PVA/H2SO4 electrolyte (Figure 15 (g)) displayed a specific capacitance of 
2.61 mF/cm2 at a current density of 150 mA/m2. An ion soft landing (SL) deposition technique 
has been recently developed to prepare high-density CNTs decorated with monodisperse POM 
(PMo12) anions and the agglomeration of the active species (POMs) has been proven to 
strongly affect the performance and stability of SSCs [323]. The direct evidence of the uniform 
distribution of the individual redox-active species (PMo12) on complex commercially relevant 
electrodes (CNT) was provided using atomically resolved STEM imaging. The FSC device was 
fabricated from CNT/PMo12-coated carbon paper as electrode and EMIMBF4/PVDF-HFP as gel-
electrolyte. Uniform deposition of small amounts of intact active species (PMo12) on CNT 
electrodes was found to substantially improve the device performance. 
5.1.6 MOF-derived material-based SSCs 
MOFs, a new class of functional materials with high porosity and chemical tunability, 
comprise nanosized cavities and open channels that make them promising candidates as 
sacrificial templates or precursors of nanostructured materials [324]. MOFs were first introduced 
Page 58 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 61 (native) -----
59 
 
by Yaghi [325] in 1995, as extremely light materials with very high SSAs (up to 46000 m2/g), 
large pore volumes, and well-defined pore sizes. MOFs consist of metal ions or cluster units 
coordinated by electron donating organic ligands, which are commonly prepared using 
solvothermal, hydrothermal, microwave-assisted, and surfactant mediated synthetic methods 
[324]. The mass production of MOFs was recently realized by some companies (BASF and 
MOF Technologies) [326]. MOFs hold great promise as electrode materials in SCs due to their 
controlled pore sizes (0.6–2 nm) as well as their ability to incorporate redox-metal centers.  
As-synthesized MOFs are usually non-conducting, thereby limiting their practical 
application in SCs. Hence, high temperature carbonization methods are implemented to convert 
them into nanoporous carbon materials. The first practical realization of MOFs as an electrode 
in SCs was demonstrated in 2011, using some Co-based MOFs in liquid electrolytes [327]. 
Recently, they have been employed as promising electrode materials in FSSCs [328-331]. The 
FSSC with MOF-5-derived nanoporous carbon delivered a high energy density of 17.37 Wh/kg 
and high power density of 13 kW/kg with 94.8% capacity retention over 10,000 cycles using 
Na2SO4/PVA electrolyte [329]. Another effective strategy to improve the conductivity in MOFs is 
to prepare nanocomposites with other conducting materials such as carbon-based species 
(CNT, RGO) and CPs (PANi, PPy) [330]. For example, Co-based MOF crystals (ZIF-67) were 
interwoven with electrochemically deposited PANi chains on carbon cloth to realize a flexible 
conductive porous electrode without altering the underlying structure of the MOF (Figure 15 h, i) 
[331]. The SSC with the PAni-ZIF-67-CC electrode yielded a remarkable areal capacitance of 
35 mF/cm2 (stack capacitance: 116 mF/cm3) and a power density of 0.833 W/cm3 at a current 
density of 0.05 mA/cm2 and retained more than 80% of its initial capacitance after 2000 cycles. 
As previously mentioned, MOFs are ideal templates for the construction of carbons, metal 
nanoparticles, metal oxide nanoparticles, and their composites under thermolysis conditions. 
The tribasic composite MoO2@Cu@C was prepared using the POM (PMo12)@MOF (Cu-based 
MOF) as template by a thermolysis method and subsequently applied to SSCs [332]. The 
Page 59 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 62 (native) -----
60 
 
device displayed a charge capacity of 7.49 mAh/g at 0.25 A/g and 91% capacity retention over 
5000 cycles. Moreover, the cell delivered an energy density of 2.58 Wh/kg at a power density of 
86.8 W/kg. Recently, rGO/Fe2O3 and rGO/NiO/Ni composite aerogels were also prepared using 
GO/MOF composites (Fe-MOF and Ni-MOF, respectively) as precursors. [156]. The flexible 
SSC device assembled with the rGO/Fe2O3 composite aerogel exhibited a volumetric 
capacitance of 250 mF/cm3 at 6.4 mA/cm3 and a capacity retention of 96.3% after 5000 cycles 
at 50.4 mA/cm3. It also displayed excellent mechanical flexibility.  
In addition to producing nanocomposites, several efforts have been made to design and 
prepare conducting MOFs [333]. In 2016, Dinca et al. [334] applied the conductive MOF 
Ni3(2,3,6,7,10,11-hexaiminotriphenylene)2 (Ni3(HITP)2) as free-standing electrode material in an 
EDLC without conductive additives or other binders. This was the first of its kind. Moreover, the 
team claimed a bulk electrical conductivity >5,000 S/m, exceeding that of ACs and holey 
graphite (1,000 S/m). Inspired by this pioneering work, Li et al. have recently developed 
conductive MOF NWAs (Cu-CAT) on carbon fiber paper and demonstrated their potential as 
electrodes in SSCs. Typically, Cu-CAT is constructed by coordinating Cu ions with 
2,3,6,7,10,11-hexahydroxytriphenylene (HHTP) ligands in the ab plane to create a 2D 
hexagonal lattice [335]. This structure further packs along the c-axis with a slipped-parallel AB 
stacking model to form a honeycomb-like porous structure as illustrated in Figure 12. Moreover, 
Cu-CAT exhibited 1D channels along the c-axis with an open-window size of ≈1.8 nm and good 
charge transportation due to the effective orbital overlap between the Cu ions and organic 
ligands. The Cu-CAT NW-based SSC displayed an EDL capacitance of 120 F/g at a current 
density of 0.5 A/g and good cycling stability, retaining 85% of its initial capacitance after 5000 
cycles. Notably, the device delivered a surface area normalized capacitance of ≈22 µF/cm2 
(BET surface area: 540 m2/g), which is twofold higher than values observed for AC- and 
SWCNT-based cells (10 µF/cm2) and comparable to those observed for graphene-based SSCs 
(18.9 –25 µF/cm2).  
Page 60 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 63 (native) -----
61 
 
5.1.7 Black Phosphorous-based SSCs 
BP is a new member of the large family of 2D materials and is the most stable allotrope 
of phosphorous. It comprises a layered structure with corrugated planes of P atom puckered 
layers weakly bonded via van der Waals interactions [336]. Similar to other layered materials, 
single- and few-layered BP nanoflakes can be readily formed by mechanical exfoliation (high-
energy ball-milling of red phosphorus and liquid exfoliation [337]. Few-layered BP 
(phosphorene) is a p-type direct-bandgap semiconducting layered material. Moreover, BP has a 
large spacing of 5.3 Å between adjacent puckered layers that is larger than the 3.6-Å spacing 
observed in graphite and comparable to the 6.15-Å spacing in the 1T MoS2 phase. This makes it 
a promising candidate for energy-storage applications [338]. The utilization of BP in SCs is still 
in its infancy. Recently, a liquid-exfoliated BP nanoflake-based SSC on a PET substrate was 
accomplished using PVA/H3PO4 as gel electrolyte [338]. The cell displayed a volumetric 
capacitance of 17.78 F/cm3 (59.3 F/g) at a scan rate of 5 mV/s with energy densities ranging 
from 0.123 to 2.47 mWh/cm3 and a maximum power density of 8.83 W/cm3. The cycling stability 
study revealed ~71.8% capacitive retention after 30,000 cycles. 
5.1.8 Other emerging materials 
 
In addition to traditional electrode materials, a few works on FSSCs with selenium (Se)- 
and tellurium (Te)-based transition metal dichalcogenides have been recently reported [339-
340]. These materials are considered as promising electrode materials for FSSCs due to their 
large effective surface area, remarkable electrochemical performance, and good ﬂexibility, 
guaranteeing maximum functionality. Very recently, atomically thin WTe2 nanosheets were 
applied to SSCs for the first time [341]. WTe2 was initially prepared using the CVD method 
followed by liquid-phase exfoliation to afford single crystals 2-7 layers WTe2 nanosheets. The 
resulting SSCs delivered energy and power densities of 0.01 Wh/cm3 and 83.6 W/cm3, 
respectively, values superior to those observed for the commercial 4 V/500 µAh Li thin-film 
battery and 3 V/300 µAh electrolytic capacitor. These positive results were attributed to good 
Page 61 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 64 (native) -----
62 
 
mechanical flexibility and superior cycling stability (capacitance retention of ≈91% after 5500 
cycles). Table 3 lists recent advancements in symmetric SCs based on different materials with 
their corresponding electrochemical performances [191, 342-376].  
 
5.2. Advances in solid-state asymmetric SCs 
 
SSCs usually exhibit low voltage (~1 V), leading to low energy density. Thus, to expand 
the practical applications of SCs, the energy density and operating voltage of FSSCs need to be 
improved without sacrificing their device power density and cycling stability. An emerging 
approach to attain these results is to assemble ASCs [377]. Contrary to SSCs, ASCs comprise 
two electrodes of different charge storage mechanisms such as a faradaic/pseudocapacitive 
positive electrode and a non-faradaic capacitor-type negative electrode [378]. Thus, in ASCs, 
both electrodes work in different potential windows, resulting in an extended voltage range up to 
2.0 V for the cell, even in aqueous electrolytes. This range is much larger than that of SSCs and 
hence, significantly improves the energy density. Several innovative cell designs are developed 
in these years as shown in Figure 16, in order to use in wearable/bendable electronics 
 5.2.1 Carbon-based negative electrodes 
Generally, carbon-based nanomaterials are used as negative electrodes in ASCs due to 
their excellent electrical conductivity and high surface area and power density [379]. On the 
other hand, faradaic/pseudocapacitve materials such as transition metal oxides and CPs are 
used as positive electrodes due to their high capacitance and energy density [380]. AC has 
been widely studied as a negative electrode material in ASC due to its high SSA (2000 to 3000 
m2/g) and controlled porosity. Recently, Pang et al. [381] fabricated ASCs with a Co3O4-
nanocube/Co(OH)2-nanosheet hybrid as a positive electrode and AC as a negative electrode 
with PVA/KOH as gel electrolyte. The Co3O4/Co(OH)2//AC device delivered a specific 
capacitance of 210 mF/cm at a current density of 0.3 mA/cm2, which is almost twice as high as 
that of Co3O4-nanocube//AC (111 mF/cm2), fivefold higher than that of Co(OH)2 microplate//AC 
Page 62 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 65 (native) -----
63 
 
(43 mF/cm2), and twice as high as that of Co3O4+Co(OH)2 hybrid//AC (133 mF/cm2) cells. 
Interestingly, the Co3O4/Co(OH)2 hybrid//AC cell maintained a capacitance of 159 mF/cm2 at a 
current density of 10 mA/cm2, suggesting excellent rate capability (75% capacitance retention). 
Notably, the as-assembled ASC cell exhibited a maximum energy density of 9.4 mWh/cm3 with 
very little capacitance decay over 5000 cycles (97.4% retention). Graphene is another carbon-
based negative electrode material widely investigated for application in ASCs due to its high 
electrical conductivity and mechanical strength [382]. Pan et al. [383] developed ASCs by 
pairing MnOx (as a positive electrode) with chemically converted graphene as a negative 
electrode. A nanoporous Ni architecture was first constructed on the surface of a flexible carbon 
cloth (Ni@CC) to prepare a 3D porous current collector. This unique 3D architecture effectively 
enhanced the energy density per surface area due to its ability of high mass loading of active 
materials and efficient electron and ion transport. Subsequently, ultrathin MnOx nanosheets 
were electrodeposited onto the 3D Ni@CC nanoporous current collectors, which exhibited an 
areal specific capacitance of 906.6 mF/cm2 at 1 mA/cm2 in an aqueous electrolyte. When 3D 
MnOx@Ni@CC was employed as the positive electrode and chemically converted graphene 
(CCG) as the negative electrode in an ASC, with Na2SO4/PVA as gel electrolyte, a superior 
energy density of 1.16 mWh/cm3 was achieved. In addition, the device exhibited excellent cyclic 
stability with 81.5% capacity retention after 10,000 charge/discharge cycles. More importantly, 
the ASC cell maintained over 85.7% of its original capacitance, even after 200 bending cycles, 
suggesting potential application in flexible high performance wearable electronics and energy 
storage devices. A novel 1D Co2.18Ni0.82Si2O5(OH)4 ultrathin nanoflake architecture was paired 
with 
GNSs 
to 
realize 
an 
ASC 
[384]. 
Interestingly, 
the 
as-assembled 
Co2.18Ni0.82Si2O5(OH)4//graphene ASC cell displayed a specific capacitance of 194.3 mF/cm2 at 
a current density of 0.50 mA/cm2, while retaining a value of 141.6 mF/cm2 at a current density of 
6.0 mA/cm2 (~73% capacitance retention). In addition, the cell could deliver a maximum energy 
density of 0.496 mWh/cm3 and excellent cycle stability with 96.3% retention over 10,000 cycles. 
Page 63 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 66 (native) -----
64 
 
Hierarchical core/shell nanostructures are of great interest due to their large surface area, short 
diffusion paths, fast-ion/electron transport pathway, and component synergistic effects that are 
feasible for high performance SCs. Zhu et al. [385] prepared well-aligned hierarchical 
Cu(OH)2@Ni2(OH)2CO3 core/shell NWAs on copper foam as a positive electrode combined with 
rGO as negative electrode to assemble ASCs. Impressively, the device could be cycled up to 
1.6 V and exhibited a specific capacitance of 785 mF/cm2 (based on the area of the device) at a 
current density of 10 mA/cm2. Moreover, an energy density of 1.01 Wh/cm2 at a power density 
of 57 W/cm2 was attained. A practical demonstration was provided by powering a “five-point 
star” pattern on a shoulder bag using two of the fabricated asymmetric SC devices with an area 
of 1 x 3 cm2 in series for more than 45 s, indicating great potential for application as a portable 
and wearable energy storage device.  
 
The common electrochemical performance-limiting factor for metal oxides is their low 
electrical conductivity, hence, it is essential to combine them with conducting carbon or polymer-
based materials. Recently, a ZnCo2O4/ZnO@multiwall carbon nanotube hybrid was prepared as 
a positive electrode for ASCs [386]. Initially, ZnCo2O4/ZnO was deposited onto Ni foam by the 
hydrothermal method, with subsequent MWCNT deposition by a dip and dry process. The ASC 
cell was then fabricated by pairing a ZnCo2O4/ZnO@MWCNT positive electrode and AC 
negative electrode with PVA/KOH as electrolyte. The ASC device displayed a high specific 
capacitance of 111.8 F/g (at 1 A/g), a high energy density of 48.1 Wh/kg (at 900 W/kg), and 
good cycling stability with a capacitance retention of 92.9% after 3000 cycles. Moreover, two 
serial connected ZnCo2O4/ZnO@MWCNT//AC ASCs were utilized to light four parallel 
connected LEDs, which remained bright for 23 min. Similarly, Shao et al. [387] produced a solid-
state ASC device based on a graphene/MnO2 nanorod as the positive electrode and a 
graphene/Ag combination as the negative electrode. The device exhibited a maximum energy 
density of 50.8 Wh/kg and a high power density of 90.3 kW/kg, even at an energy density of 
7.53 Wh/kg. The bent hybrid nanostructured asymmetric SC was connected to spin a fan, which 
Page 64 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 67 (native) -----
65 
 
also proved the high power density of the fabricated asymmetric SC. Notably, the unique 
graphene sheet-MnO2 nanorod structure and 3D network architecture of the graphene/Ag 
species provided a higher specific surface and richer porous structure than those of traditional 
constructions, enabling high rates of charge propagation and short electron transport paths that 
improved the electrochemical performances of the electrodes. Yang et al. [388] also developed 
ASCs based on a 3D Al@Ni@MnOx nanospike (NSP) as the positive electrode, chemically 
converted graphene (CCG) as the negative electrode, and Na2SO4/PVA as the polymer gel 
electrolyte. Due to the different working potential windows of the Al@Ni@MnOx NSP and CCG 
electrodes, the ASC cell exhibited ideal capacitive behavior with a cell voltage up to 1.8 V, 
capable of lighting up a red LED indicator (nominal voltage: 1.8 V). Moreover, the device 
delivered an energy density of 23.02 Wh/kg (1.29 mWh/cm3) at a power density of 947.5 W/kg 
(53.02 mW/cm3); the device maintained an energy density of 6.57 Wh/kg even at a maximum 
power density of 59 kW/kg. Interestingly, the device preserved 96.3% of its initial capacitance 
over 10,000 charging/discharging cycles at a current density of 2 A/g. Several other ASCs with 
carbon-based negative electrodes have also been explored [389]. 
 
CPs are also promising candidates to combine with metal oxides to increase conductivity 
and add extra pseudocapacitance. Recently, a positive electrode for ASCs was fabricated by 
coating NiCo2O4 NWAs on carbon textiles with a PPy nanosphere shell layer [390]. The 
NiCo2O4@PPy electrode exhibited a high specific capacitance of 2244 F/g in an aqueous 
electrolyte. This was attributed to the synergistic effect between the conductive PPy and short 
ion transport channels in the ordered NiCo2O4 mesoporous NW. Moreover, a lightweight and 
flexible ASC device assembled with NiCo2O4@PPy (positive) and AC (negative) electrodes 
achieved a high energy density of 58.8 Wh/kg at 365 W/kg, outstanding power density of 10.2 
kW/kg at 28.4 Wh/kg, and good cycling stability (∼89.2% retention after 5000 cycles) as well as 
high flexibility. Similarly, ASC was fabricated from PPy-wrapped MnO2 nanoflowers on carbon 
cloth and AC on carbon cloth as positive and negative electrodes, respectively [391]. The ASC 
Page 65 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 68 (native) -----
66 
 
displayed an areal capacitance of 1.41 F/cm2 and an energy density of 0.63 mWh/cm2 at a 
power density of 0.9 mW/cm2. An energy storage unit fabricated using multiple ASCs could 
drive an LED segment display, a mini motor, and even a toy car after full charging. PEDOT is 
another promising CP that can be used as a pseudocapacitive material in combination with a 
metal oxide. Yang et al. [392], developed a fiber-shaped ASC with NiO/Ni(OH)2 nanoflowers 
encapsulated in 3D interconnected PEDOT on contra wires as the positive electrode and 
ordered mesoporous carbon (CMK3) as the negative electrode. The as-formed flexible ASC 
device exhibited an areal capacitance of 31.6 mF/cm2 (3.16 F/cm3) at a current density of 0.4 
mA/cm2 with an energy density of 0.011 mWh/cm2 at a power density of 0.33 mW/cm2 in an 
operating voltage window of 1.45 V. The as-fabricated ASC only displayed a slight fluctuation 
during charge/discharge cycling over 1400 cycles, demonstrating the outstanding stability of the 
device.  
 
As described in the previous section, MOF-based materials can be used as templates or 
precursors for the synthesis of nanoporous carbon and nanostructured metal oxides with 
tunable surface properties. A new “one for two” strategy has been proposed to prepare positive 
(Co3O4) and negative (N-doped carbon) electrodes on carbon cloth for flexible ASCs using a 
single 2D MOF precursor [393]. The device exhibited fast kinetics by retaining almost 66% 
capacitance when the current density was increased eightfold and also demonstrated robust 
mechanical flexibility. Moreover, an energy density of 41.5 Wh/kg at a power density of 6.2 
kW/kg was delivered with 85.5% capacitance retention after 20,000 cycles under different 
bending and twisting conditions.  
5.2.2 Metal oxide-based negative electrodes 
Recently, metal oxides have also been widely explored as negative electrodes in 
asymmetric supercapacitors due to their high capacitance and high energy density over those of 
carbon-based materials [394]. The working potential window of metal oxides for asymmetric 
SCs can be defined as: 
Page 66 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 69 (native) -----
67 
 
2
1
2
1
0
)
(
1
E
E
N
F
E
E
E
E
A
∆
+
∆
+
−
=
∆
+
∆
+
=
α
β
ω
ω
 
(1) 
where ωα and ωβ are the work functions of the positive and negative electrodes, respectively; NA 
is Avogadro’s constant; and ∆E1 and ∆E2 are the surface dipole potential of the positive and 
negative electrodes, respectively [395]. For SSCs, both electrodes have the same charge 
storage mechanisms so that ∆E1 = -∆E2 and ωβ = ωα. Hence, the additional potential window is 
zero. The operation voltage of symmetric SCs is therefore defined by the dissociation energy of 
the electrolyte. Conversely, for asymmetric SCs, the work function difference of the two metal 
oxides (positive and negative electrodes) defines the operating potential. Therefore, to 
assemble large voltage asymmetric SCs, it is essential to choose the two different metal oxide 
electrodes with the largest work function difference. This results in an extended operating 
voltage window, even larger than the dissociation energy of the electrolyte, which improves the 
energy density over that of symmetric SCs. Water dissociation is kinetically limited by hydrogen 
and oxygen evolution reactions on the surface of the metal oxides in the aqueous electrolytes. 
Figure 17 presents the work functions and working potential windows for different metal 
oxides [396, 397] and can be used as a guide when choosing suitable positive and negative 
electrodes for high performance ASCs. In metal oxides with a higher work function, oxygen 
vacancy defects are more prone to decrease the work function of the oxide because they act as 
n-type dopants, shifting the Fermi level closer to the conduction band edge. Furthermore, the 
chemisorption of proton and hydroxide ions on the surface of the metal oxides will further extend 
the potential window by modifying the work function of the electrode. Several metal oxides, such 
as MoO3 [397] and iron oxide [398], have been widely studied as negative electrodes for ASCs 
due to advantages including high theoretical capacitance, a suitable potential window, low cost, 
abundance, and nontoxicity. Yang et al. [399] developed a low-cost high-performance ASC with 
α-MnO2 NWs and amorphous Fe2O3 nanotubes on flexible carbon fabric with PVA-LiCl as the 
gel electrolyte. Taking advantage of the different operating potential ranges of MnO2 NWs and 
Page 67 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 70 (native) -----
68 
 
Fe2O3 nanotubes, the ASC cell can be cycled up to 1.6 V. The MnO2//Fe2O3 ASC cell exhibited 
high specific and volumetric capacitances of 91.3 F/g and 1.5 F/cm3, respectively, at a current 
density of 2 mA/cm2 that was maintained at 0.88 F/cm3 when the current density was increased 
to 10 mA/cm2, suggesting good rate performance (58.6% retention). Moreover, the MnO2//Fe2O3 
cell displayed a high energy density of 0.55 mWh/cm3, and a high power density of 139.1 
mW/cm3 with moderate stability (80%) over 6000 cycles. A simple application to light a 
commercial blue LED was demonstrated by connecting two MnO2//Fe2O3 devices in series. 
These encouraging results were attributed to the unique nanostructure of the carbon fabric with 
a large surface area and high electrical conductivity. Recently, Ma et al. [400] designed 
ZnCo2O4@MnO2 core-shell nanotube arrays on Ni foam as a positive electrode for an ASC and 
paired it with 3D porous α-Fe2O3 on Fe foil as the negative electrode. The as-designed ASC 
device exhibited an extended operating voltage window of 1.3 V with a specific capacitance of 
161 F/g at 2.5 mA/cm2, a maximum energy density of 37.8 Wh/kg, and excellent stability with 
91% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles. Likewise, a novel core-shell nanoarchitecture 
based on Co3O4@RuO2 nanosheet arrays was developed on woven carbon fabrics to use as 
negative electrodes in ASCs [401]. The positive electrode Co9S8 nanorod array was prepared by 
hydrothermal 
sulfuration 
treatment 
of 
acicular 
Co3O4 
nanorod 
arrays. 
Thus, 
the 
Co3O4@RuO2//Co9S8 ASC cell was fabricated with a PVA-KOH gel electrolyte that can be 
reversibly cycled in a voltage window up to 1.6 V. The as-fabricated cell exhibited an energy 
density of 1.21 mWh/cm3 at a power density of 13.29 W/cm3 in aqueous electrolyte and an 
energy density of 1.44 mWh/cm3 at a power density of 0.89 W/cm3 in a solid-state electrolyte. 
However, the intrinsic semiconducting nature of metal oxides presents poor electrical 
conductivity, eventually leading to low power density in ASCs [402]. To tackle this issue, Yu et 
al. [403] recently developed a novel coil-type ACS based on Fe2O3@C nanorods on carbon 
cloth as the negative electrode and MnO2 NWs on copper wire as the positive electrode with 
PVA-LiCl as the gel-electrolyte. The thin carbon coating on the Fe2O3 nanorods improved the 
Page 68 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 71 (native) -----
69 
 
electrical conductivity. For the MnO2 NW positive electrode, the copper wire was first annealed 
to prepare insulating CuO NWs on the Cu-wire and subsequently, a MnO2 layer was 
electrodeposited onto it. The coil-type ASC was assembled by simply winding the Fe2O3@C 
negative electrode onto the MnO2@CuO NW positive electrode separated by a PVA-LiCl 
electrolyte. The as-assembled device exhibited an excellent volumetric capacitance of 2.46 
F/cm3 with extraordinary rate capability (95.4%), high energy density (0.85 mWh/cm3) (Figure 18 
(a)), and remarkable flexibility and bendability with superior bending cycle stability (≈93.0% after 
4000 cycles at different bending states). The digital photographs of the different bending states 
of the device and the corresponding capacity retention against the number of cycles are 
illustrated in Figure 18 (b, c), respectively. Another approach to improve the conductivity of 
metal oxide electrodes is to combine them with carbon materials such as CNTs and graphene. 
Thus, ASCs with wrinkled MnO2/CNT as the positive electrode and a wrinkled Fe2O3/CNT 
composite as the negative electrode were assembled [404]. The optimized ASC could be 
reversibly cycled in a voltage window up to 2 V and displayed an energy density of 45.8 Wh/kg 
at a power density of 0.41 kW/kg. Additionally, the ASC exhibited exceptional cycling stability 
and durability, with 98.9% specific capacitance retention after 10000 cycles at multiple strains. 
These excellent electrochemical performances were attributed to the synergistic effects of the 
two electrodes with an optimized potential window. Recently, Lu et al. explored a novel 
approach to improve the conductivity of MnO2 by fabricating a hydrogenated TiO2@MnO2 core-
shell nanostructure as presented in Figure 18 (d) [405]. Interestingly, TiO2 is an inexpensive and 
electrochemically stable semiconductor with higher electrical conductivity (10-5–10-6 S/cm) [406] 
than that of MnO2 (10-5-10-2 S/cm) [407]. More importantly, the carrier density of pristine TiO2 
can be increased by three orders of magnitude upon hydrogenation. Thus, hydrogen-treated 
TiO2 (H-TiO2) NWs were employed as the core (conducting scaffold) to support 
electrochemically active MnO2 and carbon shells (H-TiO2@C) (Figure 18 (b, c)) and an ASC 
device based on H-TiO2@MnO2 (positive electrode)//H-TiO2@C (negative electrode) core-shell 
Page 69 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 72 (native) -----
70 
 
NW electrodes was fabricated. This could be reversibly cycled in a potential window up to 1.8 V 
and exhibited maximum volumetric and specific capacitance values of 0.71 F/cm3 and 141.8 
F/g, respectively, at 10 mV/s. Moreover, the device displayed a good capacitance rate, with 
56% volumetric capacitance retention when the scan rate increased from 10 to 400 mV/s. The 
device further delivered a volumetric energy density of 0.30 mWh/cm3 (59 Wh/kg) and a 
volumetric power density of 0.23 W/cm3 (45 kW/kg). Additionally, the device exhibited excellent 
cycling performance with 8.8% capacitance loss over 5000 cycles and good flexibility as 
illustrated by the CV curves measured under different bending conditions (Figure 18 (e)). 
Due to their diverse crystal structures, Mn-based oxides can be used as both positive 
and negative electrodes. For example, a novel ASC cell based on amorphous porous Mn3O4 on 
conducting paper (nickel/graphite/Paper, NPG; Mn3O4/NGP) as a negative electrode and an 
Ni(OH)2 on NGP (Ni(OH)2/NGP) positive electrode were assembled [408]. In the ASC negative 
electrode, Mn3O4 exhibits +2 and +3 Mn valences and provides rich redox reactions for 
pseudocapacitance generation. In addition, Mn3O4 has a suitable working window at negative 
potential and is also low in cost, highly abundant, and nontoxic. Interestingly, the devices could 
be reversibly cycled in a wide voltage window (1.3 V) and displayed a high energy density of 
0.35 mWh/cm3, high power density of 32.5 mW/cm3, and a superior cycling performance (<17% 
capacitance loss after 12,000 cycles at a high scan rate of 100 mV/s). On the other hand, Gao 
et al. [409] prepared a free standing Mn3O4-graphene (Mn3O4-G) paper electrode and applied it 
as a positive electrode in an ASC cell with free-standing carbon nanotube-graphene (CNT-G) as 
negative electrode and a PAAK/KCl electrolyte. Figure 18 (f) is a schematic illustration of the 
systematic fabrication process of the ACS. Compared to pristine graphene paper, the composite 
paper electrodes with carbon nanotubes or Mn3O4 nanoparticles uniformly intercalated between 
the GNSs exhibited excellent mechanical stability, greatly improved active surface areas, and 
enhanced ion transportation. As expected, the CNT-G//Mn3O4-G cell could be cycled reversibly 
with a cell voltage window up to 1.8 V (Figure 18 (g)) and achieved a specific capacitance of 
Page 70 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 73 (native) -----
71 
 
72.6 F/g at a current density of 0.5 A/g while still retaining 50.8 F/g at a higher current density of 
10 A/g. Moreover, the cell presented an energy density of 32.7 Wh/kg, which is almost threefold 
higher than that of the CNT-G//CNT-G (10.5 Wh/kg) and Mn3O4-G// Mn3O4-G (7.1 Wh/kg) 
supercapacitors. More importantly, when the power density increased to 9.0 kW/kg, the energy 
density of CNT-G//Mn3O4-G was still as high as 22.9 Wh/kg, suggesting that the ASC cell can 
concurrently provide high energy and power densities. Finally, the cell displayed remarkable 
cycling stability and retained 86% of its initial capacitance after 10,000 cycles as illustrated in 
Figure 18 (h). 
5.2.3 Metal nitrite-based negative electrodes 
 
The limited electrical conductivity of the metal oxide-based negative electrode hampers 
the resulting energy storage capacity of ASCs. Therefore, to further improve the efficiency of 
ASCs, a new class of redox active metal nitrides with superb electrical conductivity (4000–
55500 S/cm) has been recently explored [410]. Lu et al. [411] developed vanadium nitrites (VN) 
as a new class of negative electrodes for ASCs. Vanadium nitride (VN) shows great potential as 
a negative electrode for ASCs due to its large specific capacitance (1340 F/g), high electrical 
conductivity (σbulk = 1.67 x 106 /Ωm), and wide operation windows at negative potentials. The 
ASC cell was fabricated with porous VN NW as the negative electrode and VOx NW as the 
positive electrode with LiCl/PVA as electrolyte. Initially, porous VN NWs were fabricated through 
a two-step approach comprising growth of VOx NWs on a carbon cloth substrate by the 
hydrothermal method followed by post-annealing in ammonia at 600 °C. Notably, the VOx//VN-
ASC device exhibited a stable electrochemical window of 1.8 V and achieved a volumetric 
capacitance of 1.35 F/cm3 (based on the volume of the entire device; 60.1 F/g, based on the 
total mass of active materials) at a current density of 0.5 mA/cm2. More importantly, the ASC 
cell demonstrated remarkable rate capability with 74.7% retention of the initial capacitance (1.01 
F/cm3) as the current density increased to 5 mA/cm2. Indeed, a high energy density of 0.61 
mWh/cm3 and a high power density of 0.85 W/cm3 were achieved with excellent cycling stability 
Page 71 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 74 (native) -----
72 
 
(12.5% reduction in capacitance over 10,000 cycles). The mechanical flexibility test indicated 
that the electrochemical performance of the device was not affected by folding and twisting, 
which confirms its potential for application as a flexible energy storage device. However, metal 
nitrites usually oxidize in aqueous solutions, therefore, to circumvent this problem, these 
materials have been combined with more stable materials by different processes including CNT 
encapsulation [412] and graphene wrapping [413]. Among these, vertically aligned graphene 
nanosheets (GNS) are more effective as substrates due to their large surface area, high 
conductivity, and light weight. Zhu et al. [414] fabricated an all metal nitrides ASC using titanium 
nitride (TiN) as positive and iron nitride (Fe2N) as negative electrode grown on GNS substrate. 
The schematic illustration of the steps involved in the fabrication process for both electrodes is 
presented in Figure 19 (a). Initially, thin layers (20 nm) of TiO2 and ZnO were coated on the 
GNS substrate by atomic layer deposition. Next, the Fe2N@GNS negative electrode was 
produced by converting ZnO into FeOOH via an ion-exchange reaction and subsequent thermal 
treatment in NH3. On the other hand, the TiN@GNS positive electrode was prepared by 
annealing TiO2@GNS under NH3 atmosphere. The TiN@GNS//Fe2N@GNS ASC assembled 
with PVA/LiCl gel electrolyte could be reversibly cycled up to 1.6 V. The device delivered a 
stable capacitance of 60 F/g at 10 mV/s with <2% capacity drop after an increase in scan rate to 
100 mV/s, suggesting extraordinary rate capability. Moreover, the cycling stability of the device 
was tested under bending conditions from the 5000th to the 15000th cycle and subsequently 
under natural state in the last 5000 cycles, suggesting that bending had negligible effect on the 
capacitance of the device. Interestingly, the device maintained 100% Coulombic efficiency 
within 20000 cycles (Figure 19 (b)). This result was ascribed to the structure stability of the 
electrode material in the gel electrolyte. In addition, the device achieved both a high volumetric 
energy density of 0.55 mWh/cm3 and a high power density of 220 mW/cm3 (Figure 19 (c)). 
 
 
Page 72 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 75 (native) -----
73 
 
5.2.4 Conducting polymer-based negative electrodes 
 
CPs make up a big family of pseudocapacitive materials that can provide a stable and 
impressive energy-storage performance in both positive and negative working potentials due to 
their good conductivities, reversible redox reactions, and environmental friendliness. However, 
during charging/discharging processes, the CPs may swell and shrink, resulting in mechanical 
degradation of the electrodes. Thus, poor cycling stability is always observed, especially when 
they are used as negative electrodes. Therefore, different strategies have been developed to 
enhance the pseudocapacitance of CPs, such as optimizing the nanostructures, doping with 
surfactant ions, and fabricating composites with other species. Lu et al. [415] synthesized highly 
ordered 3D α-Fe2O3@PANi core-shell NWAs as negative electrodes for ASCs. The α-Fe2O3 
NWAs were electrodeposited on carbon cloth with subsequent annealing in air. A thin layer of 
PANi was then electrodeposited on the α-Fe2O3 NWs to produce the 3D α- Fe2O3@PANi core-
shell NW. This unique α-Fe2O3@PANi core-shell nanoarchitecture provided a large reaction 
surface area, fast ion and electron transfers, and good structure stability, all of which improved 
the electrochemical performance. The ASC cell was then assembled with α-Fe2O3@PANi as 
negative and PANi on carbon cloth as positive electrodes. The ASC cell displayed a high 
volumetric capacitance of 2.02 mF/cm3 (based on the volume of device), a high energy density 
of 0.35 mWh/cm3 at a power density of 120.51 mW/cm3, and very good cycling stability with a 
capacitance retention of 96% after 10,000 cycles. Likewise, Jin et al. [416] assembled an ASC 
using CNT/PANi and CNT/MnO2/graphene paper as negative and positive electrodes, 
respectively, with a PVP-Na2SO4 gel electrolyte as presented in Figure 19 (d). The assembled 
ASC operated in a higher voltage range up to 1.6 V and achieved an energy density of 24.8 
Wh/kg and a high power density of 2230 W/kg (Figure 19 (e, f)). PEDOT is another promising 
candidate for application as a negative electrode in ASC due to its higher reduction potential 
ascribed to the electron donating nature of its oxygen groups. In addition, the high stability of 
PEDOT in its oxidized state enables it to exhibit electrochemical activity in a wide potential 
Page 73 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 76 (native) -----
74 
 
window. For example, an ASC device was fabricated on Au-coated PEN plastic substrates 
using PEDOT and PANi as negative and positive electrodes, respectively [417]. This ASC 
device could be cycled in a wide voltage window of 1.6 V and exhibited a volumetric stack 
capacitance of 34 F/cm3 at a current density of 0.5 mA/cm2. Moreover, the PANi//PEDOT ASC 
device displayed the highest energy density (12 mWh/cm3), which was six-fold higher than that 
for the symmetric PEDOT cell (E = 2 mWh/cm3) and twofold higher than the PANi-based cell (E 
= 5 mWh/cm3). Finally, the cycling stability of the ASC was determined as 80% over 10,000 
cycles at a current density of 2 mA/cm2.  
5.2.5 Some other negative electrodes  
 
In addition to the above discussed materials, some new promising materials have been 
recently employed as negative electrodes in ASCs. Specifically, metal phosphides, having both 
metalloid characteristics and good electric conductivity, are considered as advanced electrode 
materials for ASCs. A 3D cobalt phosphide (CoP) NW on carbon cloth was presented as the 
negative electrode with a MnO2 NW as the positive electrode and LiCl/PVA as the gel electrolyte 
[418]. Interestingly, the resultant ASC cell could be successfully cycled in a voltage window up 
to 1.6 V and delivered good supercapacitive characteristics including a volumetric capacitance 
of 1.94 F/cm3, and energy and power densities of 0.69 mWh/cm3 and 114.20 mW/cm3, 
respectively. Iron selenide (FeSe2) is another suitable candidate for ASC application due to its 
excellent electrochemical activities and an appropriate operating window at negative potentials 
[419]. The assembled ASC was based on NiCo2O4 and FeSe2 as positive and negative 
electrodes, respectively, and a KOH/PVA electrolyte exhibited an energy density of 10.4 Wh/kg 
and a maximum power density of 1.2 kW/kg (operating window: 1.5 V). Phytic acid, has a strong 
chelating ability and can easily bond with metal ions to generate cross‐linked metal phytate 
complexes. Thus, using phytic acid treatment, NiZn-phytate and Fe-phytate were developed to 
serve as positive and negative electrodes, respectively [420]. The resultant Ni/Fe cell delivered 
excellent electrochemical properties with long-term stability (~86% retention after 8000 cycles at 
Page 74 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 77 (native) -----
75 
 
20.83 A/g). In addition, the ASC cell maintained its electrochemical performance under various 
bending conditions, suggesting great potential for application as a power supply for wearable 
smart products. A summary of the electrochemical performances of flexible solid-state 
asymmetric designs based on different positive and negative electrodes with their 
corresponding gel electrolytes is presented in Table 4 [421-465]. 
 
6. Some potential practical applications 
6.1 Piezoelectric SCs 
In recent years, various novel implantable/wearable healthcare devices (spirometers, 
sphygmomanometers, and wristbands) have been employed in a broad range of applications 
ranging from physical activity monitoring to more analytical applications such as diet tracking, 
mental stress detection, and rehabilitation [466]. However, flexible efficiency of the power 
supplying unit is still one of the bottlenecks for wearable electronics. Thus, a new self-
sustainable energy storage device that can harvest/store body energy (breathing, arm pressing, 
and chest compression) and power smart electronics shows great potential for application in 
next generation implantable/wearable electronics. The recent discovery of electricity generation 
using piezoelectric ZnO NWs has attracted significant attention on piezoelectric materials in 
energy harvesting and transducer technology [467]. Piezoelectric materials can convert 
ubiquitously irregular and low-frequency mechanical vibrations into electricity and have been 
extensively studied for their use as nanogenerators [468]. Thus, mechanical vibrations (energy) 
can be efficiently converted and stored in piezoelectric SCs using a piezoelectric film to replace 
traditional separators. Owing to their excellent piezoelectric properties and mechanical flexibility, 
polyamide (PA) and PVDF films have been demonstrated as wearable flexible energy 
generators [469]. 
 
The piezoseparator (piezoelectric film) is a key component in piezoelectric SCs and is 
typically a well-polarized PVDF film placed between the electrodes. In the piezo-electrochemical 
Page 75 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 78 (native) -----
76 
 
mechanism, the external mechanical impacts develop a piezoelectric potential across the PVDF 
films and drive ions in the electrolyte to migrate towards the interface of the SC electrode 
(forming an electronic double layer or pseudocapacitance at the interface), storing the electricity 
as electrochemical energy (Figure 20 (a)). Thus, the integration of energy generation 
(mechanical generation of energy from a piezoelectric potential) and storage (storing in SCs) 
systems can effectively supply power without using an external DC source [470]. 
FSSC was assembled using functionalized carbon cloth as positive and negative 
electrodes with polarized PVDF films coated with a H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte [471]. The 
integrated piezo-supercapacitor exhibited a specific capacitance of 357.6 F/m2 (current density: 
8 A/m2), a power density of 49.67 mWh/m2, and an energy density of 400 mW/m2. Moreover, 
when the SSC was charged under a continuous compressive force with an average frequency 
of 4.5 Hz, the voltage of the piezo-supercapacitor increased to 100 mV within 40 s. The stored 
electric energy was determined from the discharge curve as 0.25 mAh at a constant current of 
100 mA. More recently, the integration of a pseudo-supercapacitor and piezoelectric materials 
as a hybrid energy harvesting and storage device was realized using pseudocapacitive MnO2 
NWs as positive and negative electrodes and PVDF-ZnO coated with H3PO4/PVA film as the 
separator (as well as a piezoelectric) [472]. The addition of ZnO NWs in the PVDF matrix 
induced polarization of ions in the composite film without electrical poling. When a compressive 
force with palm impact was applied, the voltage of the device increased from 35 to 145 mV (110 
mV charged) in 300 s. In addition, after realising the compression force, the device sustained 
the stored energy for ~150 s. The fabrication of flexible piezoelectric SCs using a laser 
engraving technique by integrating a triboelectric nanogenerator and an MSC array into a single 
device was recently reported [473]. A high degree of integration was realized through double-
faced laser engraving of the PI substrate. The triboelectric nanogenerator and MSC were 
fabricated by using two sides of the laser-induced graphene. The nanogenerator generated 
Page 76 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 79 (native) -----
77 
 
electricity from ambient mechanical vibrations with high output, while the rectified electrical 
energy was directly stored in the MSC that could be charged to 3 V in 117 min. 
6.2 Photo-supercapacitors 
Solar energy, the cleanest and most easily available energy source to date, is 
unfortunately limited by access to sunlight. Integrating solar cells with energy storage devices is 
an exclusive strategy to extend the practical applications of solar energy beyond the imposed 
restrictions of sunlight availability [376]. The idea of coupling solar cells and SCs as a complete 
energy conversion and storage device is known as “photo-supercapacitors,” whereby the solar 
energy can be efficiently transferred and converted to electrical energy by adopting an SC as 
the energy delivery system that is schematically shown in Figure 20 (b) [474]. 
A coaxial, all-solid-state “energy fiber” was introduced by integrating a dye-sensitized 
solar cell (DSSC) with SCs comprising CNTs@Ti wire electrodes and a PVA-H3PO4 gel 
electrolyte [475]. The photoelectric conversion efficiency was determined as 2.73%, while the 
energy storage efficiency reached 75.7% with specific capacitances up to 0.156 mF/cm (3.32 
mF/cm2) and power densities up to 0.013 mW/cm (0.27 mW/cm2) at a current of 50 mA. 
Likewise, Zhang et al. [476] assembled coaxial SCs by coupling P3HT:PCBM@TiO2@Ti wire 
(PCBM: [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester) and PEDOT/PSS as the photo-electrode 
and MWCNTs as the SC electrode with a PVA/H3PO4 electrolyte. The photo-conversion and 
energy storage efficiencies were investigated as a function of MWCNT length in the SCs, 
achieving 0.4% and 0.82 optimum performances, respectively. Furthermore, the coaxial 
structure offers good effective contact area and favors rapid charge transport and it can be 
easily woven into various structures such as lightweight textiles. In addition to DSSC, a 
wearable energy-smart ribbons photo-supercapacitor was recently demonstrated by integrating 
a perovskite solar cell (PSC) on top of a symmetric SC [477]. This flexible integrated device 
displayed the highest photoconversion efficiency (10.41%), while the energy storage efficiency 
was ~67%. The SC held an energy density of 1.15 mWh/cm3 and a power density of 
Page 77 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 80 (native) -----
78 
 
243 mW/cm3 under solar illumination. Even with their stability and the need for appropriate 
sealing to prevent fast environmental aging of the PSCs concerned, DSSCs represent a more 
reliable technology for integrated devices. 
6.3 Shape-memory Supercapacitors 
Many recent applications (wearable electronics, bendable smart phones, and biomedical 
devices) and their energy storage devices, undergo irreversible deformation. Therefore, 
electronic devices and their power units need to exhibit mechanically deformable ability. Thus, 
stretchable, compressible, and shape-memory (shape-recoverable) SCs have attracted much 
attention for future applications [12].  
Incorporation of shape-memory materials into SCs can recover devices back to their 
initial shape or size after irreversible deformations in practical applications. There are two main 
categories of shape-memory materials, namely shape-memory alloys (SMAs) and polymers 
(SMPs) [478]. The shape-memory effect of SMAs arises from a reversible crystalline phase 
change known as a martensite-austenite transformation. When heated to a certain temperature, 
the deformed SMAs return to their original shape and all plastic deformations are removed. The 
most prominent SMAs are based on nickel-titanium (NiTi) due to its superior mechanical and 
electrical characteristics. 
A shape-memory SC was realized using graphene coated on TiNi alloy flakes as the 
negative electrode and an ultrathin MnO2/Ni film as the positive electrode in gel electrolytes 
[478]. It displayed a specific capacitance of 53.8 F/g at 0.5 A/g. The bent device regained its 
original planar shape within 550 s when heated to ambient temperature. The recovery speed of 
this SC was relatively low. Recently, NiTi wires were applied as current collectors and 
substrates for the active materials (MnO2 and PPy) in a twisted fiber shape-memory SC, 
whereby serious plastic deformations were restored to an undistorted state within a few seconds 
[479] while maintaining near-identical capacitive performances.  
Page 78 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 81 (native) -----
79 
 
Above the glass transition temperature (Tg; amorphous polymers) and melting 
temperature (Tm; crystalline polymers), SMPs are soft and light-weight and can be extended to 
several hundreds of percent. SMPs can memorize more than one shape and recover their 
original form when subjected to various stimuli such as temperature, light, magnetic fields, and 
electric currents. Wrapping aligned CNT sheets onto a shape-memory polyurethane (SMPU) 
substrate enabled a shape-memory and fiber-shaped MSC [480]. After 500 cycles of 
deformation and recovery at a strain of 50%, its electrochemical properties exhibited no 
significant decrease, suggesting excellent stability of the device structure. However, its 
maximum specific capacitance was only 42.3 mF/cm, which could be enhanced by introducing 
pseudocapacitve materials. Densely compacted CNT layers and PANi layers were coated on 
the PVA/CNT SMPU fibers through layer by layer (LBL) technology [481]. The resulting shape-
memory SCs possessed shape memory properties and exhibited outstanding specific 
capacitance values exceeding 427 F/cm3. 
6.4 Microbial Supercapacitors 
A microbial electrochemical technique converts biomass directly to electricity or fuel, 
harvesting electrons from specific bacterial species known as “exoelectrogens” (“exo:” out of 
and “electrogene:” bacteria-producing electrons) via their unique extracellular electron transport 
(EET). The schemetic representation of working mechanism of Microbial SCs (MSC) is 
presented in Figure 20 (c). Exoelectrogens have been implemented in various microbial 
electrochemical technologies (METs), such as microbial fuel cells (MFCs), microbial electrolysis 
cells (MECs), and microbial reverse electrodialysis cells (MRCs) [482]. Recently, several reports 
have demonstrated that exoelectrogens such as Geobacter, Shewanella, and Proteobacteria, 
store electrons and can be used as capacitors [483] with a current density in the range of 1.2–
90 A/m2. The high current density observed in these reports demonstrated the ability to use 
biological pseudocapacitance as a potential renewable method for energy generation and 
storage. 
Page 79 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 82 (native) -----
80 
 
In 2012, Malvankar et al. [484] demonstrated the pseudocapacitive redox nature of c-
type 
cytochrome 
biofilms. These 
biofilms 
displayed 
low 
self-discharge 
and good 
charge/discharge reversibility. The capacitance of G. sulfurreducens biofilms was determined as 
620 µF/cm2 at the open circuit potential. A novel bio-inspired microbial SC was recently 
presented utilizing pseudocapacitance generated by an exoelectrogen, Geobacter spp., grown 
on a single-layer graphene film and 3D graphene-scaffold electrodes [485]. Charging and 
discharging the microbial SC were performed by regulating the respiration of the exoelectrogen 
(Figure 20(c)). The microbial SC delivered a specific capacitance of 17.85 mF/cm2 with 
outstanding cycling stability over one million cycles. It also demonstrated maximum current and 
power densities of 531.2 A/m2 (1,060,000 A/m3) and 197.5 W/m2 (395,000 W/m3), respectively. 
Notably, its areal power density was 2.5-fold, 19-fold, three orders of magnitude, and four orders 
of magnitude greater than those of solar cell (outdoor), enzymatic fuel cell, thermoelectric 
energy harvester, and RF energy harvester, respectively [486]. An overview of several new 
applications of FSSCs are shown in Figure 21. 
 
7. Conclusions and Future Challenges 
FSSCs are emerging as breakthrough miniaturized energy storage systems with diverse 
technological applications such as wearable electronics, smart clothes, electronic skins, and 
implantable medical devices. This review introduces recent progress in the fundamentals of 
charge storage mechanisms, emerging new electrode materials and electrolytes, and novel cell 
designs of FSSCs. To date, studies have demonstrated that excellent progress has been made 
in the development of new flexible electrodes and cell designs (symmetric and asymmetric) for 
FSSCs. Moreover, the latest discoveries of new materials with controlled architecture hold great 
promise towards performance improvement in terms of high power, energy densities, and cycle 
life. FSSC performance is commonly defined in terms of gravimetric and volumetric scales that 
foster the development of new electrode designs such as free-standing and substrate-supported 
Page 80 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 83 (native) -----
81 
 
designs. The former is lightweight and utilizes the entire electrode material to achieve high 
performance, thereby avoiding the extra weight of current collectors and additives, however, it is 
fragile and difficult to handle. On the other hand, a large variety of flexible substrates, such as 
metal foils/wires, paper, textiles, PETs, and fibers have been investigated to achieve high 
performance FSSCs. Owing to their porous structure, light weight, and high flexibility, textile- 
and paper-based current collectors are considered promising substrates for FSSC application. 
In addition to flexible electrodes, extensive efforts have been devoted towards exploring new gel 
electrolytes that improve the overall performance of the SC. Thus, various new POM-
incorporated gels, such as SiWA, PWA, and BWA, have been revealed as promising 
electrolytes for FSSC application due to their good conductivity and pseudocapacitance. An 
emerging new strategy of redox-active electrolyte-enhanced devices have emerged through the 
introduction of pseudocapacitive contribution in electrolytes.  
Several new promising materials such as MXenes, MOFs, POMs, and metal nitrides with 
properties such as high electronic conductivity and surface controlled porosity have been 
adopted in the field of FSSCs. Moreover, the very recent discovery of MXenes has 
demonstrated great potential for the design of FSSCs with enhanced volumetric energy density. 
The application of other layered materials (phosphorene) as electrodes in FSSCs is still in its 
infancy and needs further development, including new reducing agents, etchants, and 
intercalants to synthesize high quality large-scale materials. Various potential practical 
applications have been introduced, including piezoelectric SCs, photo-supercapacitors, and 
shape-memory SCs. This is a great step towards achieving smart SCs.  
 
Despite the many achievements and encouraging results, the development of a new 
generation of miniaturized FSSCs is still at its early stage. Much effort is still needed before the 
emergence of real technological implementations. Herein, we summarize some of the current 
challenges and future directions for the practical realization of FSSCs:  
Page 81 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 84 (native) -----
82 
 
(1) A detailed analysis is necessary to deeply understand the energy storage mechanisms at 
the electrode/polymer gel-electrolyte interface. Many theoretical studies have been reported on 
liquid electrolytes, however, the theoretical basis of the charge storage mechanism in gel 
electrolytes is complicated and difficult to understand as the ions are trapped in the polymer 
chains. Therefore, advanced in-situ characterization (microscopic and spectroscopic) and 
simulation techniques need to be developed to elucidate the charge storage mechanisms of 
FSSCs.  
(2) There is no standardized method for the evaluation of electrochemical features and the 
mechanical flexibility of FSSCs. It is essential to report volumetric electrochemical features 
since the mass of the active material is negligible when compared to the mass of the whole 
device. Likewise, different approaches have been undertaken to analyze the mechanical 
integrity of FSSCs, thereby highlighting the need for standard methods to compare the 
mechanical feasibility.  
(3) The FSSC performance relies entirely on the electrode material and electrolytes. As 
discussed in section 4, the unusual electronic, chemical, and surface properties of 2D materials 
beyond graphene (MXenes, phosphorene, germanene, and tinene,) makes them promising 
electrodes for FSSCs. However, mass production of high quality 2D materials is still a great 
challenge and therefore, more effort should be taken to elucidate new synthetic methods that 
meet industrial requirements.  
(4) Several new investigations on gel electrolytes resolved the initial problems of low ionic 
conductivity (10-3-10-1 S/cm) and thermal instability. However, more research on improving 
device performance in terms of capacitance, energy density, stability, and operating cell voltage 
using new redox-active electrolytes is required.  
(5) High production cost is another challenge for the practical implementation of FSSC 
technology. Therefore, future studies should focus on the development of highly flexible and 
Page 82 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 85 (native) -----
83 
 
energetic FSSCs using cost-effective raw materials. Moreover, single-step processing materials 
and electrolytes are more favorable for practical application.  
(6) The fast-growing popularity of intelligent electronics urges the continuous development of 
smart power sources with integrated stimulus-response. In this context, new device designs, 
which are flexible, bendable, foldable, and stretchable, need to be explored. The integration of 
the different functional electronic devices in a single component is of great interest. With more 
effort on optimization, smart SCs will play important roles in lightweight, flexible, and wearable 
capacitive devices in the near future. 
 
Acknowledgment 
DPD acknowledges the support of the University of Adelaide, Australia for the grant of a 
Research Fellowship (VC Fellow), the Secretary for Universities and Research of the Ministry of 
Economy and Knowledge of the Government of Catalonia, and the Co-fund program of the 
Marie Curie Actions of the 7th R&D Framework Program of the European Union. This work was 
also supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF-2015M3A7B 4050 424). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 83 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 86 (native) -----
84 
 
References 
[1]  
(a) N. A. Kyeremateng, T. Brousse, D. Pech, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 7-15, (b) H. 
Sun, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Sun, H. Peng, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2017, 2, 17023 (b) M. 
Beidaghi, Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci. 2014, 7, 867-884. (b) Z. Liu, J. Xu, D. Chen, 
G. Shen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 161-192 (c) D. Yu, Q. Qian, L. Wei, W. Jiang, K. 
Goh, J. Wei, J. Zhang, Y. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 647-662. 
[2] 
(a) H. He, Y. Fu, T. Zhao, X. Gao, L. Xing, Y. Zhang, X. Xue, Nano Energy 2017, 39, 
590-600 (b) D. Qi, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017 DOI: 10.1002/ 
adma.201602802. (c) X. Peng, L. Peng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 
3303-3323. (d) D. Pech, M. Brunet, H. Durou, P. H. Huang, V. Mochalin, Y. Gogotsi, P. 
L. Taberna and P. Simon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 651-654 
[3] 
(a) F. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yuan, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, Q. Zhou, Y. Wu, W. 
Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, DOI: 10.1039/c7cs00205j. (b) F. Bonaccorso, L. 
Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, 
Science, 2015, 347, 10, DOI: 10.1126/science.1246501 (c) L. Hu and Y. Cui, Energy 
Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6423-6435, (d) L. Li, C. Fu, Z. Lou, S. Chen, W. Han, K. Jiang, 
D. Chen, G. Shen, Nano Energy 2017, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2017.08.060 
[4] 
(a) S. Bauer, Nat. Mater 2013, 12, 871-872 (b) E. Gibney, Nature 2015, 528, 26-28 (c) 
I. M. Mosa, A. Pattammattel, K. Kadimisetty, P. Pande, M. F. El-Kady, G. W. Bishop, M. 
Novak, R. B. Kaner, A. K. Basu, C. V. Kumar, J. F. Rusling, Adv. Energy Mater. 2017, 
7, 1700358  
[5] 
(a) X. Pu, L. Li, M. Liu, C. Jiang, C. Du, Z. Zhao, W. Hu, Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 28, 
2016, 98-105 (b) F. R. Fan, W. Tang, Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 4283-4305 (c) 
D. Son, J. Lee, S. Qiao, R. Ghaffari, J. Kim, J. E. Lee, C. Song, S. J. Kim, D. J. Lee, S. 
W. Jun, S. Yang, M. Park, J. Shin, K. Do, M. Lee, K. Kang, C. S. Hwang, N.S. Lu, T. 
Page 84 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 87 (native) -----
85 
 
Hyeon, D.H. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2014, 9, 397-404 (d) T. Q. Trung, N. E. Lee, Adv. 
Mater. 2016, 28, 4338-4372. 
[6] 
(a) M. Salanne, B. Rotenberg, K. Naoi, K. Kaneko, P.-L. Taberna, C. P. Grey, B. Dunn, 
P. Simon, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16070. (b) D. P. Dubal, O. Ayyad, V. Ruiz, P. Gomez-
Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1777-1790 (c) M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dunn and Y. 
Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12647-12659. (d) Y. Wang, Y. Song, Y. Xia, Chem. 
Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5925-5950 (e) Z. Yu, L. Tetard, L. Zhai, J. Thomas, Energy 
Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 702-730.  
[7] 
(a) Y. Wang, Y. Song, Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5925-5950 (b) D. P. Dubal, 
P. Gomez-Romero, B. R. Sankapal, R. Holze, Nano Energy 2015, 11, 377-399, (b) G. 
P. Wang, L. Zhang and J. J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797-828. (c) Q. Lu, J. 
G. Chen and J. Q. Xiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1882-1889 
[8] 
(a) S. Yang, R. E. Bachman, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 116-
128; (b) H. B. Wu, G. Zhang, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 27-40. 
(c) C. Zhang, W. Lv, Y. Tao and Q. H. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1390-1403 
[9] 
(a) Z. Wu, L. Li, J. Yan, X. Zhang, Adv. Sci. 2017, 4, 1600382 (b) Z. Yang, J. Ren, Z. 
Zhang, X. Chen, G. Guan, L. Qiu, Y. Zhang, H. Peng, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 5159-
5223. (c) K. Naoi, W. Naoi, S. Aoyagi, J. Miyamoto, T. Kamino, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 
46, 1075-1083 
[10] 
(a) B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Supercapacitors Scientific Fundamentals and 
Technological Applications, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York, 1999; (b) 
A. Yu, V. Chabot and J. Zhang, Electrochemical supercapacitor for energy storage and 
delivery: Fundamentals and application, CRC Press, by Taylor & Francis Group, 2013. 
[11] 
(a) C. Yan, P. S. Lee, Small 2014, 10, 3443-3460, (b) S. Y. Lee, K. H. Choi, W. S. Choi, 
Y. H. Kwon, H. R. Jung, H. C. Shin, J. Y. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2414-
Page 85 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 88 (native) -----
86 
 
2423, (c) S. Yao, Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater. 2015, 27, 1480-1511, (d) Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, J. 
A. Rogers, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci. 2015, 19, 190-199 
[12] 
(a) W. Liu, M. S. Song, B. Kong and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2017, DOI: 
10.1002/adma.201603436. (b) K. Guo, N. Yu, Z. Hou, L. Hu, Y. Ma, H. Li and T. Zhai, 
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16-30 (c) T. Q. Trung, N. E. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, DOI: 
10.1002/adma.201603167. 
[13] 
(a) Y. Matsuda, M. Morita, M. Ishikawa, M. Ihara, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1993, 140, 
L109-L110 (b) A. Clemente, S. Panero, E. Spila, B. Scrosati, Solid State Ionics 1996, 
85, 273-277. (c) S. A. Hashmi, R. J. Latham, R. G. Linford, W. S. Schlindwein, Polym 
Int 1998, 47, 28-33. 
[14] 
(a) A. Lewandowski, M. Zajder, E. Frachowiak, F. Beguin, Electrochim. Acta 2001, 46, 
2777-2780. (b) K. R. Prasad, N. Munichandraiah, Electrochem. Solid-State 2002, 5, 
A271-A274. (c) Y. G. Wang, X. G. Zhang, Solid State Ionics 2004, 166, 61-67. 
[15] 
(a) L. Liu, Z. Niu, J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4340-4363. (b) X. Wang, K. 
Jiang, G. Shen, Mater. Today. 2015, 18, 265-272 (c) Y. Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Cheng, 
W. Y. Lai, H. Pang, W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5181-5199. (d) X. Wang, X. 
Lu, B. Liu, D. Chen, Y. Tong, G. Shen, Adv. Mater. 2014, 26, 4763-4782. 
[16] 
(a) P. Yang, W. Mai, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 274–290 (b) X. Lu, M. Yu, G. Wang, Y. 
Tong, Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2160-2181 (d) A. Tyagi, K. M. Tripathi, R. K. 
Gupta, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22507-22541, (a) L. Li, Z. Wu, S. Yuan, X. B. 
Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2101-2122, 
[17] 
(a) H. Chen, S. Zeng, M. Chen, Y. Zhang, Q. Li, Carbon 2015, 92, 271-296, (c) X. 
Wang, G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 790-823 (d) G. Xiong, C. Meng, R. G. 
Reifenberger, P. P. Irazoqui, T. S. Fisher, Electroanalysis 2014, 26, 30-51 
[18] 
(a) W. K. Chee, H. N. Lim, Z. Zainal, N. M. Huang, I. Harrison, Y. Andou, J. Phys. 
Page 86 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 89 (native) -----
87 
 
Chem. C 2016, 120, 4153-4172 (b) T. Chen, L. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10756-
10775, (c) Y. Huang, H. Li, Z. Wang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Y. Huang, C. Zhi, Nano 
Energy 2016, 22, 422-438.  
[19] 
(a) J. Sun, Y. Huang, Y. N. S. Sea, Q. Xue, Z. Wang, M. Zhu, H. Li, X. Tao, C. Zhi, H. 
Hu, Mater. Today Energy 2017, 5, 1-14 (b) S. T. Senthilkumar, Y. Wang, H. Huang, J. 
Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20863-20879 (c) K. Jost, G. Dion, Y. Gogotsi, J. Mater. 
Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10776-10787 
[20] 
(a) H. Wang, A. C. Forse, J. M. Griffin, N. M. Trease, L. Trognko, P. L. Taberna, P. 
Simon, C. P. Grey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18968-18980 (b) F. Béguin, V. 
Presser, A. Balducci, E. Frackowiak, Adv. Mater. 2014, 26, 2219-2251 (c) P. Simon, Y. 
Gogotsi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1094-1103. 
[21] 
(a) V. Augustyn, P. Simon and B. Dunn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1597-1614 (b) J. 
R. Miller, A. F. Burke, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2008, 53-57. (c) P. Simon, Y. 
Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845-854 (d) J. R. Miller, P. Simon, Science, 2008, 321, 
651-652 
[22] 
(a) S. Zheng, Z. S. Wu, S. Wang, H. Xiao, F. Zhou, C. Sun, X. Bao, H. M. Cheng, 
Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 6, 70-97. (b) H. Xiao, Z. S. Wu, L. Chen, F. Zhou, S. 
Zheng, W. Ren, H. M. Cheng, X. Bao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7284-7292. (c) N. A. 
Choudhury, S. Sampath, A. K. Shukla, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 55-67; (d) G. 
Lota, E. Frackowiak, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 87-90. 
[23] 
(a) J. Chmiola, G. Yushin, Y. Gogotsi, C. Portet, P. Simon, P. L. Taberna, Science, 
2006, 313, 1760-1763; (b) C. Largeot, C. Portet, J. Chmiola, P. L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi, 
P. Simon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2730-2731. 
[24] 
H. Shi, Electrochim. Acta, 1996, 41, 1633-1639. 
[25] 
S. Kondrat, N. Georgi, M. V. Fedorov, A. A. Kornyshev, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 
Page 87 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 90 (native) -----
88 
 
2011, 13, 11359-11366. 
[26] 
(a) C. Merlet, B. Rotenberg, P. A. Madden, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and M. 
Salanne, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 306-310 (b) M. Deschamps, E. Gilbert, P. Azais, E. R. 
Pinero, M. R. Ammar, P. Simon, D. Massiot, F. Beguin, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 351-358. 
[27] 
(a) T. Brousse, D. Bélanger, J. W. Long, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2015, 162, A5185-A5189 
(b) D. P. Dubal, P. Gomez-Romero, Metal oxides in supercapacitors, Elsevier 2017.  
[28] 
E. Herrero, L. J. Buller, H. D. Abruna, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1897-1930. 
[29] 
X. Wang, G. Yushin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1889-1904. 
[30] 
(a) M. D. Stoller, R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1294-1301 (b) S. Roldan, 
D. Barreda, M. Granda, R. Menendez, R. Santamaria, C. Blanco, Phys. Chem. Chem. 
Phys., 2015, 17, 1084-1092 (c) Y. Gogotsi, P. Simon, Science, 2011, 334, 917-918 (d) 
Y. J. Kang, S.-J. Chun, S.-S. Lee, B.-Y. Kim, J. H. Kim, H. Chung, S.-Y. Lee and W. 
Kim, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6400–6406. 
[31] 
J. Bae, M. K. Song, Y. J. Park, J. M. Kim, M. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. 
Ed., 2011, 50, 1683-1687. 
[32] 
(a) Y. Cheng, S. Lu, H. Zhang, C. V. Varanasi and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4206-
4211, (b) X. Xiao, T. Li, Z. Peng, H. Jin, Q. Zhong, Q. Hu, B. Yao, Q. Luo, C. Zhang, L. 
Gong, J. Chen, Y. Gogotsi and J. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2014, 6, 1-9. 
[33] 
(a) D. Feng, Y. Lv, Z. Wu, Y. Dou, L. Han, Z. Sun, Y. Xia, G. Zheng, D. Zhao, J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 15148-15156 (b) K. Xiao, L. X. Ding, G. Liu, H. Chen, S. Wang, 
H. Wang, Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 5997-6002 
[34] 
(a) Y. He, W. Chen, X. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Fu, C. Zhao, E. Xie, ACS Nano 2013, 7, 174-
182, (b) K. Qin, J. Kang, J. Li, C. Shi, Y. Li, Z. Qiao, N. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 481-
487. 
[35] 
V. L. Pushparaj, M.M. Shaijumon, A. Kumar, S. Murugesan, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, R.J. 
Page 88 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 91 (native) -----
89 
 
Linhardt, O. Nalamasu, P. M. Ajayan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2007, 104, 13574-13577 
[36] 
(a) Z. Cao, B. B. Wei, Energy Environ. Sci. 2013, 6, 3183-3201 (b) Z. Zhang, T. Zhai, X. 
Lu , M. Yu , Y. Tong , K. Mai , J. Mater. Chem. A 2013, 1, 505 -509 (c) J. Chang, S. 
Adhikari, T. H. Lee, B. Li, F. Yao, D. T. Pham, V. T. Le, Y. H. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater. 
2015, 5, 1500003. 
[37] 
Y. J. Kang, S. J. Chun, S. S. Lee, B. Y. Kim, J. H. Kim, H. Chung, S. Y. Lee, W. Kim, 
ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6400-6406. 
[38] 
(a) A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183-191, (b) A. K. Geim, 
Science, 2009, 324, 1530-1534, (c) L. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 46, 31-42. 
[39] 
(a) L. L. Zhang, R. Zhou, X. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5983-5992, (b) C. Xu, B. 
Xu, Y. Gu, Z. Xiong, J. Sun and X. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1388-1414. 
[40] 
Z. Weng, Y. Su, D. W. Wang, F. Li, J. Du, H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater. 2011, 1 
917-922  
[41] 
N. Li, G. Yang, Y. Sun, H. Song, H. Cui, G. Yang, C. Wang, Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 3195-
3203 
[42] 
(a) G. K. Wang, X. Sun, F. Y. Lu, H. T. Sun, M. P. Yu, W. L. Jiang, C. S. Liu and J. 
Lian, Small, 2012, 8, 452–459, (b) Z. Lei, N. Christov, X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 
2011, 4, 1866-1873. 
[43] 
C. Liu, Z. Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu, B. Z. Jang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4863-4868. 
[44] 
Y. Wang, J. Chen, J. Cao, Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. H. Ouyang, D. Jia, J. Power Sources, 
2014, 271, 269-277. 
[45] 
B. G. Choi, J. Hong, W. H. Hong, P. T. Hammond, H. Park, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7205-
7213. 
[46] 
D. Yu and L. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2009, 1, 467-470. 
[47] 
(a) Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, L. J. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Wang, M. F. Mousaviae, R. 
Page 89 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 92 (native) -----
90 
 
B. Kaner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3639-3665 (b) A. Borenstein, O. Hanna, R. 
Attias, S. Luski, T. Brousse, D. Aurbach, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12653-12672 
[48] 
(a) G. Zhang, X. Xiao, B. Li, P. Gu, H. Xue, H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8155-
8186 (b) F. Shi, L. Li, X. Wang, C. Gu, J. Tu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 41910-41921.  
[49] 
(a) C. Zhang, T. M. Higgins, S. H. Park, S. E. O'Brien, D. Long, J. N. Coleman, V. 
Nicolosi, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 495-505 (b) Z. Peng, X. Liu, H. Meng, Z. Li, B. Li, Z. 
Liu, S. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4577-4586 
[50] 
(a) M. Huang, F. Li, F. Dong, Y. X. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 
21380-21423 (b) J. Cao, X. Li, Y. Wang, F. C. Walsh, J. H. Ouyang, D. Jia, Y. Zhou, J. 
Power Sources 2015, 293, 657-674 
[51] 
(a) S. Gu, Z. Lou, L. Li, Z. Chen, X. Ma, G. Shen, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 424-434 (b) K. 
Chi, Z. Zhang, Q. Lv, C. Xie, J. Xiao, F. Xiao, S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 
2017, 9, 6044-6053 
[52] 
(a) C. H. Lai, D. Ashby, M. Moz, Y. Gogotsi, L. Pilon, B. Dunn, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 
9407-9415 (b) L. Kong, C. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Qiao, L. Ling, D. Long, ACS Nano, 
2015, 9, 11200-11208  
[53] 
(a) W. Li, F. Gao, X. Wang, N. Zhang, M. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 12, 9342-
9347 (b) E. Feng, H. Peng, Z. Zhang, J. Lia, Z. Lei, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 9024-
9032 (c) A. Khosrozadeh, M. A. Darabi, M. Xing, Q. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11379-11389 
[54] 
(a) C. Yang, L. Zhang, N. Hu, Z. Yang, H. Wei, Y. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 302, 
39-45 (b) Y. Zhou, X. Hu, Y. Shang, C. Hua, P. Song, X. Li, Y. Zhang, A. Cao, RSC 
Adv., 2016, 6, 62062-62070  (c) C. Yang, L. Zhang, N. Hu, Z. Yang, H. Wei, Y. Wang, 
Y. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci. 2016, 387, 666-673 
[55] 
(a) R. B. Ambade, S. B. Ambade, R. R. Salunkhe, V. Malgras, S. H. Jin, Y. Yamauchi,  
Page 90 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 93 (native) -----
91 
 
S. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016,4, 7406-7415 (b) Y. Li, G. Ren, Z. Zhang, C. Teng, 
Y. Wu, X. Lu, Y. Zhu, L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17324-17332 (c) Z. S. Wu, 
Y. Zheng, S. Zheng, S. Wang, C. Sun, K. Parvez, T. Ikeda, X. Bao, K. Müllen, X. Feng, 
Adv. Mater. 2017, 10.1002/adma.201602960  
[56] 
X. Xiao, X. Peng, H. Jin, T. Li, C. Zhang, B. Gao, B. Hu, K. Huo, J. Zhou, Adv. Mater. 
2013, 25, 5091. 
[57] 
B. Gao, X. Li, X. Guo, X. Zhang, X. Peng, L. Wang, J. Fu, P. K. Chu, K. Huo, Adv. 
Mater. Interfaces 2015, 2, 1500211. 
[58] 
(a) S. Mondal, U. Rana, S. Malik, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 7573-7583 (b) J. Li, W. 
Lu, Y. Yand, T. W. Chou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11271-11277 (c) N. Hu, L. 
Zhang, C. Yang, J. Zhao, Z. Yang, H. Wei, H. Liao, Z. Feng, A. Fisher, Y. Zhang, Z. J. 
Xu, Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 19777 (d) L. Negre, B. Daffos, V. Turq, P. L. Taberna P. Simon, 
Electrochim. Acta. 2016, 206, 490-495 
[59] 
K. Chi, Z. Zhang, J. Xi, Y. Huang, F. Xiao, S. Wang, Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2014, 6, 16312-16319. 
[60] 
Y. Chen, L. Du, P. Yang, P. Sun, X. Yu, W. Mai, J. Power Sources 2015, 287, 68-74 
[61] 
(a) H. Zhou, H. J. Zhai, G. Han, J. Power Sources, 2016, 323, 125-133 (b) T. Cheng,  
Y. Z. Zhang, J. D. Zhang, W. Y. Lai, W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016,4, 10493-
10499 (c) S. Lehtimäki, M. Suominen, P. Damlin, S. Tuukkanen, C. Kvarnström, D. 
Lupo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22137-22147 (d) I. Shown, A. Ganguly, L. 
C. Chen, K. H. Chen, Energy Sci. Eng. 2015, 3, 2-26 
[62] 
Y. Liu, B. Weng, J. M. Razal, Q. Xu, C. Zhao, Y. Hou, S. Seyedin, R. Jalili, G. G. 
Wallace, J. Chen, Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 17045. 
[63] 
Z. Li, G. Ma, R. Ge, F. Qin, X. Dong, W. Meng, T. Liu, J. Tong, F. Jiang, Y. Zhou, K. Li, 
X. Min, K. Huo, Y. Zhou, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2016, 55, 979-982. 
Page 91 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 94 (native) -----
92 
 
[64] 
(a) J. Yu, J. Wu, H. Wang, A. Zhou, C. Huang, H. Bai, L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4724–4729 (b) J. Cao, T. Huang, R. Liu, X. Xi, D. Wu, Electrochim. 
Acta, 2017, 230, 265-270 (c) P. A. Shinde, N. R. Chodankar, V. C. Lokhande, A. M. 
Patil, T. Ji, J. H. Kim, C. D. Lokhande, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 113442-113451 
[65] 
(a) A. Lamberti, M. Fontana, S. Bianco, E. Tresso, International J. Hydrogen Energy, 
2016, 41, 11700-11708 (b) P. Pazhamalai, K. Krishnamoorthy, S. J. Kim, International 
J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 14830-14835 
[66] 
(a) Y. Wang, S. Wang, Y. Wu, Z. Zheng, K. Hong, B. Li, Y. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 
2017, 246, 1065-1074 (b) X. Yang, Z. Lin, J. Zheng, Y. Huang, B. Chen, Y. Mai, X. 
Feng, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8650-8657 (c) V. S. Kumbhar, Y. R. Lee, C. S. Ra, D. Tum,  
B. K. Min, J. J. Shim, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 16348-16359 
[67] 
(a) H. Xia, D. D. Zhu, Z. T. Luo, Y. Yu, X. Q. Shi, G. L. Yuan, J. P. Xie, Sci. Rep. 2013, 
3, 2978, (b) L. T. Le, M. H. Ervin, H. Qiu, B. E. Fuchs, W. Y. Lee, Electrochem. 
Commun. 2011, 13, 355. 
[68] 
(a) N. R. Chodankar, D. P. Dubal, A. C. Lokhande, C. D. Lokhande, J. Colloid and 
Interface Science 2015, 460, 370-376, (b) S. K. Shinde, D. P. Dubal, G. S. Ghodake, D. 
Y. Kim, V. J. Fulari, Nano-Structures & Nano-Objects 2016, 6, 5-13. 
[69] 
(a) N. R. Chodankar, D. P. Dubal, G. S. Gund, C. D. Lokhande, Electrochim. Acta 
2015, 165, 338-347 (b) N. R. Chodankar, D. P. Dubal, G. S. Gund, C. D. Lokhande, J. 
Energy Chem. 2016, 25, 463-471. 
[70] 
J. Chen, J. Xu, S. Zhou, N. Zhao, C. P. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17385–
17391 
[71] 
K. Sheng, Y. Sun, C. Li, W. Yuan, G. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 247. 
[72] 
(a) R. K. Gupta, J. Candler, S. Palchoudhury, K. Ramasamy, B. K. Gupta, Sci. Rep. 
2015, 5, 15265, (b) G. Zhu, Z. He, J. Chen, J. Zhao, X. Feng, Y. Ma, Q. Fan, L. Wang, 
Page 92 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 95 (native) -----
93 
 
W. Huang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1079-1085, (c) B. Liu, B. Liu, Q. Wang, X. Wang, Q. 
Xiang, D. Chen, G. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2013, 5, 10011-10017 
[73] 
Y. Huang, J. Tao, W. Meng, M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Y. Fu, Y. Gao, C. Zhi, Nano Energy, 
2015, 11, 518–525. 
[74] 
W. Zhou, X. Liu, Y. Sang, Z. Zhao, K. Zhou, H. Liu, S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 2014, 6, 4578−4586. 
[75] 
Q. Wang, X. Wang, B. Liu, G. Yu, X. Hou, D. Chen, G. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 
1, 2468–2473 
[76] 
M. Shao, Z. Li, R. Zhang, F. Ning, M. Wei, D. G. Evans, X. Duan, Small 2015, 11, 
3530–3538 
[77] 
(a) W. Liu, C. Lu, H. Li, R. Y. Tay, L. Sun, X. Wang, W. L. Chow, X. Wang, B. K. Tay, Z. 
Chen, J. Yan, K. Feng, G. Lui, R. Tjandra, L. Rasenthiram, G. Chiu,  A. Yu, J. Mater. 
Chem. A, 2016,4, 3754-3764 (b) Z. Liu, Z. S. Wu, S. Yang, R. Dong, X. Feng, K. 
Müllen, Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 2217-2222  
[78] 
J. Tao, W. Ma, N. Liu, X. Ren, Y. Shi, J. Su, Y. Gao, Nano-Micro Lett. 2015, 7, 276-281 
[79] 
J. Li, X. Cheng, J. Sun, C. Brand, A. Shashurin, M. Reeves, M. Keidar, J. Appl. Phys. 
2014, 115, 164301  
[80] 
X. Zhang, Z. Lin, B. Chen, S. Sharma, C. Wong, W. Zhang, Y. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. 
A, 2013, 1, 5835-5839 
[81] 
L. Yuan, X. Xiao, T. Ding, J. Zhong, X. Zhang, Y. Shen, B. Hu, Y. Huang, J. Zhou, Z. L. 
Wang, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2012, 51, 4934-4938 
[82] 
L. Zhang, P. Zhu, F. Zhou, W. Zeng, H. Su, G. Li, J. Gao, R. Sun, C. Wong, ACS 
Nano, 2016, 10, 1273-1282 
[83] 
K. H. Choi, J. T. Yoo, C. K. Lee, S. Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2812-2821 
[84] 
(a) M. Mao, J. Hu, H. Liu, International J. Energy Res. 2015, 39, 727-740, (b) S. Zhai, 
Page 93 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 96 (native) -----
94 
 
H. E. Karahan, L. Wei, Q. Qian, A. T. Harris, A. I. Minett, S. Ramakrishna, A. K. Ng, Y. 
Chen, Energy Storage Materials, 2016, 3, 123-139. (c) Q. Xue, J. Sun, Y. Huang, M. 
Zhu, Z. Pei, H. Li, Y. Wang, N. Li, H. Zhang, C. Zhi, small, 2017, DOI: 
10.1002/smll.201701827 
[85] 
(a) K. Jost, D. Stenger, C. R. Perez, J. K. McDonough, K. Lian, Y. Gogotsi, G. Dion, 
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2698-2705 (b) W. Y. Ko, Y. F. Chen, K. M. Lu, K. J. Lin, 
Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 18887 (c) X. Yu, X. Su, K. Yan, H. Hu, M. Peng, X. Cai, D. Zou, Adv. 
Mater. Tech. 2016, 1, 1600009 (d) X. Li, J. Wang, Y. Zhao, F. Ge, S. Komarneni, Z. 
Cai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25905–25914 
[86] 
(a) A. M. Abdelkader, N. Karim, C. Vallés, S. Afroj, K. S Novoselov, S. G. Yeates, 2D 
Mater., 2017, 4, 035016 (b) Q. Lu, L. Liu, S. Yang, J. Liu, Q. Tian, W. Yao, Q. Xue, M. 
Li, W. Wu, J. Power Sources 2017, 361, 31-38 (c) N. Yu, H. Yin, W. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. 
Tang, M. Q. Zhu, Adv. Energy. Mater. 2016, doi: 10.1002/aenm.201501458 
[87] 
C. Zhou, J. Liu, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 035402. 
[88] 
Y. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Xie, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8054–8063 
[89] 
H. Y. Jin, Z. H. Peng, W. M. Tang, H. L. W. Chan, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 33022-33028 
[90] 
W. Y. Ko, Y. F. Chen, K. M. Lu, K. J. Lin, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 18887 
[91] 
M. S. Javed, J. Chen, L. Chen, Y. Xi, C. Zhang, B. Wan, C. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 
2016, 4, 667-674 
[92] 
Q. Liao, N. Li, S. Jin, G. Yang, C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5310-5317 
[93] 
(a) Q. Wang, Y. Wu, T. Li, D. Zhang, M. Miao, A. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016,4, 
3828-3834 (b) J. Sun, Y. Huang, C. Fu, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, C. Zhi, H. Hu, 
Nano Energy 2016, 27, 230-237 (c) L. Gao, X. Li, X. Li, J. Cheng, B. Wang, Z. Wang,  
C. Li, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 57190-57198 
[94] 
(a) C. Choi, H. J. Sim, G. M. Spinks, X. Lepró, R. H. Baughman, S. J. Kim, Adv. Energy 
Page 94 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 97 (native) -----
95 
 
Mater. 2016, 6, 1502119 DOI: 10.1002/aenm.201502119 (b) Q. Wang, D. Zhang, Y. 
Wu, T. Li, A. Zhang, M. Miao, Energy Tech. 2017, 5, 1449-1456 
[95] 
T. Huang, B. Zheng, L. Kou, K. Gopalsamy, Z. Xu, C. Gao, Y. Meng, Z. Wei, RSC Adv., 
2013, 3, 23957-23962 
[96] 
L. Kou, T. Huang, B. Zheng, Y. Han, X. Zhao, K. Gopalsamy, H. Sun, C. Gao, Nat. 
Commun., 2014, 5, 3754 
[97] 
(a) B. Liu, D. Tan, X. Wang, D. Chen, G. Shen, Small 2013, 9, 1998-2004 (b) Q. Wang, 
X. Wang, J. Xu, X. Ouyang, X. Hou, D. Chen, R. Wang, G. Shen, Nano Energy 2014, 8, 
44-51. (c) X. Dong, Z. Guo, Y. Song, M. Hou, J. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Xia, Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 2014, 24, 3405-3412 
[98] 
T. Chen, L. Dai, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 2, 21–26 
[99] 
N. Liu, W. Ma, J. Tao, X. Zhang, J. Su, L. Li, C. Yang, Y. Gao, D. Golberg, Y. Bando, 
Adv. Mater. 2013, 25, 4925-4931 
[100] 
Z. Yu, J. Thomas, Adv. Mater. 2014, 26, 4279-4285 
[101] 
Y. Huang, H. Hu, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, W. Meng, C. Liu, Z. Pei, C. Hao, Z. Wang, C. Zhi, 
ACS Nano 2015, 9, 4766–4775 
[102] 
V. T. Le, H. Kim, A. Ghosh, J. Kim, J. Chang, Q. A. Vu, D. T. Pham, J. H. Lee, S. W. 
Kim, Y. H. Lee, ACS Nano 2013, 7, 5940-5947 
[103] 
(a) X. Cao, B. Zheng, W. Shi, J. Yang, Z. Fan, Z. Luo, X. Rui, B. Chen, Q. Yan, H. 
Zhang, Adv. Mater. 2015, 27, 4695-4701 (b) Y. J. Kang, H. Chung, M. S. Kim, W. Kim, 
Appl. Surf. Sci. 2015, 355, 160-165 (c) X. Peng, H. Liu, Q. Yin, J. Wu, P. Chen, G. 
Zhang, G. Liu, C. Wu, Y. Xie, Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 11782 
[104] 
(a) T. Gu, B. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25243-25250 (b) X. Fan, T. 
Chen, L. Dai, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 36996-37002 (c) E. A. Nagelli, L. Huang, A.Q.-Z. Dai, 
F. Du, L. Dai, Part. Part. Syst. Charact. 2017,  https://doi.org/10.1002/ppsc.201700131 
Page 95 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 98 (native) -----
96 
 
[105] 
Z. S. Zhang, T. Zhai, X. H. Lu, M. H. Yu, Y. X. Tong and K. C. Mai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 
2013, 1, 505. 
[106] 
(a) Z. Liu, Z. S. Wu, S. Yang, R. Dong, X. Feng, K. Müllen, Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 2217-
2222 (b) P. Yu, W. Fu, Q. Zeng, J. Lin, C. Yan, Z. Lai, B. Tang, K. Suenaga, H. Zhang, 
Z. Liu, Adv. Mater. 2017, DOI: 10.1002/adma.201701909 
[107] 
Y. Gao, Y. S. Zhou, W. Xiong, L. J. Jiang, M. Mahjouri-samani, P. Thirugnanam, X. 
Huang, M. M. Wang, L. Jiang, Y. F. Lu, APL Mater. 2013, 1, 012101 
[108] 
B. G. Choi, J. Hong, W. H. Hong, P. T. Hammond, H. S. Park, ACS Nano 2011, 5, 
7205–7213 
[109] 
H. Fei, C. Yang, H. Bao, G. Wang, J. Power Sources 2014, 266, 488-495 
[110] 
W. Si, C. Yan, Y. Chen, S. Oswald, L. Hana, O. G. Schmidt, Energy Environ. Sci., 
2013, 6, 3218–3223 
[111] 
X. Xiao, T. Li, P. Yang, Y. Gao, H. Jin, W. Ni, W. Zhan, X. Zhang, Y. Cao, J. Zhong, L. 
Gong, W. C. Yen, W. Mai, J. Chen, K. Huo, Y. L. Chueh, Z. L. Wang, J. Zhou, ACS 
Nano, 2012, 6, 9200-9206 
[112] 
N. Kurra, M. K. Hota, H. N. Alshareef, Nano Energy 2015, 13, 500-508 
[113] 
(a) Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Huang, X. Duan, ACS Nano 2013, 7, 4042-4049 
(b) J. Cai, C. Lv, A. Watanabe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1671-1679  
[114] 
J. B. In, B. Hsi, J. H. Yoo, S. Hyun, C. Carraro, R. Maboudian, C. P. Grigoropoulos, 
Carbon, 2015, 83, 144-151 
[115] 
Z. Peng, J. Lin, R. Ye, E. L. G. Samuel, J. M. Tour, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2015, 
7, 3414-3419 
[116] 
(a) S. Li, C. Zhao, K. Shu, C. Wang, Z. P. Guo, G. G. Wallace, H. K. Liu, Carbon, 2014, 
79, 554-562, (b) B. Hsia, J. Marschewski, S. Wang, J. B. In, C. Carraro, D. Poulikakos, 
C. P. Grigoropoulos, R. Maboudian, Nanotechnology 2014, 25, 055401 
Page 96 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 99 (native) -----
97 
 
[117] 
Y. S. Moon, D. Kim, G. Lee, S. Y. Hong, K. K. Kim, S. M. Park, J. S. Ha, Carbon, 2015, 
81, 29-37 
[118] 
 J. Maeng, C. Meng, P. P. Irazoqui, Biomed. Microdevices, 2015, 17, 7 
[119] 
T. Chen, L. Dai, Energy Storage Materials, 2016, 2, 21–26. 
[120] 
H. Xu, X. Hu, Y. Sun, H. Yang, X. Liu, Y. Huang, Nano Research, 2015, 8(4) 1148–
1158. 
[121] 
X. Dong , Z. Guo , Y. Song , M. Hou , J. Wang , Y. Wang, Y. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2014, 24, 3405–3412. 
[122] 
W. Ma, S. Chen, S. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Cheng, Y. Guo, S. Peng, S. Ramakrishn, M. 
Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 306, 481-488. 
[123] 
S. Jiang, T. Shi, X. Zhan, H. Long, S. Xi, H. Hu, Z. Tang, J. Power Sources 2014, 272, 
16-23. 
[124] 
D. Zhao, C. Chen, Q. Zhang, W. Chen, S. Liu, Q. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Li, H. Yu, Adv. 
Energy Mater. 2017, 1700739-1700748. 
[125] 
K. Wang, X. Zhang, C. Li, H. Zhang, X. Sun, N. Xu, Y. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 
19726-19732. 
[126] 
J. Yu, J. Wu, H. Wang, A. Zhou, C. Huang, H. Bai, L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4724–4729. 
[127] 
P. Zhang, Z. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Fan, Y. Jiao, B. Chen, Electrochim.. Acta 2015, 184, 1–7. 
[128] 
P. Wu, S. Cheng, M. Yao, L. Yang, Y. Zhu, P. Liu, O. Xing, J. Zhou, M. Wang, H. Luo, 
M. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2017, 1702160-1702169. 
[129] 
X. Li, S. Ding, X. Xiao, J. Shao, J. Wei, H. Pang, Y. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 
12774-12781 
[130] 
J. Noh, C. Yoon, Y. Kim, J. Jang, Carbon, 2017, 116, 470-478. 
[131] 
M. Yu, T. Zhai, X. Lu, X. Chen, S. Xie, W. Li, C. Liang, W. Zhao, L. Zhang, Y. Tong, J. 
Page 97 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 100 (native) -----
98 
 
Power Sources, 2013, 239, 64-71. 
[132] 
B. S. Shen, H. Wang, L. J. Wu, R. S. Guo, Q. Huang, X. B. Yan, Chin. Chem. Lett. 
2016, 27, 1586-1591 
[133] 
K. Ye, Z. Liu, C. Xu, N. Li, Y. Chen, Y. Su, Inorganic Chemistry Communications, 2013, 
30, 1–4. 
[134] 
M. S. Javed, S. Dai, M. Wang, D. Guo, L. Chen, X. Wang, C. Hu, Y. Xi, J. Power 
Sources 2015, 285, 63-69. 
[135] 
C. Liu, S. Zhao, Y. Lu, Y. Chang, D. Xu, Q. Wang, Z. Dai, J. Bao, M. Han, small 2017, 
DOI: 10.1002/smll.201603494. 
[136] 
P. Yang, Y. Li, Z. Lin, Y. Ding, S. Yue, C. P. Wong, X. Cai, S. Tan, W. Mai, J. Mater. 
Chem. A, 2014, 2, 595–599. 
[137] 
Q. Liao, N. Li, S. Jin, G. Yang, C. Wang, ACS nano 2015, 9, 5310–5317. 
[138] 
J. Zhao, J. Chen, S. Xu, M. Shao, D. Yan, M. Wei, D. G. Evans, X. Duan, J. Mater. 
Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8836–8843 
[139] 
H. Y. Jin, Z. H. Peng, W. M. Tang, H. L. W. Chan, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 33022–33028.  
[140] 
Q. Wang, J. Xu, X. Wang, B. Liu, X. Hou, G. Yu, P. Wang, D. Chen, G. Shen, 
ChemElectroChem 2014, 1, 559 – 564. 
[141] 
X. F. Lu, A. L. Wang, H. Xu, X. J. He, Y. X. Tong, G. R. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 
16560–16566 (301a) 
[142] 
M. S. Javed, S. Dai, M. Wang, Y. Xi, Q. Lang, D. Guo, C. Hu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 
13610–13618. 
[143] 
G. Zhu, Z. He, J. Chen, J. Zhao, X. Feng, Y. Ma, Q. Fan, L. Wang, W. Huang, 
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1079–1085. 
[144] 
T. Qin, S. Peng, J. Hao, Y. Wen, Z. Wang, X. Wang, D. He, J. Zhang, J. Hou, G. Cao, 
Adv. Energy Mater. 2017, 1700409-1700419. 
Page 98 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 101 (native) -----
99 
 
[145] 
W. Y. Ko, Y. F. Chen, K. M. Lu, K. J. Lin, Sci. Rep. 2015, 6, 18887. 
[146] 
K. Parvez, Z. Wu, R. Li, X. Liu, R. Graf, X. Feng, K. Müllen , J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 
136, 6083−6091. 
[147] 
X. Wang, A. Sumboja, W. L. Foo, C. Yan, K. Tsukagoshi, P. Lee, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 
15827–15833. 
[148] 
Y. Gao, H. Jin, Q. Lin, X. Li, M. Tavakoli, S. Leung, W. Tang, L. Zhou, H. Chan, Z. Fan, 
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10199–10204. 
[149] 
J. Zhang, X. Zhao, Z. Huang, T. Xu, Q. Zhang, Carbon 2016, 107, 844-851 
[150] 
B. Yao, L. Yuan, X. Xiao, J. Zhang, Y. Qi, J. Zhou, J. Zhou, B. Hub, W. Chen, Nano 
Energy 2013, 2, 1071–1078. 
[151] 
S. Dai, W. Xu, Y. Xin, M. Wang, X. Gun, D. Guo, C. Hun, Nano Energy 2016, 19, 363–
372. 
[152] 
H. Lee, S. Hong, J. Kwon, Y. Suh, J. Lee, H. Moon, J. Yeo, S. Ko, J. Mater. Chem. A, 
2015, 3, 8339–8345. 
[153] 
J. Yun, D. Kim, G. Lee, J. Ha, Carbon 2014, 79, 156-164. 
[154] 
Y. Kang, H. Chung, M. Kim, W. Kim, Applied Surface Science 2015, 355, 160–165. 
[155] 
H. Hu, K. Zhang, S. Li, S. Jia, C. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20916–20922. 
[156] 
X. Xu, W. Shi, P. Li, S. Ye, C. Ye, H. Ye, T. Lu, A.  Zheng, J. Zhu, L. Xu, M. Zhong, X. 
Cao, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6058-6065 
[157] 
K. Zhang, H. Hu, W. Yao, C. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 617–623. 
[158] 
X. Liu, T. Qian, N. Xu, J. Zhou, J. Guo, C. Yan, Carbon 2015, 92, 348-353.  
[159] 
S. Liu, J. Xie, H. Li, Y. Wang, H. Yang, T. Zhu, S. Zhang, G. Cao, X. Zhao, J. Mater. 
Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18125–18131. 
[160] 
C. Hao, F. Wen, J. Xiang, L. Wang, H. Hou, Z. Su, W. Hu, Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2014, 24, 6700–6707. 
Page 99 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 102 (native) -----
100 
 
[161] 
X. Cao, B. Zheng, W. Shi, J. Yang, Z. Fan, Z. Luo, X. Rui, B. Chen, Q. Yan, H. Zhang, 
Adv. Mater. 2015, 27, 4695–4701. 
[162] 
L. Li, J. Gong, C. Liu, Y. Tian, M. Han, Q. Wang, X. Hong, Q. Ding, W. Zhu, J. Bao, 
ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 1089-1096. 
[163] 
G. Sun, J. An, C. Chua, H. Pang, J. Zhang, P. Chen, Electrochemistry Communications 
2015, 51, 33–36. 
[164] 
J. Xie, X. Sun, N. Zhang, K. Xu, M. Zhou, Y. Xie, Nano Energy 2013, 2, 65–74. 
[165] 
Y. Chen, K. Cai, C. Liu, H. Song, X. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater. 2017, 1701247-
1701258. 
[166] 
X. Li, T. Zhao, Q. Chen, P. Li, K. Wang, M. Zhong, J. Wei, D. Wu, B. Weief, H. Zhu, 
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 17752—17757. 
[167] 
X. Fan, T. Chen, L. Dai, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 36996–37002. 
[168] 
R. Yuksel, Z. Sariob, A. Cirpan, P. Hiralal, H. Unalan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2014, 6, 15434−15439. 
[169] 
M. Sawangphruk, M. Suksomboon, K. Kongsupornsak, J. Khuntilo, P. Srimuk, Y. 
Sanguansak, P. Klunbud, P. Suktha, P. Chiochan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9630–
9636 
[170] 
B. Pandit, D. P. Dubal, B. R. Sankapal, Electrochim. Acta 2017, 242, 382-389. 
[171] 
H. Niu, X. Yang, H. Jiang, D. Zhou, X. Li, T. Zhang, J. Liu, Q. Wang, F. Qu, J. Mater. 
Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24082–24094. 
[172] 
Y. Shao, H. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, NPG Asia Materials, 2014, 6, 119 
[173] 
(a) B. E. Francisco, C. M. Jones, S. H. Lee and C. R. Stoldt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 
100, 103902 (b) A. S. Ulihin, Y. G. Mateyshina and N. F. Uvarov, Solid State Ionics, 
2013, 251, 62–65. 
[174] 
(a) N. A. Choudhury, S. Sampath and A. K. Shukla, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 55-
Page 100 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 103 (native) -----
101 
 
67 (b) H. Gao, K. Lian, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 33091-33113, (c) C. Zhong, Y. Deng, W. 
Hu, J. Qiao, L. Zhang, J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015,44, 7484-7539 
[175] 
A. A. Łatoszynska, G. Z. Zukowska, I. A. Rutkowska, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon, P. J. 
Kulesza, W. Wieczorek, J. Power Sources, 2014, 274, 1147-1154 
[176] 
(a) C. Meng, C. Liu, L. Chen, C. Hu and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4025 (b) H. J. 
Yu, J. H. Wu, L. Q. Fan, Y. Z. Lin, K. Q. Xu, Z. Y. Tang, C. X. Cheng, S. Tang, J. M. 
Lin, M. L. Huang and Z. Lan, J. Power Sources, 2012, 198, 402 (257) 
[177] 
J. Duay, E. Gillette, R. Liu and S. B. Lee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 3329. 
[178] 
K. T. Lee, N. L. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2008, 179, 430. 
[179] 
X. L. Hu, G. M. Hou, M. Q. Zhang, M. Z. Rong, W. H. Ruan, E. P. Giannelis, J. Mater. 
Chem., 2012, 22, 18961. 
[180] 
P. Sivaraman, A. Thakur, R. K. Kushwaha, D. Ratna, A. B. Samui, Electrochem. Solid-
State Lett., 2006, 9, A435. 
[181] 
C. W. Huang, C. A. Wu, S. S. Hou, P. L. Kuo, C. T. Hsieh, H. S. Teng, Adv. Funct. 
Mater., 2012, 22, 4677. 
[182] 
Y. S. Lee, S. H. Ju, J. H. Kim, S. S. Hwang, J. M. Choi, Y. K. Sun, H. Kim, B. Scrosati, 
D. W. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 17, 18. 
[183] 
L. Q. Fan, J. Zhong, J. H. Wu, J. M. Lin, Y. F. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 
9011-9014. 
[184] 
G. M. Wang, X. H. Lu, Y. C. Ling, T. Zhai, H. Y. Wang, Y. X. Tong and Y. Li, ACS 
Nano, 2012, 6, 10296-10302. 
[185] 
Y. J. Kang, H. Chung and W. Kim, Synth. Met., 2013, 166, 40-44. 
[186] 
M. Sawangphruk, P. Srimuk, P. Chiochan, A. Krittayavathananon, S. Luanwuthi and J. 
Limtrakul, Carbon, 2013, 60, 109-116. 
[187] 
X. Li, M. Zhou, J. Wang, F. Ge, Y. Zhao, S. Komarneni, Z. Cai, J. Power Sources 2017, 
Page 101 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 104 (native) -----
102 
 
342, 762-771 
[188] 
X. Jian, H. Yang, J. Li, E. Zhang, L. Cao, Z. Liang, Electrochim. Acta 2017, 228, 483-
493 
[189] 
T. Qian, N. Xu, J. Zhou, T. Yang, X. Liu, X. Shen, J. Liang, C. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 
2015, 3, 488–493. 
[190] 
A. Virya, K. Lian, Electrochem. Commun., 2017, 74, 33-37 
[191] 
N. Li, T. Lv, Y. Yao, H. Li, K. Liu, T. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3267 
[192] 
Y. Yu, J. Zhong, W. Sun, R. Kumar, N. Koratkar, Adv. Funct. Mater. 27, 2017, 1606461 
[193] 
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5779-
5784. 
[194] 
G. Huang, C. Hou, Y. Shao, B. Zhu, B. Jia, H. Wang, Q. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 
2015, 12, 26–32. 
[195] 
G. M. Wang, H. Y. Wang, X. H. Lu, Y. C. Ling, M. H. Yu, T. Zhai, Y. X. Tong and Y. Li, 
Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2676–2682. 
[196] 
H. F. Ju, W. L. Song and L. Z. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10895–10903. 
[197] 
Q. Chen, X. M. Li, X. B. Zang, Y. C. Cao, Y. J. He, P. X. Li, K. L. Wang, J. Q. Wei, D. H. 
Wu and H. W. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 36253-36256. 
[198] 
H. Gao, K. Lian, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8855 
[199] 
H. Gao, K. Lian, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21272 
[200] 
H. Gao, K. Lian, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2013, 160, A505-A510 
[201] 
(a) B. Scrosati, F. Croce, and L. Persi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1718, (b) J. A. 
Kerres, Fuel Cells, 2005, 5, 230 (c) Y. Jin, S. Qiao, L. Zhang, Z. P. Xu, S. Smart, J. C. 
D. d. Costa, and G. Q. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 664 
[202] 
K. Lian, Q. Tian, Electrochem. Commun. 2010, 12, 517-519 
[203] 
(a) W. Li, T. Li, X. Ma, Y. Li, L. An, Z. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 12491-12496 (b) H. 
Page 102 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 105 (native) -----
103 
 
Gao, A. Virya, K. Lian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21511-21517 
[204] 
K. M. Kim, J. H. Nam, Y. G. Lee, W. I. Cho, J. M. Ko, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2013, 13, 1702-
1706. 
[205] 
D. Z. Chen, J. Yu, W. Lu, Y. Zhao, Y. Yan, T. W. Chou, Electrochim. Acta 2017, 233, 
181-189 
[206] 
(a) X. H. Lu, G. M. Wang, T. Zhai, M. H. Yu, S. L. Xie, Y. C. Ling, C. L. Liang, Y. X. 
Tong, Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5376, (b) C. C. Yang, S. J. Lin, J. Appl. Electrochem., 
2003, 33, 777. 
[207] 
(a) J. Qiao, J. Fu, R. Lin, J. Ma, J. Liu, Polymer 2010, 51, 4850-4859 (b) C. C. Yang, S. 
J. Lin, G. M. Wu, Mater. Chem. Phys. 2005, 92, 251-255, (c) J. M. Yang, S. A. Wang, J. 
Membr. Sci. 2015, 477, 49-57. 
[208] 
I. K. Moon, S. Yoon, J. Oh, Chem. Eur. J. 2017, 23, 597-604 
[209] 
C. C. Yang, S. T. Hsu, W. C. Chien, J. Power Sources, 2005, 152, 303 
[210] 
H. Zhang, C. Lu, C. Chen, L. Xie, P. Zhou, Q. Kong, ChemElectroChem 2017, 
10.1002/celc.201700253 
[211] 
A. Lewandowski, M. Zajder, E. Frackowiak, F. Beguin, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 
2777 
[212] 
H. Gao, K. Lian, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A505-A510. 
[213] 
Y. F. Huang, P. F. Wu, M. Q. Zhang, W. H. Ruan, E. P. Giannelis, Electrochim. Acta, 
2014, 132, 103-111. 
[214] 
N. Vassal, E. Salmon and J. F. Fauvarque, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 1527. 
[215] 
D. Kalpana, N. G. Renganathan and S. Pitchumani, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 621. 
[216] 
(a) C. Iwakura, H. Wada, S. Nohara, N. Furukawa, H. Inoue, M. Morita, Electrochem. 
Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, A37 (b) H. Wada, S. Nohara, N. Furukawa, H. Inoue, N. 
Sugoh, H. Iwasaki, M. Morita, C. Iwakura, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 4871. 
Page 103 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 106 (native) -----
104 
 
[217] 
H. Gao, J. Li, K. Lian, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 21332–21339 
[218] 
J. Li, K. Lian, Polymer 2016, 99, 2016, 140-146 
[219] 
C. W. Huang, C. A. Wu, S. S. Hou, P. L. Kuo, C. T. Hsieh, H. S. Teng, Adv. Funct. 
Mater., 2012, 22, 4677-4685. 
[220] 
Y. N. Sudhakar, M. Selvakumar, D. K. Bhat, Ionics, 2013, 19, 277-285. 
[221] 
C. Ramasamy, J. P. del Vel, M. Anderson, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2014, 18, 
2217–2223. 
[222] 
M. Schroeder, P. Isken, M. Winter, S. Passerini, A. Lex-Balducci, A. Balducci, J. 
Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1753-A1758. 
[223] 
P. M. DiCarmine, T. B. Schon, T. M. McCormick, P. P. Klein, D. S. Seferos, J. Phys. 
Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8295-8307. 
[224] 
C. W. Huang, C. A. Wu, S. S. Hou, P. L. Kuo, C. T. Hsieh, H. Teng, Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2012, 22, 4677-4685 
[225] 
J. Rodrıguez, E. Navarrete, E. A. Dalchiele, L. Sanchez, J. R. Ramos-Barrado, F. 
Martın, J. Power Sources, 2013, 237, 270–276. 
[226] 
M. F. Hsueh, C. W. Huang, C. A. Wu, P. L. Kuo, H. Teng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 
16751-16758. 
[227] 
Y. D. Chiou, D. S. Tsai, H. H. Lam, C. H. Chang, K. Y. Lee, Y. S. Huang, Nanoscale, 
2013, 5, 8122-8129 
[228] 
R. Yuksel, Z. Sarioba, A. Cirpan, P. Hiralal, H. E. Unalan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 
2014, 6, 15434–15439. 
[229] 
C. Ramasamy, J. Palma and M. Anderson, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2014, 18, 
2903-2911. 
[230] 
S. N. Syahidah, S. R. Majid, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 112, 678-685 
[231] 
A. Jain and S. K. Tripathi, Ionics, 2013, 19, 549-557 
Page 104 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 107 (native) -----
105 
 
[232] 
B. Anothumakkool, Arun Torris A. T., S. Veeliyath, V. Vijayakumar, M. V. Badiger, S. 
Kurungot, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8, 1233-1241 
[233] 
V. Vijayakumar, B. Anothumakkool, Arun Torris A. T., S. B. Nair, M. V. Badiger, S. 
Kurungot, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8461-8476 
[224] 
(a) Y. Lim, J. Yoon, J. Yun, D. Kim, S. Y. Hong, S. J. Lee, G. Zi, J. S. Ha, ACS Nano, 
2014, 8, 11639-11650 (b) S. Wang, B. Hsia, C. Carraro, R. Maboudian, J. Mater. 
Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7997-8002. 
[235] 
(a) G. P. Pandey and S. A. Hashmi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3372-3378, (b) M. 
Suleman, Y. Kumar and S. A. Hashmi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 7436-7443 
[236] 
C. W. Liew, S. Ramesh and A. K. Arof, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 2953-2963. 
[237] 
S. Ketabi, K. Lian, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 103, 174-178. 
[238] 
P. Tamilarasan, S. Ramaprabhu, Energy 2013, 51, 374-381. 
[239] 
X. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Peng, P. Cao, X. Cai, J. Li, M. Zhai, Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2015, 
2, 1500267 
[240] 
(a) Y. J. Kang, S. J. Chun, S. S. Lee, B. Y. Kim, J. H. Kim, H. Chung, S. Y. Lee, W. 
Kim, ACS Nano 2012, 6, 6400–6406, (b) X. Yang, F. Zhang, L. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. 
Huang, Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2013, 23, 3353-3360 
[241] 
A. Revzin, R. J. Russell, V. K. Yadavalli, W. G. Koh, C. Deister, D. D. Hile, M. B. 
Mellott, M. V. Pishko, Langmuir 2001, 17, 5440-5447 
[242] 
D. Kim, G. Lee, D. Kim, J. S. Ha, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2015, 7, 4608-4615  
[243] 
X. Zhong, J. Tang, L. Cao, W. Kong, Z. Sun, H. Cheng, Z. Lu, H. Pan, B. Xu, 
Electrochim. Acta 2017, 244, 112-118 
[244] 
X. Liu, B. Wu, N. Brandon, Q. Wang, Energy Technol. 2017, 5, 220-224 
[245] 
G. P. Pandey, A. C. Rastogi, C. R. Westgate, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 857–865. 
[246] 
S. Ketabi, B. Decker, K. Lian, Sol. State Ionics 2016, 298, 73-79 
Page 105 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 108 (native) -----
106 
 
[247] 
Y.Gao, Y. S. Zhou,M. Qian,H.M. Li, J. Redepenning, L. S. Fan, X. N. He, W. Xiong, X. 
Huang, M. Majhouri-Samani, L. Jiang, Y. F. Lu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 20613–20618 
[248] 
(a) N. R. Chodankar, D. P. Dubal, A. C. Lokhande, A. M. Patil, J. H. Kim, C. D. 
Lokhande, Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 39205. (b) E. Frackowiak, K. Fic, M. Meller, G. Lota, 
ChemSusChem 2012, 5, 1181-1185. (c) E. Frackowiak, M. Meller, J. Menzel, D. 
Gastol, K. Fic, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 172, 179-198. (d) B. Akinwolemiwa, C. Peng, 
G. Z. Chena, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2015, 162, A5054-A5059  
[249] 
(a) G. Lota, K. Fic and E. Frackowiak, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 12, 38-41 (b) K. 
Fic, G. Lota, M. Meller and E. Frackowiak, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5842-5850 
[250] 
(a) H. Yu, J. Wu, L. Fan, K. Xu, X. Zhong, Y. Lin, J. Lin, Electrochim. Acta 2011, 56, 
6881-6886. (b) S. T. Senthilkumar, R. Kalai Selvan, Y. S. Lee, J. S. Melo, J. Mater. 
Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1086–1095. 
[251] 
G. Ma, J. Li, K. Sun, H. Peng, J. Mu, Z. Lei, J. Power Sources 2014, 256, 281-287 
[252] 
(a) K. Sun, E. Feng, H. Peng, G. Ma, Y. Wu, H. Wang, Z. Lei, Electrochim. Acta 2015, 
158, 361-367, (b) S. T. Senthilkumar, R. K. Selvan, J. S. Melo and C. Sanjeeviraja, 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10541–10550 
[253] 
S. T. Senthilkumar, R. K. Selvan, N. Ponpandian, J. S. Melo, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 8937–
8940. 
[254] 
G. F. Ma, E. K. Feng, K. J. Sun, H. Peng, J. J. Li and Z. Q. Lei, Electrochim. Acta, 
2014, 135, 461–466 
[255] 
F. D. Yu, M. L. Huang, J. H. Wu, Z. Y. Qiu, L. Q. Fan, J. M. Lin and Y. B. Lin, J. Appl. 
Polym. Sci., 2014, 131, 39784. 
[256] 
Y. Tian, R. Xue, X. Zhou, Z. Liu, L. Huang, Electrochim. Acta 2015, 152, 135-139 
[257] 
S. Roldán, Z. González, C. Blanco, M. Granda, R. Menéndez, R. Santamaría, 
Electrochim. Acta 2011, 56, 3401-3405. 
Page 106 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 109 (native) -----
107 
 
[258] 
E. Feng, G. Ma, K. Sun, F. Ran, H. Peng, Z. Lei, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 1986-1992 
[259] 
E. Feng, G. Ma, K. Sun, Q. Yang, H. Peng, Z. Lei, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 75896-75904 
[260] 
(a) D. P. Dubal, J. Suarez-Guevara, D. Tonti, E. Enciso, P. Gomez-Romero, J. Mater. 
Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23483-23492, (b) D. P. Dubal, B. Nagar, J. Suarez-Guevara, D. 
Tonti, E. Enciso, P. Palomino, P. Gomez-Romero, Materials Today Energy 2017, 5, 58-
65 
[261] 
S. Pan, J. Deng, G. Guan, Y. Zhang, P. Chen, J. Ren, H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 
2015, 3, 6286-6290 
[262] 
M. Kim, J. Yoo, J. Kim, Chem. Eng. J. 2017, 324, 93-103 
[263] 
G. K. Veerasubramani, K. Krishnamoorthy, P. Pazhamalai, S. J. Kim, Carbon, 2016, 
105, 638-648. 
[264] 
H. Zhang, J. Li, C. Gu, M. Yao, B. Yang, P. Lu, Y. Ma, J. Power Sources 2016, 332, 
413-419 
[265] 
J. Zhou, J. Cai, S. Cai, X. Zhou and A. N. Mansour, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 
10479-10483 
[266] 
D. Kim, G. Lee, D. Kim, J. Yun, S. S. Lee, J. S. Ha, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15611-15620 
[267] 
H. S. Jang, C. J. Raj, W. G. Lee, B. C. Kim, K. H. Yu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 75376-75383 
[268] 
J. K. Lee, Y. J. Lee, W. S. Chae, Y. M. Sung, J. Electroceram. 2006, 17, 941. 
[269] 
J. Reiter, J. Vondrak, J. Michalek, Z. Micka, Electrochim. Acta 2006, 52, 1398 
[270] 
X. Liu, D. Wu, H. Wang, Q. Wang, Adv. Mater. 2014, 26, 4370 
[271] 
G. P. Pandey, S. A. Hashmi, Y. Kumar, Energy Fuels 2010, 24, 6644 
[272] 
D. Kumar, S. A. Hashmi, Solid State Ionics 2010, 181, 416-423 
[273] 
Sellam, S. A. Hashmi, J. Solid State Electrochem 2014, 18, 465-475 
[274] 
S. A. Hashmi, A. Kumar, S. K. Tripathi, European Polymer J. 2005, 41, 1373-1379 
[275] 
T. Chen, H. Peng, M. Durstock, L. Dai, Sci. Rep. 2014, 4, 3612 
Page 107 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 110 (native) -----
108 
 
[276] 
F. Miao, C. Shao, X. Li, K. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4180-4187. 
[277] 
B. Hsia, J. Marschewski, S. Wang, J. B. In, C. Carraro, D. Poulikakos, C. P. 
Grigoropoulos, R. Maboudian, Nanotechnology 2014, 25, 55401. 
[278] 
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin, R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326. 
[279] 
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Huang, X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4042-4049 
[280] 
K. Gao, Z. Shao, J. Li, X. Wang, X. Peng, W. Wang, F. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 
1, 63-67 
[281] 
(a) J. Sun, C. Wu, X. Sun, H. Hu, C. Zhi, L. Hou, C. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 
9443–9464 (b) Y. Zhang, L. Li, H. Su, W. Huang, X. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 
43-59 (c) K. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Meng, Z. Wei, small 2014, 10, 14-31 
[282] 
(a) Y. Zhong, X. Xia, F. Shi, J. Zhan, J. Tu, H. J. Fan, Adv. Sci. 2016, 3, 1500286 (b) X. 
Rui, H. Tan, Q. Yan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9889-9924, (c) M. S. Balogun, W. Qiu, W. 
Wang, P. Fang, X. Lu, Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1364-1387 (d) J. Zhu, S. 
Tang, J. Wu, X. Shi, B. Zhu, X. Meng, Adv. Energy Mater. 7, 2017 
DOI: 10.1002/aenm.201601234 
[283] 
(a) Y. Shi, L. Peng, Y. Ding, Y. Zhao, G. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6684-6696, 
(b) F. Wolfart, B. M. Hryniewicz, M. S. Góes, C. M. Corrêa, R. Torresi, M. A. O. S. 
Minadeo, S. I. Córdoba de Torresi, R. D. Oliveira, L. F. Marchesi, M. Vidotti, J. Solid 
State Electrochem. 2017, 21, 2489–2515 (c) R. Holze, Y. P. Wu, Electrochim. Acta 
2014, 122, 93-107 (d) A. Eftekhari, L. Li, Y. Yang, J. Power Sources 2017, 347, 86-107 
[284] 
A. Ferris, S. Garbarino, D. Guay, D. Pech, Adv. Mater. 2015, 27, 6625-6629 
[285] 
T. M. Dinha, A. Achour, S. Vizireanu, G. Dinescu, L. Nistor, K. Armstrong, D. Guay, D. 
Pech, Nano Energy 2014, 10, 288-294 
[286] 
J. Zhang, X. Zhao, Z. Huang, T. Xu, Q. Zhang, Carbon 2016, 107, 844-851 
[287] 
P. Shi, L. Li, L. Hua, Q. Qian, P. Wang, J. Zhou, G. Sun, W. Huang, ACS Nano 2017, 
Page 108 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 111 (native) -----
109 
 
11, 444-452. 
[288] 
W. Ma, S. Chen, S. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Cheng, Y. Guo, S. Peng, S. Ramakrishna, M. 
Zhu, J. Power Sources 2016, 306, 481-488 
[289] 
S. Yang, X. Song, P. Zhang, L. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6136-6145 
[290] 
(a) B. Pandit, D. P. Dubal, P. Gómez-Romero, B. B. Kale, B. R. Sankapal, Sci. Rep., 
2017, 7, 43430 (b) B. Pandit, D. P. Dubal, B. R. Sankapal, Electrochim. Acta 2017, 242, 
382-389 
[291] 
D. Kim, J. Yun, G. Lee, J. S. Ha, Nanoscale 2014, 6, 12034-12041 
[292] 
Y. Qian, R. Liu, Q. Wang, J. Xu, D. Chen, G. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10917-
10922 
[293] 
Y. Zheng, Z. Lin, W. Chen, B. Liang, H. Du, R. Yang, X. He, Z. Tang, X. Gui, J. Mater. 
Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5886-5894 
[294] 
B. D. Boruah, A. Misra, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17552-17559 
[295] 
H. Niu, X. Yang, H. Jiang, D. Zhou, X. Li, T. Zhang, J. Liu, Q. Wang, F. Qu, J. Mater. 
Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24082-24094 
[296] 
W. Cai, T. Lai, W. Dai, J. Ye, J. Power Sources 2014, 255, 170-178 
[297] 
(a) D. Choi, G. E. Blomgren and P. N. Kumta, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1178-1182 (b) P. 
Pande, P. G. Rasmussen, L. T. Thompson, J. Power Sources, 2012, 207, 212-215. 
[298] 
X. Xiao, X. Peng, H. Jin, T. Li, C. Zhang, B. Gao, B. Hu, K. Huo, J. Zhou, Adv. Mater. 
2013, 25, 5091-5097 
[299] 
G. Ma, Z. Wang, B. Gao, T. Ding, Q. Zhong, X. Peng, J. Su, B. Hu, L. Yuan, P. K. Chu, 
J. Zhou, K. Huo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14617-14624 
[300] 
X. Lu, G. Wang, T. Zhai, M. Yu, S. Xie, Y. Ling, C. Liang, Y. Tong, Y. Li, Nano Lett. 
2012, 12, 5376-5381 
[301] 
M. S. Javed, S. Dai, M. Wang, Y. Xi, Q. Lang, D. Guo, C. Hu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 
Page 109 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 112 (native) -----
110 
 
13610-13618 
[302] 
(a) 
X. 
Li, 
A. 
M. 
Elshahawy, 
C. 
Guan, 
J. 
Wang, 
small, 
2017, 
DOI: 
10.1002/smll.201701530 (b) M. C. Liu, Y. M. Hu, W. Y. An, Y. X. Hu, L. Y. Niu, L. B. 
Kong, L. Kang, Electrochim. Acta. 2017,232, 387-395. (c) C. Yang, L. Dong, Z. Chen, 
H. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 18884-18891.  
[303] 
(a) R. Soni, B. Anothumakkool, S. Kurungot, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 1329-1336 
(b) C. Yang, L. Zhang, N. Hu, Z. Yang, H. Wei, Z. J. Xu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, Appl. Surf. 
Sci. 2016, 379, 206-212 (c) J. M. DArcy, M. F. El-Kady, P. P. Khine, L. Zhang, S. H. 
Lee, N. R. Davis, D. S. Liu, M. T. Yeung, S. Y. Kim, C. L. Turner, A. T. Lech, P. T. 
Hammond, R. B. Kaner, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1500-1510. 
[304] 
F. Xiao, S. Yang, Z. Zhang, H. Liu, J. Xiao, L. Wan, J. Luo, S. Wang, Y. Liu, Sci. Rep. 
2015, 5, 9359.  
[305] 
L. Yuan, B. Yao, B. Hu, K. Huo, W. Chen, J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 470-
476 
[306] 
C. Yu, P. Ma, X. Zhou, A. Wang, T. Qian, S. Wu, Q. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2014, 6, 17937-17943 
[307] 
R. Liu, L. Ma, S. Huang, J. Mei, J. Xu, G. Yuan, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 857-864 
[308] 
(a) R. Dong, M. Pfeffermann, H. Liang, Z. Zheng, X. Zhu, J. Zhang and X. Feng, 
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12058-12063 (b) M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, 
L. J. Li, K. P. Loh, H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263-275. (c) S. Liu, F. Wang, R. 
Dong, T. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Zhuang, Y. Mai and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 
8365-8370. (d) P. Xiong, J. Zhu, L. Zhang and X. Wang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 
340-374. 
[309] 
(a) B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya, Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2017, 2, 16098 (b) M. 
Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi, M. W. 
Page 110 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 113 (native) -----
111 
 
Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 (c) V. M. H. Ng, H. Huang, K. Zhou, P. S. 
Lee, W. Que, J. Z. Xu, L. B. Kong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3039-3068 
[310] 
(a) B. Anasori, Y. Xie, M. Beidaghi, J. Lu, B. C. Hosler, L. Hultman, P. R. C. Kent, Y. 
Gogotsi, M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano 2015, 9, 9507-9516. (b) J. C. Lei, X. Zhang, Z. 
Zhou, Front. Phys. 2015, 10, 107303 
[311] 
(a) F. Shahzad, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, S. M. Hong, C. M. Koo, Y. 
Gogotsi, Science 2016, 353, 1137-1140 (b) A. Lipatov, M. Alhabeb, M. R. Lukatskaya, 
A. Boson, Y. Gogotsi, A. Sinitskii, Adv. Electron. Mater. 2016, 2, 1600255 
[312] 
M. R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C. E. Ren, Y. Dall Agnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, M. 
Naguib, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum, Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2013, 341, 1502-1505 
[313] 
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi, M. W. Barsoum, Nature, 2014, 
516, 78-81 
[314] 
C. Zhang, B. Anasori, A. Seral-Ascaso, S. H. Park, N. McEvoy, A. Shmeliov, G. S. 
Duesberg, J. N. Coleman, Y. Gogotsi, V. Nicolosi, Adv. Mater. 2017, DOI: 
10.1002/adma.201702678 
[315] 
M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Q. Deng, J. Zhou, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Y. Huang, Z. Wang, H. Li, Q. 
Huang, C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater. 2016, 6, DOI: 10.1002/aenm.201600969 
[316] 
H. Li, Y. Hou, F. Wang, M. R. Lohe, X. Zhuang, L. Niu, X. Feng, Adv. Energy Mater. 
2017, DOI: 10.1002/aenm.201601847 
[317] 
(a) J. Suarez-Guevara, V. Ruiz, P. Gomez-Romero, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1014–
1021 (b) J. Suarez-Guevara, V. Ruiz, P. Gomez-Romero, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 
2014, 16, 20411-20414. 
[318] 
(a) A. K. Cuentas-Gallegos, M. Lira-Cantú, N. Casañ-Pastor, P. Gómez-Romero, Adv. 
Fun. Mater. 2005, 15, 1125-1133 (b) Y. Ji, L. Huang, J. Hu, C. Streb, Y. F. Song, 
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 776-789 
Page 111 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 114 (native) -----
112 
 
[319] 
(a) M. Ammam, J. Mater. Chem. A 2013, 1, 6291-6312  (c) M. Genovese, K. Lian, 
Electrochem. Commun. 2014, 43, 60–62. (d) T. Akter, K. W. Hu, K. Lian, Electrochim. 
Acta 2011, 56, 4966–4971. 
[320] 
(a) D. P. Dubal, B. Ballesteros, A. A. Mohite, P. Gomez-Romero, ChemSusChem 2017, 
10, 731-737 (b) D. P. Dubal, N. R. Chodankar, A. Vinu, D. H. Kim, P. Gomez-Romero, 
ChemSusChem 2017, 10, 2742-2750 (c) V. Ruiz, J. Suarez-Guevara, P. Gomez-
Romero, Electrochem. Commun. 2012, 24, 35–38 
[321] 
(a) M. Genovese and K. Lian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3939-3947 (b) M. Genovese, 
K. Lian, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci. 2015, 19, 126-137. (c) H. Y. Chen, R. Al-
Oweini, J. Friedl, C. Y. Lee, L. Li, U. Kortz, U. Stimming, M. Srinivasan, Nanoscale, 
2015, 7, 7934–7941 
[322] 
Y. Chen, M. Han, Y. Tang, J. Bao, S. Li, Y. Lan, Z. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 
12377-12380 
[323] 
V. Prabhakaran, B. L. Mehdi, J. J. Ditto, M. H. Engelhard, B. Wang, K. Don D. 
Gunaratne, D. C. Johnson, N.  D. Browning, G. E. Johnson, J. Laskin, Nat. Commun. 
2016, 7, 11399 
[324] 
(a) R. R Salunkhe, Y. V. Kaneti, J. Kim, J. H. Kim, Y. Yamauchi, Acc. Chem. Res. 
2016, 49, 2796-2806 (b) R. R Salunkhe, Y. V. Kaneti, Y. Yamauchi, ACS Nano, 2017, 
11, 5293-5308. (c) W. Xuan, C. Zhu, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 
1677-1695 
[325] 
(a) O. M. Yaghi, H. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 10401-10402; (b) C. K. Brozeka, 
M. Dinca, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5456-5467; (c) N. Campagnol, T. R. C. Van 
Assche, M. Li, L. Stappers, M. Dinca, J. F. M. Denayer, K. Binnemans, D. E. DeVose, 
J. Fransaer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3914-3925. 
[326] 
A. Mahmood, W. Guo, H. Tabassum and R. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, DOI: 
Page 112 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 115 (native) -----
113 
 
10.1002/aenm.201600423. 
[327] 
(a) D. Y. Lee, S. J. Yoon, N. K. Shresth, S. H. Lee, H. Ahn, S. H. Han, Microporous 
Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 153, 163-165. (b) R. Dıaz, M. G. Orcajo, J. A. Botas, G. 
Calleja, J. Palma, Mater. Lett., 2012, 68, 126-128. 
[328] 
A. Basu, K. Roy, N. Sharma, S. Nandi, R. Vaidhyanathan, S. Rane, C. Rode, S. Ogale, 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8, 31841-31848 
[329] 
F. Yu, T. Wang, Z. Wen, H. Wang, J. Power Sources 2017, 364, 9-15 
[330] 
D. Fu, H. Zhou, X. M. Zhang, G. Han, Y. Chang, H. Li, ChemistrySelect 2016, 2, 285-
289 
[331] 
L. Wang, X. Feng, L. Ren, Q. Piao, J. Zhong, Y. Wang, H. Li, Y. Chen, B. Wang, J. Am. 
Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4920-4923 
[332] 
Y. Zhang, B. Lin, Y. Sun, P. Han, J. Wang, X. Ding, X. Zhang, H. Yang, Electrochim. 
Acta 2016, 188, 490-498 
[333] 
L. Sun, M. G. Campbell, M. Dinca, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2016, 55, 3566-3579 
[334] 
D. Sheberla, J. C. Bachman, J. S. Elias, C. J. Sun, Y. Shao-Horn, M. Dinca, Nat. Mater. 
2017, 16, 220-224 
[335] 
W. H. Li, K. Ding, H. R. Tian, M. S. Yao, B. Nath, W. H. Deng, Y. Wang, G. Xu, Adv. 
Funct. Mater. 2017, DOI: 10.1002/adfm.201702067 
[336] 
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen, Y. Zhang, Nat. 
Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377. 
[337] 
M. Köpf, N. Eckstein, D. Pfister, C. Grotz, I. Krüger, M. Greiwe, T. Hansen, H. 
Kohlmann, T. Nilges, J. Cryst. Growth 2014, 405, 6-10 
[338] 
C. Hao, B. Yang, F. Wen, J. Xiang, L. Li, W. Wang, Z. Zeng, B. Xu, Z. Zhao, Z. Liu and 
Y. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3194–3201. 
[339] 
(a) T. Lu, S. Dong, C. Zhang, L. Zhang, G. Cui, Coordination Chem. Rev., 2017, 332, 
Page 113 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 116 (native) -----
114 
 
75-99 (b) S. S. Karade, B. R. Sankapal, J. Electroanal. Chem. 2017, 802, 131-138 (c) 
Y. Qiu, X. Li, M. Bai, H. Wang, D. Xue, W. Wang, J. Cheng, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 
4, 675-682 (d) P. Xu, W. Zeng, S. Luo, C. Ling, J. Xiao, A. Zhou, Y. Sun, K. Liao, 
Electrochim. Acta 2017, 241, 41-49 
[340] 
C. Zhang, H. Yin, M. Han, Z. Dai, H. Pang, Y. Zheng, Y. Q. Lan, J. Bao, J. Zhu, ACS 
Nano, 2014, 8, 3761-3770 
[341] 
P. Yu, W. Fu, Q. Zeng, J. Lin, C. Yan, Z. Lai, B. Tang, K. Suenag, H. Zhang, Z. Liu, 
Adv. Mater. 2017, 29, 1701909-1701918, DOI: 10.1002/adma.201701909 
[342] 
H. Wang, J. Deng, C. Xu, Y. Chen, F. Xu, J. Wang, Y. Wang, Energy Storage Materials 
2017, 7, 216–221. 
[343] 
A. Ramadoss., K. Yoon, M. Kwak, S. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Jang, J. Power Sources 2017, 
337, 159-165. 
[344] 
H. Li,, J. Song, L. Wang, X. Feng, R. Liu, W. Zeng, Z. Huang, Y. Ma, L. Wang, 
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 193–200. 
[345] 
H. Zhang, C. Lu, C. Chen, L. Xie, P. Zhou, Q. Kong, ChemElectroChem 2017, 4, 1–8. 
[346] 
X. Jian, H. Yang, J. Li, E. Zhang, L. Cao, Z. Liang, Electrochim. Acta 2017, 228, 483–
493. 
[347] 
Z. Li, Y. Li, L. Wang, L. Cao, X. Liu, Z. Chen, D. Pan, M. Wu, Electrochim. Acta 2017, 
235, 561–569. 
[348] 
L. Liu, D. Ye, Y. Yu, L. Liu, Y. Wu, Carbon 2017, 111, 121-127 
[349] 
L. Song, X. Cao, L. Li, Q. Wang, H. Ye, L. Gu, C. Mao, J. Song, S. Zhang, H. Niu, Adv. 
Funct. Mater. 2017, 27, 1700474-1700487. 
[350] 
Y. Zheng, Z. Lin, W. Chen, B. Liang, H. Du, R. Yang, X. He, Z. Tang, X. Gui, J. Mater. 
Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5886–5894. 
[351] 
Y. Li, X. Wang, Q. Yang, M. Javed, Q. Liu, Weina Xu, C. Hu, D. Wei, Electrochim. Acta 
Page 114 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 117 (native) -----
115 
 
2017, 234, 63–70 
[352] 
H. Li, Y. Yu, L. Liu, L. Liu, Y. Wu, Electrochim. Acta 2017, 228, 553–561. 
[353] 
J. Zhu, S. Tang, J. Wu, X. Shi, B. Zhu, X. Meng, Adv. Energy Mater. 2017, 7, 1601234-
1601245 
[354] 
H. Li, Y. Hou, F. Wang, M. Lohe, X. Zhuang, L. Niu, X. Feng, Adv. Energy Mater. 2017, 
7, 1601847-1601853. 
[355] 
R. Soni, A. Raveendrana, S. Kurungot, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3593–3600. 
[356] 
K. Li, J. Liu, Y. Huang, F. Bu, Y. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5466–5474. 
[357] 
Y. Fan, W. Song, X. Li, L. Fan, Carbon 2017, 111, 658-666. 
[358] 
N. Li, X. Huang, H. Zhang, Y. Li, C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 9763-
9771 
[359] 
P. Li, J. Li, Z. Zhao, Z. Fang, M. Yang, Z. Yuan, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, W. Hong, X. 
Chen, D. Yu, Adv. Sci. 2017, 1700003-1700012. 
[360] 
S. Akbulut, M. Yilmaz, S. Raina, S. Hsu, W. Kang, Diamond & Related Materials 2017, 
74, 222–228. 
[361] 
A. Liu, H. Lv, H. Liu, Q. Li, H. Zhao, J Mater Sci: Mater Electron 2017, 28, 8452–8459. 
[362] 
Y. Qiu, X. Li, M. Bai, H. Wang, D. Xue, W. Wang, J. Cheng, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 
4, 675–682. 
[363] 
D. Zhao, Q. Zhang, W. Chen, X. Yi, S. Liu, Q. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Li, X. Li, H. Yu, ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 13213-13222. 
[364] 
J. Cao, T. Huang, R. Liu, X. Xi, D. Wu, Electrochim. Acta 2017, 230, 265–270. 
[365] 
B. Yao, H. Wang, Q. Zhou, M. Wu, M. Zhang, C. Li, G. Shi, Adv. Mater. 2017, 1700974-
1700981. 
[366] 
F. Chen, P. Wan, H. Xu, X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 17865−17871. 
[367] 
X. Hou, T. Peng, J. Cheng, Q. Yu, R. Luo, Y. Lu, X. Liu, J. Kim, J. He, Y. Luo, Nano 
Page 115 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 118 (native) -----
116 
 
Research, DOI 10.1007/s12274-017-1459-9. 
[368] 
I. Moon, S. Yoon, J. Oh, Chem. Eur. J. 2017, 23, 597 – 604. 
[369] 
Y. Wu, Q. Wang, T. Li, D. Zhang, M. Miao, Electrochim. Acta 2017, 245, 69–78 
[370] 
H. Su, P. Zhu, L. Zhang, F. Zhou, G. Li, T. Li, Q. Wang, R. Sun, C. Wong, J. 
Electroanal. Chem. 2017, 786, 28–34. 
[371] 
X. Li, K. Liu, Z. Liu, Z. Wang, B. Lia, D. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta 2017, 240, 43–52. 
[372] 
C. Chen, J. Cao, Q. Lu, X. Wang, L. Song, Z. Niu, J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2017, 
27, 1604639-1604646. 
[373] 
C. Liu, S. Zhao, Y. Lu, Y. Chang, D. Xu, Q. Wang, Z. Dai, J. Bao, M. Han, small 2017, 
13, 1603494-1603502. 
[374] 
S. Chen, L. Wang, M. Huang, L. Kang, Z. Lei, H. Xu, F. Shi, Z. Liu, Electrochim. Acta 
2017, 242, 10–18. 
[375] 
C. Wan, Y. Jiao, J. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3819-3831. 
[376] 
S. Xu, G. Wei, J. Li, W. Han, Y. Gogotsi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17442-17451 
[377] 
(a) X. Xiao, T. Ding, L. Yuan, Y. Shen, Q. Zhong, X. Zhang, Y. Cao, B. Hu, T. Zhai, L. 
Gong, J. Chen, Y. Tong, J. Zhou, Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1328-1332. 
(b) Ji. Sun, Y. Huang, Y. N. S. Sea, Q. Xue, Z. Wang, M. Zhu, H. Li, X. Tao, C. Zhi, H. 
Hu, Mater. Today Energy 2017, 5, 1-14 (c) S. C. Lee, U. M. Patil, S. J. Kim, S. Ahn, S. 
W. Kang, S. C. Jun, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 43844–43854. 
[378] 
(a) W. Tang, Y. Zhu, Y. Hou, L. Liu, Y. Wu, K. P. Loh, H. Zhang, K. Zhu, Energy 
Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2093-2104 (b) J. Yan, Z. Fan, W. Sun, G. Ning, T. Wei, Q. 
Zhang, R. Zhang, L. Zhi, F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2632-2641 
[379] 
F. Luan, G. Wang, Y. Ling, X. Lu, H. Wang, Y. Tong, X. X. Liu, Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2013, 
5, 7984-7990  
[380] 
(a) L. Wu, R. Li, J. Guo, C. Zhou, W. Zhang, C. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Li, J. Liu, AIP Adv. 
Page 116 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 119 (native) -----
117 
 
2013, 3, 082129 (b) Y. Zhang, M. Zheng, M. Qu, M. Sun, H. Pang, J. Alloys Compd. 
2015, 651, 214-221 
[381] 
H. Pang, X. Li, Q. Zhao, H. Xue, W. Y. Lai, Z. Hu, W. Huang, Nano Energy 2017, 35, 
138-145 
[382] 
(a) Z. Gao, W. Yang, J. Wang, N. Song, X. Li, Nano Energy 2015, 13, 306-317, (b) J. 
Zhao, S. Wang, Z. Run, G. Zhang, W. Du, H. Pang, Part. Part. Syst. Charact. 2015, 32, 
880-885, (c) J. Zhao, J. Chen, S. Xu, M. Shao, Q. Zhang, F. Wei, J. Ma, M. Wei, D. G. 
Evans, X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2014, 24, 2938-2946 
[383] 
Z. Pan, Y. Qiu, J. Yang, F. Ye, Y. Xu, X. Zhang, M. Liu, Y. Zhang, Nano Energy 2016, 
26, 610-619 
[384] 
J. Zhao, M. Zheng, Z. Run, J. Xia, M. Sun, H. Pang, J. Power Sources 2015, 285, 385-
392 
[385] 
S. Zhu, Z. Wang, F. Huang, H. Zhang, S. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9960-9969 
[386] 
J. Sun, P. Zan, L. Ye, X. Yang, L. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9815-9823 
[387] 
Y. Shao, H. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1245-1251 
[388] 
J. Yang, G. Li, Z. Pan, M. Liu, Y. Hou, Y. Xu, H. Deng, L. Sheng, X. Zhao, Y. Qiu, Y. 
Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2015, 7, 22172-22180 
[389] 
(a) X. Wang, B. Liu, R. Liu, Q. Wang, X. Hou, D. Chen, R. Wang, G. Shen, Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. 2014, 53, 1849-1853, (b) D. Ghosh, M. Mandal, C. K. Das, Langmuir 
2015, 31, 7835-7843 
[390] 
D. Kong, W. Ren, C. Cheng, Y. Wang, Z. Huang, H. Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 2015, 7, 21334−21346 
[391] 
J. Tao, N. Liu, L. Li, J. Su, Y. Gao, Nanoscale 2014, 6, 2922-2928 
[392] 
H. Yang, H. Xu, M. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Huang, X. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8, 
1774-1779 
Page 117 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 120 (native) -----
118 
 
[393] 
C. Guan, W. Zhao, Y. Hu, Z. Lai, X. Li, S. Sun, H. Zhang, A. K. Cheetham, J. Wang, 
Nanoscale Horiz., 2017, 2, 99-105 
[394] 
(a) N. R. Chodankar, D. P. Dubal, A. C. Lokhande, A. M. Patil, J. H. Kim, C. D. 
Lokhande, Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 39205 (b) G. S. Gund, D. P. Dubal, N. R. Chodankar, J. 
Y. Cho, P. Gomez-Romero, C. Park, C. D. Lokhande, Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 12454 
[395] 
(a) S. Trasatti, Pure Appl. Chem. 1986, 58, 955-966  (b) P. V. Rysselberghe, Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 1953, 21, 1550-1551 (c) J. Cheng, M. Sprik, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2012, 14, 11245-11267. 
[396] 
(a) M. T. Greiner, M. G. Helander, W. M. Tang, Z. B. Wang, J. Qiu, Z. H. Lu, Nat. 
Mater. 2012, 11, 76-81 (b) C. A. Pan, T. B. Ma, Appl. Phys. Lett. 1980, 37, 714. (c) Z. 
Viskadourakis, M. L. Parames, O. Conde, M. Zervos, J. Giapintzakis, Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2012, 101, 033505. (d) F. Chen, R. Schafranek, W. Wu, A. Klein, J. Phys. D: Appl. 
Phys. 2011, 44, 1. (e) M. N. Islam, M. O. Hakim, J. Mater. Science Lett. 1986, 5, 63 
[397] 
(a) G. R. Li, Z. L. Wang, F. L. Zheng, Y. N. Ou, Y. X. Tong, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 
4217, (b) J. Chang, M. Jin, F. Yao, T. H. Kim, V. T. Le, H. Yue, F. Gunes, B. Li, A. 
Ghosh, S. Xie, Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2013, 23, 5074-5083 
[398] 
(a) Q. T. Qu, S. B. Yang, X. L. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5574, (b) X. Lu, Y. Zeng, 
M. Yu, T. Zhai, C. Liang, S. Xie, M. S. Balogun, Y. Tong, Adv. Mater. 2014, 26, 3148-
3155 (c) Q. Tang, W. Wang, G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A 2015, 3, 6662-6670 
[399] 
P. Yang, Y. Ding, Z. Lin, Z. Chen, Y. Li, P. Qiang, M. Ebrahimi, W. Mai, C. P. Wong, Z. 
L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 731-736 
[400] 
W. Ma, H. Nan, Z. Gu, B. Geng, X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5442 
[401] 
J. Xu, Q. Wang, X. Wang, Q. Xiang, B. Liang, D. Chen, G. Shen, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 
5453-5462 
[402] 
X. Lu, T. Zhai, X. Zhang, Y. Shen, L. Yuan, B. Hu, L. Gong, J. Chen, Y. Gao, J. Zhou, 
Page 118 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 121 (native) -----
119 
 
Y. Tong, Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater. 2012 , 24 , 938 
[403] 
Z. Yu, J. Moore, J. Calderon, L. Zhai, J. Thomas, Small 2015, 11, 39, 5289-5295 
[404] 
T. Gu, B. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12289 
[405] 
X. Lu, M. Yu, G. Wang, T. Zhai, S. Xie, Y. Ling, Y. Tong, Y. Li, Adv. Mater. 2013, 25, 
267-272 
[406] 
(a) S. Murugesan, P. Kuppusami, N. Parvathavarthini, E. Mohandas, Surf. Coat. 
Technol. 2007, 201, 7713 (b) G. M. Wang, H. Y. Wang, Y. C. Ling, Y. C. Tang, X. Y. 
Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang, Y. Li, Nano Lett. 2011, 11, 3026 
[407] 
(a) L. Y. Yuan, X. H. Lu, X. Xiao, T. Zhai, J. J. Dai, F. C. Zhang, B. Hu, X. Wang, L. 
Gong, J. Chen, C. G. Hu, Y. X. Tong, J. Zhou, Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano 2012, 6, 656. (b) 
X. H. Lu, D. Z. Zheng, T. Zhai, Z. Q. Liu, Y. Y. Huang, S. L. Xie, Y. X. Tong, Energy 
Environ. Sci. 2011, 4, 2915. 
[408] 
J. X. Feng, S. H. Ye, X. F. Lu, Y. X. Tong, G. R. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2015, 
7, 11444-11451 
[409] 
H. Gao, F. Xiao, C. B. Ching, H. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2012, 4, 7020-7026 
[410] 
(a) B. Avasarala, P. Haldar, Electrochim. Acta 2010, 55, 9024 (b) I. Milošv, H. H. 
Strehblow, B. Navinšek, M. Metikoš-Hukovic, Surf. Interface Anal. 1995, 23, 529. 
[411] 
X. Lu, M. H. Yu, T. Zhai, G. Wang, S. Xie, T. Lu, C. Liang, Y. X. Tong, Y. Li, Nano Lett., 
2013, 13, 2628 
[412] 
(a) A. Achour, J. B. Ducros, R. L. Porto, M. Boujtita, E. Gautron, L. Le Brizoual, M. A. 
Djouadi, T. Brousse, Nano Energy 2014, 7, 104 (b) Z. L. Wang, Nano Today 2010, 5, 
540. 
[413] 
(a) Y. Yue, P. Han, X. He, K. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. Zhang, S. Dong, L. Gu, G. Cui, J. Mater. 
Chem. 2012, 22, 4938 (b) Y. Qiu, K. Yan, S. Yang, L. Jin, H. Deng, W. Li, ACS Nano 
2010, 4, 6515 (c) F. Tian, Y. Xie, H. Du, Y. Zhou, C. Xia, W. Wang, RSC Adv. 2014, 4, 
Page 119 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 122 (native) -----
120 
 
41856 
[414] 
C. Zhu, P. Yang, D. Chao, X. Wang, X. Zhang, S. Chen, B. K. Tay, H. Huang, H. 
Zhang, W. Mai, H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater. 2015, 27, 4566–4571. 
[415] 
X. F. Lu, X. Y. Chen, W. Zhou, Y. X. Tong, G. R. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2015, 
7, 14843-14850 
[416] 
Y. Jin, H. Chen, M. Chen, N. Liu, Q. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2013, 5, 3408-
3416 
[417] 
N. Kurra, R. Wang, H. N. Alshareef, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7368 
[418] 
Z. Zheng, M. Retana, X. Hu, R. Luna, Y. Ikuhara, W. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017, 9, 16986-16994 
[419] 
C. Ji, F. Liu, L. Xu, S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5568-5576 
[420] 
P. Li, Z. Jin, D. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3274-3283 
[421] 
J. Zhao, M. Zheng, Z. Run, J. Xia, M. Sun, H. Pang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 385-
392. 
[422] 
Z. Zhang, K. Chi, F. Xiao, S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12828-12835. 
[423] 
H. Yang, H. Xu, M. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Huang, X. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 
8, 1774-1779 
[424] 
J. X. Feng, S. H. Ye, X. F. Lu, Y. X. Tong, G. R. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 
7, 11444-11451. 
[425] 
J. Zhao, S. Wang, Z. Run, G. Zhang, W. Du, H. Pang, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 
32, 880-885. 
[426] 
C. Wei, C. Cheng, B. Zhou, X. Yuan, T. Cui, S. Wang, M. Zheng, H. Pang, Part. Part. 
Syst. Charact. 2015, 32, 831-839. 
[427] 
D. Kong, W. Ren, C. Cheng, Y. Wang, Z. Huang, H. Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21334-21346. 
Page 120 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 123 (native) -----
121 
 
[428] 
D. Kong, C. Cheng, Y. Wang, J. I. Wong, Y. Yang, H. Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 
2015, 3, 16150-16161. 
[429] 
G. Sun, X. Zhang, R. Lin, J. Yang, H. Zhang, P. Chen, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2015, 
54, 4651-4656. 
[430] 
D. Ghosh, M. Mandal, C. K. Das, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 7835-7843. 
[431] 
H. Pang, Y. Zhang, W. Y. Laib, Z. Huc, W. Huang, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 303-312. 
[432] 
Z. Zhang, F. Xiao, S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11215-11223. 
[433] 
Z. Zhang, F. Xiao, J. Xiao, S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11817-11823. 
[434] 
N. Yu, M. Q. Zhu, D. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7910-7918. 
[435] 
Z. Gao, W. Yang, J. Wang, N. Song, X. Li, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 306-317 
[436] 
Y. Zhang, M. Zheng, M. Qu, M. Sun, H. Pang, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 651, 214-221. 
[437] 
Y. Chen, B. Liu, Q. Liu, J. Wang, Z. Li, X. Jing, L. Liu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15159-
15167. 
[438] 
N. R. Chodankar, D. P. Dubal, G. S. Gund, C. D. Lokhande, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 
625-631. 
[439] 
A. V. Shinde, N. R. Chodankar, V. C. Lokhande, A. C. Lokhande, T. Ji, J. H. Kim, C. D. 
Lokhande, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 58839-58843 
[440] 
H. Xie, S. Tang, J. Zhu, S. Vongehr, X. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18505-
18513. 
[441] 
T. Chen, Y. Tang, Y. Qiao, Z. Liu, W. Guo, J. Song, S. Mu, S. Yu, Y. Zhao, F. Gao, Sci. 
Rep., 2016, 6, 23289. 
[442] 
Q. Wang, Y. Ma, Y. Wu, D. Zhang, M. Miao, ChemSusChem 2017, 10, 1427 – 1435. 
[443] 
K. Subramani, N. Sudhan, R. Divya, M. Sathish, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 6648–6659. 
[444] 
W. Liu, K. Feng, Y. Zhang, T. Yu, L. Han, G. Lui, M. Li, G. Chiu, P. Fung, A. Yu, Nano 
Energy 2017, 34, 491–499. 
Page 121 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 124 (native) -----
122 
 
[445] 
J. Noh, C. Yoon, Y. Kim, J. Jang, Carbon 2017, 116, 470-478. 
[446] 
H, Pang, X. Li, Q. Zhao, H. Xue, W. Lai, Z. Hu, W. Huang, Nano Energy 2017, 35, 138–
145. 
[447] 
Z. Zheng, M. Retana, X. Hu, R. Luna, Y. Ikuhara, W. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017, 9, 16986−16994. 
[448] 
K. Chi, Z. Zhang, Q. Lv, C. Xie, J. Xiao, F. Xiao, S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017, 9, 6044−6053. 
[449] 
J. Wang, L. Zhang, X. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Tian, X. Liu, J. Zhao, Y. Li, Sci. Rep., 2017, 
7,  41088 
[450] 
Z. Tian, H. Dou, B. Zhang, W. Fan, X. Wang, Electrochimica Acta 2017, 237, 109–118. 
[451] 
M. Zheng, L. Li, P. Gu, Z. Lin, W. Du, H. Xue, H. Pang, Energy Technol. 2017, 5, 544-
548 
[452] 
H. Wang, C. Xu, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, Energy Storage Materials 2017, 8, 127–133. 
[453] 
Z. Pan, M. Liu, J. Yang, Y. Qiu, W. Li, Y. Xu, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2017, 1701122-1701131. 
[454] 
K. Ghosh, C. Yue, M. Sk, R. Jena, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 15350−15363. 
[455] 
H. Xie, S. Tang, D. Li, S. Vongehr, X. Meng, ChemSusChem 2017, 10, 2301 – 2308. 
[456] 
L. Gao, J. Surjadi, K. Cao, H. Zhang, P. Li, S. Xu, C. Jiang, J. Song, D. Sun, Y. Lu, 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 5409−5418 
[457] 
Y. Liu, N. Fu, G. Zhang, M. Xu, W. Lu, L. Zhou, H. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2017, 27, 
1605307-1605318. 
[458] 
H. Pang, X. Li, Q. Zhao, H. Xue, Wen-Yong Lai, Z. Hu, W. Huang, Nano energy, 2017, 
35, 138-145. 
[459] 
S. Cheng, T. Shi, Y. Huang, X. Tao, J. Li, C. Cheng, G. Liao, Z. Tang, Ceramics 
International 2017, 43, 2155–2164. 
Page 122 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 125 (native) -----
123 
 
[460] 
X. He, Q. Liu, J. Liu, R. Li, H. Zhang, R. Chen, J. Wang, Chem. Eng. J. 2017, 325, 
134–143. 
[461] 
T. Wang, S. Zhang, X. Yan, M. Lyu, L. Wang, J. Bell, H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 2017, 9, 15510−15524. 
[462] 
Y. Zhong, T. Shi, Z. Liu, Y. Huang, S. Cheng, C. Cheng, X. Li, G. Liao, Z. Tang, Energy 
Technol. 2017, 5, 656 – 664. 
[463] 
W. Ma, S. Chen, S. Yang, W. Chen, W. Weng, Y. Cheng, M. Zhu, Carbon 2017, 113, 
151-158 
[464] 
K. Lu, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Ma, B. Song, H. Ma, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 2017, 
5, 821−827 
[465] 
J. Zhao, C. Li, Q. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Wang, Z. Lin, J. Wang, W. Lv, C. Lu, C. Wong, 
Y. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6928–6936 
[466] 
(a) F. R. Fan, W. Tang, Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 4283-4305. (b) T. Q. Trung, 
N. E. Lee, Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 4338-4372. (c) Y. Huang, M.S. Zhu, Y. Huang, Z. X. 
Pei, H.F. Li, Z.F. Wang, Q. Xue, C.Y. Zhi, Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 8344–8364. 
[467] 
Z. Wang, J. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242-246. 
[468] 
(a) Z. L. Wang, T. Jiang, L. Xu, Nano Energy 2017, 39, 9-23 (b) J. Ma, Y. Jie, J. Bian, 
T. Li, X. Cao, N. Wang, Nano Energy 2017, 39, 192-199  
[469] 
(a) Z. Tian, J. He, X. Chen, Z. Zhang, T. Wen, C. Zhai, J. Han, J. Mu, X. Hou, X. Chou, 
C. Xue, Nano Energy 2017, 39, 562-570 (b) W. Gong, C. Hou, Y. Guo, J. Zhou, J. Mu, 
Y. Li, Q. Zhang, H. Wang, Nano Energy 2017, 39, 673-683 
[470] 
(a) X. Wang, Y. Yin, F. Yi, K. Dai, S. Niu, Y. Han, Y. Zhang, Z. You, Nano Energy 2017, 
39, 429-436 (b) X. He, Y. Zia, H. Yu, S. L. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Ding, H. Zou, W. Zhang, 
C. Lu, Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy 2017, 39, 328-336 (c) A. Maitra, S. K. Karan, S. Paria, 
A. K. Das, R. Bera, L. Halder, S. K. Si, A. Bera, B. B. Khatua, Nano Energy 2017, 40, 
Page 123 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 126 (native) -----
124 
 
633-645 
[471] 
R. Song, H. Jin, X. Li, L. Fei, Y. Zhao, H. Huang, H. L. Chan, Y. Wang, Y. Chai, J. 
Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14963–14970 
[472] 
A. Ramadoss, B. Saravanakumar, S. W. Lee, Y. S. Kim, S. J. Kim, Z. L. Wang, ACS 
Nano, 2015, 9, 4337–4345 
[473] 
J. Luo, F. R. Fan, T. Jiang, Z. Wang, W. Tang, C. Zhang, M. Liu, G. Cao and Z. L. 
Wang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 3934-3943. 
[474] 
(a) A. Scalia, F. Bella, A. Lamberti, S. Bianco, C. Gerbaldi, E. Tresso, C. F. Pirri, J. 
Power Sources 2017, 359, 311-321 (b) P. Yang, X. Xiao, Y. Li, Y. Ding, P. Qiang, X. 
Tan, W. Mai, Z. Lin, W. Wu, T. Li, H. Jin, P. Liu, J. Zhou, C. P. Wong, Z. L. Wang, ACS 
Nano, 2013, 7, 2617–2626 
[475] 
X. Chen, H. Sun, Z. Yang, G. Guan, Z. Zhang, L. Qiu, H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 
2014, 2, 1897-1902 
[476] 
Z. Zhang, X. Chen, P. Chen, G. Guan, L. Qiu, H. Lin, Z. Yang, W. Bai, Y. Luo, H. Peng, 
Adv. Mater 2014, 26, 466-470  
[477] 
C. Li, M. Islam, J. Moore, J. Sleppy, C. Morrison, K. Konstantinov, Nat. Publ. Gr 2016, 
7, 1-10 
[478] 
L. Liu, B. Shen, D. Jiang, R. Guo, L. Kong and X. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 
1600763 
[479] 
Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Y. Huang, C. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1290-
1297. 
[480] 
J. Deng, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, P. Chen, X. Cheng and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 
2015, 54, 15419-15423. 
[481] 
J. Zhong, J. Meng, Z. Yang, P. Poulind, N. Koratkar, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 330-338. 
[482] 
(a) B. E. Logan, K. Rabaey, Science 2012, 337, 686-690. (b) R. D. Cusick, Y. Kim, B. 
Page 124 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 127 (native) -----
125 
 
E. Logan, Science 2012, 335, 1474-1477. (c) B. E. Logan, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2009, 7, 
375-381.  
[483] 
(a) N. Uría, X. Muñ oz Berbel, O. Sánchez, F.X. Muñ oz, J. Mas, Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2011, 45, 10250-10256. (b) A. Deeke, T. H. Sleutels, H. V. Hamelers, C. J. Buisman, 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46, 3554-3560. (c) E. J. Gardel, M. E. Nielsen, P. T. 
Grisdela Jr, P. R. Girguis, Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46, 5222-5229.  
[484] 
N. S. Malvankar, T. Mester, M. T. Tuominen, D. R. Lovley, ChemPhysChem 2012, 13, 
463-468. 
[485] 
H. Ren, H. Tian, H. S. Lee, T. Park, F. C. Leung, T. L. Ren, J. Chae, Nano Energy 
2015, 15, 697-708 
[486] 
R. S. Jayashree, M. Mitchell, D. Natarajan, L. J. Markoski, P. J. Kenis, Langmuir 2007, 
23, 6871-6874. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 125 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 128 (native) -----
126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Statistics of number of papers published and number of citations per year. The results 
obtained for “Flexible solid-state supercapacitors” from scoups as of october 2017. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 126 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 129 (native) -----
127 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 An overview of the latest advancement in the field of flexible solid-state 
supercapacitors (FSSCs) as a green energy storage technology.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 127 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 130 (native) -----
128 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 (a) Plot of specific capacitance vs normalized by BET SSA for the carbons suggesting 
decrease in capacitance with pore size until a critical value. Reprinted with the permission from 
[23a], Copyright 2006, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Different 
types of reversible redox mechanisms that give rise to pseudocapacitance: (a) underpotential 
deposition, (b) redox pseudocapacitance, (c) intercalation pseudocapacitance. Reproduced with 
Permission from from [21a], Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 128 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 131 (native) -----
129 
 
 
Figure 4 (a) Flexible CNT-coated bacterial nanocellulose (BNC) paper, (b) SEM image of CNTs 
coated on a BNC paper (c) Capacitance retention over 5000 cycles of charge/discharge at a 
current density of 10 A/g, inset shows CV curves measured before and after 200 bending 
cycles, Reprinted with permission from [30d], Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (d) 
Photograph of free-standing f-RGO films, inset shows the photograph of all solid-state flexible 
thin f-RGO-SC (e) Photographs of SC prior to the bent experiments, (f) Stability test of RGO-SC 
and f-RGO-SC by measuring 1000 charge-discharge cycles with a constant current density of 1 
A/g at the bent state. Reprinted with permission from [45], Copyright 2012 American Chemical 
Society. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 129 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 132 (native) -----
130 
 
 
Figure 5 (a) FSSC device with MnO2 nanoflakes electrodes in normal and bending conditions. 
Reprinted with permission from [69b], Copyright 2016 Elsevier. (b) Cycling stability of MnO2 
based FSC in bending state using CMC-Na2SO4 gel as an electrolyte. Reprinted with 
permission from [69a], Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (c) Low magnified SEM image of polypyrrole 
deposited on SS mesh, (d) Capacitance retentions as functions of cycle number at a specific 
current of 10 A/g under 0 (black) and 20 % strain (blue). (e) CV curves of the fabricated PPy 
based stretchable supercapacitors at various kinds of deformation. Reprinted with permission 
from [73], Copyright 2014 Elsevier. (f) Ragone plot for Ni/MnO2−FP//Ni/AC−FP FSC, inset 
shows synthesized Ni/MnO2-filter paper and digital photograph of final Ni/MnO2-FP//Ni/AC-FP 
asymmetric device. Reproduced with permission from [82], Copyright 2016, American Chemical 
Society.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 130 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 133 (native) -----
131 
 
 
Figure 6 (a) Schematic of textile based supercapacitors for wearable electronics, Reproduced 
with permission from [85 a], Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b-e) SEM image of 
single crystalline SiC nanowires on carbon fabric, Digital photographs of FSSC based on SiC 
with corresponding CV curves at normal and bending conditions, cycling stability at bent and 
twisted conditions, respectively, Reproduced with permission from [88], Copyright 2015, 
American Chemical Society. (f-i) Pictorial presentation of steps involved in the synthesis of 
vertically aligned graphene nanosheets (VAGNs) decoared with Co3O4 nanoparticles, SEM 
image of VAGNs on carbon fabric, CV curves for Co3O4/VAGNs/Carbon fabric solid-state cell at 
different bending conditions and cycling stability for 20,000 cycles, respectively, Reproduced 
with permission from [92], Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.  
 
  
 
 
 
Page 131 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 134 (native) -----
132 
 
 
Figure 7 (a, b) SEM images of graphene fibers of two different sizes such as 100 µm and 35 
µm, respectively (c) Digital photograph of planar fiber-based SC, Reproduced with permission 
from [95], Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Schematic illustration of preparation 
of GO@CMC core-shell fibers by coaxial spinning process. (f) Polarized-light optical microscopy 
image of wet GO@CMC fibre showing the core-sheath structure and the well-aligned GO 
sheets in the core part, (j) Ragone plots compared with the reported fibre-shaped yarn-SCs with 
solid electrolyte, Reproduced with permission from [96], Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing 
Group. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 132 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 135 (native) -----
133 
 
 
Figure 8 (a) Steps involved in the fabrication of yarn and subsequent deposition of MnO2 and 
PPy thin films on to the yarn (b) Comparison of electrochemical performance of various 
fiber/yarn-based electrocapacitive materials (CL and CA are length and areal capacitances, EA 
and EV are areal and volumetric energy densities). (c) SEM image of an as-drawn yarn, Adopted 
with permission from [101], Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic and 
digital photo of a coaxial-fiber SC. (e) Ragone plot with energy and power density per length or 
area of the core electrode. (f) CV curves with different bending angles at a scan rate of 5 mV/s 
and inset shows the digital photograph of bended yarn-FSCs. Reprinted with permission from 
Ref. [102], Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 133 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 136 (native) -----
134 
 
 
Figure 9 (a) Photograph of a fabricated flexible micro-supercapacitor on a polyethylene 
terephthalate (PET) substrate, (b) Ragone plot of the microsupercapacitor, (c) Cycling stability 
of MnOx/Au multilayer micro-supercapacitors, measured at a scan rate of 1 V/s (d) CV curves at 
different bending states, indicated by diameters of curvature, respectively. Reprinted with 
permission from [110], Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Optical images of 
MnO2@carbon fiber single device on PET substrate bended with different angles (f) CV curves 
for MnO2@carbon FSCs at different bending conditions (g) Schematic diagram of energy 
modulus integrated by three SCs connected in series and a triboelectric generator. (h) Digital 
photograph of the energy modulus that is powering commercialized LED. Reprinted with 
permission from Ref. [111], Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 134 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 137 (native) -----
135 
 
 
Figure 10 (a) Structures of SiWA and BWA hetero polyacids, Adopted with the permission from 
[203a], Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Ionic conductivities of SiWA, BWA, and 
H2SO4 at different electrolyte concentrations (c) CVs curves of CNT-graphite electrodes with 
SiWA- and BWA-based gel electrolytes at 1 V/s, inset shows a picture of a polymer electrolyte 
film. Reprinted with permission from [203b], Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) 
Ionic conductivities of H2SO4-PVA electrolyte at various temperatures with corresponding plot of 
logσ vs. 1/T. (e) Variations in areal specific capacitances of CNTs and H2SO4-PVA with cycle 
number at different temperatures. (f) Change in the colour of cells after 10,000 cycles at 
different temperatures, suggesting aging of electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from [205], 
Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (g) Cross-sectional SEM image of cross-linked H2SO4-PVA gel-
electrolyte (h) Cycling stability of graphene/carbon black electrode with and without cross-linked 
H2SO4-PVA gel-electrolyte at room temperature and 70°C. (i) Photographs of with and without 
cross linked H2SO4-PVA gel-electrolytes before and after thermal treatment at 70 °C for 5 h. 
Reprinted with permission from [109], Copyright 2014, Elsevier. 
 
 
 
Page 135 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 138 (native) -----
136 
 
 
 
Figure 11 (a) Schematics illustration of charge storing mechanism in conventional and redox-
active electrolytes (e.g. KI). Reaction mechanisms of different organic redox-active electrolytes 
during charge/discharge process (b) hydroquinone (HQ) (c) p-phenylenediamine (PPD) (d) 
Indigo carmine (IC) and (e) methylene blue (MB).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 136 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 139 (native) -----
137 
 
 
Figure 12 An overview of promising electrode materials used so far for flexible solid-state 
supercapacitors (FSSCs). The materials are divided into two sub-sections such as traditional 
materials (NCs-Nanocarbons, CPs-Conducting polymers, MOs-metal oxides) and emerging new 
materials (MNs-Metal nitrides, MXs-MXenes, MOFs-Metal organic frameworks, POMs-
polyoxometalates, BP-Black phosphorous). Modified and reprinted with the permission from [6b, 
260a, 311b, 321c, 335, 337] Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & KGaA, Royal society of chemistry, 
Elsevier.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 137 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 140 (native) -----
138 
 
 
Figure 13 (a) Schematic and photograph of the fabricated supercapacitors without carbon paste 
current collectors. (b) Variation of specific capacitance with current density of SSC cell. 
Reprinted with permission from Ref. [228], Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) 
Schematic illustrations and photographs of the fabrication process of flexible solid-state 
supercapacitors based on graphene hydrogel films. (d) CV curves of FSC device at 10 mV/s for 
different bending angles. (e) Cycling stability of the device at a current density of 10 A/g with 
Coulombic efficiency. Adopted with permission from Ref. [279], Copyright 2013 American 
Chemical Society. 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 138 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 141 (native) -----
139 
 
 
Figure 14 (a and b) SEM image (top-view and cross-section) of RuO2 electrode after 300 
electrodeposition cycles, respectively, (c) Ragone plot of the solid-state device based on RuO2. 
Reproduced with the permission from [284], Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & KGaA. 
(d) Cross-section SEM image of a carbon nanowalls (CNW) film loaded with RuO2, suggesting 
different morphologies such as cauliflower RuO2 and vertically aligned CNW (e) Schematic 
diagram of fabrication of SSC based on RuO2 on CNW electrodes, (f) Capacity retention with 
number of cycles for SSC device. Reproduced with the permission from [285], Copyright 2014 
Elsevier.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 139 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 142 (native) -----
140 
 
 
Figure 15 (a) Digital photographs of flexible, transparent Ti3C2Tx film on PET substrate and 
inset shows schematic diagram and photograph of SSCs cell. (b) Comparison of areal 
capacitances with various transparent supercapacitors. (c) Cycling stability of a Ti3C2Tx SSCs 
with the typical GCD curves upon cycling (inset). Reproduced with the permission from [314], 
Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Photograph of thickness 
of the as-prepared PPy/Ti3C2 SSC complete cell. (e) Schematic of intercalated PPy in the 
interlayers of Ti3C2 with corresponding atomic-scale presentation. (f) Performance of the 
PPy/Ti3C2 SSC under bending. Reprinted with the permission from [315], Copyright 2016 Wiley-
VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (g) Schematic illustration of PPy-PMo12/rGO SSCs 
with actual photographs of the device. Adopted from [322] Copyright 2015, Royal Society of 
Chemistry. (h) Steps involved in synthesis of PANI-ZIF-67-CC electrode with schematic 
representation of electron and electrolyte conduction in MOF (left) and MOF interwoven by 
PANI (right). Reprinted with the permission from [331], 2015, American Chemical Society.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 140 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 143 (native) -----
141 
 
 
Figure 16 Recently developed innovative designs of ASCs that includes (a, b, e and g) Coil-
type design, (c, f) planar design, (d) interdigitated and (h) wire-type design, Reprinted with the 
permission from [51b, 130, 399, 377c, 403, 442, 456, 463] American Chemical Society, Wiley-
VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Elsevier, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 141 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 144 (native) -----
142 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17 (a) Schematic illustration of work function of different metal oxides, Reprinted with 
permission from Ref. [397b], Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & KGaA. (b) Potential 
window of various electrode materials in aqueous electrolyte. Reproduced with the permission 
from Ref. [398c], Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 142 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 145 (native) -----
143 
 
 
Figure 18 (a) Ragone plots of Fe2O3@C//MnO2@CuO ASC compared with other recently 
reported values of ASCs. The inset shows a LED powered by ASC. (b) Photographs of cable-
type ASC at different bending states. (d) Long-term cycling stability at different bending states. 
Adopted with the permission from [403], Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & KGaA. (d) 
Pictorial presentation of synthesis of hydrogenated (H)-TiO2@MnO2 and H-TiO2@C core-shell 
NWs on a carbon cloth substrate as positive and negative electrodes for ASC respectively with 
corresponding TEM images. (e) CV curves recorded at a scan rate of 100 mV/s for (H)-
TiO2@MnO2//H-TiO2@C under different bending conditions with photographs of the device 
(inset). Reproduced with the permission from [405], Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & 
KGaA. (f) schematic presentation of synthesis steps of freestanding films of CNTs-graphene as 
negative and Mn3O4-graphene as a positive electrode, inset shows photograph of free-standing 
Mn3O4-graphene film, (g) CV curves of CNTs-graphene and Mn3O4-graphene in different 
working potential ranges, (d) Cycling stability of CNTs-graphene//Mn3O4-graphene ASC over 
10,000 cycles at 50 mV/s scan rate. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [409], Copyright 2012 
American Chemical Society. 
 
 
Page 143 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 146 (native) -----
144 
 
 
Figure 19 (a) Schematics of the fabrication of negative electrode (Fe2N@GNS) and positive 
electrode (TiN@GNS) for ASC, (b) Cycling performance of Fe2N@GNS//TiN@GNS device at 4 
A/g in 20,000 cycles with different bending situations. (c) Ragone plots of quasi-solid-state 
Fe2N@GNS//TiN@GNS ASC in comparison with other PVA-based solid electrolyte SSCs and 
ASCs with practical demonstration (inset).  Reproduced with the permission from [414], 
Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & KGaA. (d) Schematic diagram of design of ASC 
based on CNT-MnO2 as positive electrode and CNT-PAni as negative electrode with 
corresponding photograph of final ASC device. (e) CV curves and (f) Ragone plots of the CNT-
MnO2//CNT-PAni ASCs under different potential ranges. Reprinted with permission from Ref. 
[416], Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 144 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 147 (native) -----
145 
 
 
Figure 20 (a) Proposed working mechanism of the piezo-supercapacitor. Reproduced with the 
permission from [471], Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic of a self-
powered system consisting of DSSCs and FSSCs, and one LED. Reproduced with the 
permission from [474 b], Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (c) Working principle of the microbial 
supercapacitor (MSC): when a high-speed switch is off, electrons are stored in the biofilm on 
graphene anode, and when it is on, electrons stored inside biofilm are discharged very quickly, 
resulting an extremely high current and power density. Reproduced with the permission from 
[485], Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 145 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 148 (native) -----
146 
 
 
Figure 21 An overview of several new applications of FSSCs such as (a) triboelectric 
nanogenerator as energy-harvesting skin to scavenge energy from various motion of body 
parts. (b) Digital clock (c) an electronic LED tree (2.5 V) (d) large-area intelligent power floor 
(LIPF), LEDs lit up when a person stomps on the LIPF. (e) Calculator, (f) Competition timer (g) 
Sensors. Reprinted with permission from [470a, 469a, 58c and 468b] Elsevier and Nature 
Publishing Group.  
 
 
 
 
Page 146 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 149 (native) -----
147 
 
Table 1 Various flexible substrates used for the fabrication of flexible solid-state devices and their electrochemic
 
Substrate 
Materials 
Cell design 
Specific capacitance 
Cycling 
Ti wire 
CNT 
Symmetric 
1.84 mF/cm2 at 1 µA 
80 % after 
Au wire 
MnO2 
Asymmetric 
12 mF/cm2 at 0.3 mA/cm2 
90 % after 2
0.6 m
Ni fibers 
Ni(OH)2 
Symmetric 
35.67 mF/cm at 0.1 mA 
70 % over 10
0.5 
Fiber 
MnO2 
Nanowire/graphene 
Symmetric 
66.1 F/cm3 at 60 mA/cm3 
96% over 10
0.12 A
carbon cloth 
Activated carbon cloth 
Symmetric 
161.28 mF/cm2 at 12.5 
mA/cm2 
104 % after 30
12.5 m
mCel-Membrane 
Activated carbon 
Symmetric 
153 mF/cm2 at 10 mV/s 
93.4 after 10
200 m
carbon cloth 
polyaniline hydrogel 
Symmetric 
430 F/g at 5 mV/s 
86 % after 10
Stainless steel 
fabrics 
Graphene 
Symmetric 
180.4 mF/cm2 at 1 mA/cm2 
96.8 % after 7
8 mA
carbon cloth 
TiO2@PANI 
Symmetric 
775.6 mF/cm3 (28.3 F/g) at 
10 mV/s 
97.2 % after 1
100 m
carbon cloth 
NiCo2O4@CNT/CNT 
asymmetric 
- 
95 % after 5
50 m
Ni Foam 
C-Co3Si2O5(OH)4 
Asymmetric 
352 mF/cm2 mF/cm2 at 1 
mA/cm2 
97.3 % after 6
4 mA
Carbon fabric 
MnO2//MoO3 
Asymmetric 
4.86 mF/cm2 at a 0.5 
mA/cm2 
89 % after 30
mA
Carbon fabric 
MnO2 
Symmetric 
- 
76.5 % after 5
1 mA
PET 
Ti3C2Tx 
Symmetric 
1.44 F/cm3 at 0.288 A/cm3 
87 % over 1
100 m
Carbon fabric 
MnO2/reduced 
graphene oxide (RGO) 
Symmetric 
14 F/cm2 (31.8 F/g) at 2 
mV/s 
100 % after 5
0.2 m
Carbon fabric 
MoS2 
Symmetric 
- 
96.5 % after 5
0.2 
Page 147 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 150 (native) -----
148 
 
PET 
SnS/S doped graphene 
Symmetric 
2.98 mF/cm2 at 60 mA/cm2 
99 % after 10
120 m
Carbon fabric 
MnO2 
Symmetric 
0.44 F/cm3 (283.9 F/g) at 
0.2 A/g 
83 % after 1
0.5 
Carbon fabric 
Co3O4/Vertically 
aligned graphene 
nanosheets (VAGNs) 
Symmetric 
580 F/g at 1 A/g 
86.3 % after 2
20 
Carbon fabric 
CoMn-LDH 
Symmetric 
- 
88.3 % after 6
2 A
Carbon fabric 
Functionalized Carbon 
fabric 
Symmetric 
134.8 mF/cm2 (2.4 F/ cm3) 
at 2 mA/cm2 
90 % after 50
mA
Carbon fabric 
CuCo2O4@MnO2 
Symmetric 
714 mF/cm2 at 
1 mA/cm2 
3000 cycles 
Carbon fabric 
MnO2 
Symmetric 
42.4 mF/cm2 at 5 mV/s 
96.4 % after 2
100 m
Carbon fabric 
Cu7S4 
Symmetric 
- 
95 % after 500
m
Carbon textile 
ZnS 
Symmetric 
540 F/g at 5 mV/s 
96.6 % after 5
0.8 m
Nickel Foam 
ZnCo2O4 
Symmetric 
94 mF/cm2 at 
0.1 mA/cm2 
97.4 % after 
0.5 m
Nickel Foam 
MnO2–CNT–graphene 
Symmetric 
107 F/g, 
Nickel Foam 
PPy@LDH core–shell 
Asymmetric 
88.7 mF/cm2 at 
20 mA/cm2 
115.4 % after
at 20
Nickel Foam 
NiCo2O4  
Symmetric 
161 mF/cm2 at 1 
mA/cm2 
100 % 3000
mA
Carbon cloth 
N/O-enriched carbon 
cloth 
Symmetric 
- 
116 % 5000
mA
Commercial textiles 
MnO2/CNT 
 
Symmetric 
324 F/g at 0.5 A/g 
100 % 5000
A
Commercial A4-size 
paper 
graphene sheets 
Symmetric 
11.3 mF/cm2 at 1 mV/s 
Photo paper 
PANI–MnOx 
Symmetric 
94.73 mF/cm2 at 0.1 
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 151 (native) -----
149 
 
mA/cm2 
Xerox printing paper 
MnO2/Au/MnO2 
Symmetric 
8.14 mF/cm2 (20.35 F cm3) 
at 0.2 mA/cm2 
88 % after 5
100 m
Carbon Fiber Yarn 
MnO2 
Symmetric 
- 
85 % after 10
0.1 
A4 printing paper 
graphite/polyaniline 
Symmetric 
77.8mF/cm2 at  0.1mA/cm2, 
83% after 10,0
mA
Filter paper 
KCu7S4/Graphene 
Symmetric 
- 
92 % after 5,
0.8  m
PET 
MnOx/Au 
Symmetric 
78.6 F/cm3 at  
10 mV/s 
74.1% after 15
1 V
PET 
Ag/activated carbon 
Symmetric 
45 mF/cm2 at 0.3 mA cm2  
 
86 % after 12
mA
PET 
Graphene/MWNT 
Symmetric 
740.9 µF/cm2 at 1 µA/cm2 
85 % after 20
15 µA
PET 
SWCNTs 
Symmetric 
17.5 F/g at 2 A/g 
87.5 % after 1
5 A
PET 
Au/PANI 
Symmetric 
26.49 
mF/cm2 (67.06 F/cm3) at 0.5 
mA/cm2 
72.7 % after 
200 m
Carbon paper 
graphene oxide/metal–
organic 
framework 
(GO/MOF) 
Symmetric 
250 mF/cm3 at 6.4 mA/cm3 
96.3% after 5
50.4 m
PET 
Au/polyaniline 
Symmetric 
51.7 mF/cm2 at  
0.1 mA/cm2 
92 % after 1
0.2 m
PET 
rGO/PPy 
Symmetric 
147.9 F/cm3 at 5 A/ cm3 
71.7 % after 5
10 A
PET 
N-doped rGO 
Symmetric 
3.4 mF/cm2 at 20 µA/cm2 
98.4 % after 2
100 µ
PET 
MoS2@Ni(OH)2 
Symmetric 
14.07 mF/cm2 (37.53 F/cm3) 
at 1 mV/s 
94.2% after 90
V
PET 
rGO/MoO3 
Symmetric 
404 F/g at 0.5 A/g 
80 % after 50
A
Page 149 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 152 (native) -----
150 
 
Au coated PET 
CuSe 
symmetric 
30.17 mF/cm3 at 0.14 
mA/cm3 
90 % after 10
0.57 m
PET 
graphene 
Symmetric 
56.5 F/cm3 at 0.06 A/cm3 
PET 
β-Ni(OH)2/graphene 
Symmetric 
2570 µF/cm2 at 0.2 A/m 
98.2 % after 2
0.1 A
Air-laid paper 
PPy 
Symmetric 
 702 mF/cm2 at 1 mA/cm2 
PET 
graphene/carbon black 
nanoparticle 
Symmetric 
144.5 F/g at the 
current density of 0.5 A/g 
PET or PDMS 
Graphene fibers/MnO2 
fibers 
Symmetric 
42.02 mF/cm2 at  
0.01 V/s 
92  % after 10
mA
PDMS 
Graphene 
Symmetric 
4.2 mF/cm2 at 0.1 µA 
PDMS 
SWCNTs 
Symmetric 
36.9 F/g at 10 mV/s 
94  % after 5
1.25
carbon fiber paper 
Silver nanoparticle-
polyaniline-graphene 
Symmetric 
142 F/g at 1.5A/g 
Stainless steel 
V2O5 
Symmetric 
96 F/g at 0.5 A/g 
88  % after 1
20 m
carbon nanofibers 
ZnCo2O4// carbon 
nanofibers 
Asymmetric 
139.2 F/g at 2 mV/s 
90  % after 3
50 m
Cu foils 
Graphene oxide 
Symmetric 
130 F/g at 5 mV/s 
Cu foils 
Cu(OH)2//AC 
Asymmetric 
26.4 F/g at 4 A/g 
90% after 5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 153 (native) -----
151 
 
Table 2 Advances in gel-polymer electrolytes based on combinations of different plasticizers and polymer hos
corresponding room temperature ionic conductivities 
Polymer Host 
Electrolytic salt 
Type of electrolyte 
Ionic condu
(mS/cm
PAM 
LiCl 
Aqueous 
10 
PVA 
SiWA-H3PO4 
Aqueous 
8 
PVA 
SiO2-SiWA-H3PO4 
Aqueous 
16 
PVA 
BWA 
Aqueous 
78 
PVA 
H2SO4 
Aqueous 
30 
PVA 
KOH 
Aqueous 
0.1 
PEO 
KOH 
Aqueous 
1 to 1
PVA 
GO doped KOH 
Aqueous 
200 
PEO 
TEAOH 
Aqueous 
11.2
PAA 
TEAOH 
Aqueous 
0.9 
PAN-b-PEG-b-PAN 
DMF-LiClO4 
Organic 
6.9 
PEO 
PC-NaTFSI 
Organic 
0.54
PEO 
PC-EC-DMC-NaTFSI 
Organic 
0.76
PVDF-HFP 
PC-Mg(ClO4)2 
Organic 
5.4 
PVA 
BMIMCl-Li2SO4 
Ionic liquid 
37 
PVDF-HFP 
GO doped EMIMBF4 
Ionic liquid 
25 
PEGDA 
[EMIM][TFSI] 
Ionic liquid 
9.4 
PEO 
EMIHSO4-MIHSO4 
Ionic liquid 
1.7 
PEO 
EMIHSO4-ImHSO4 
Ionic liquid 
2.5 
PVA 
BAAS doped H2SO4 
Redox-active aqueous 
21.4
PVA 
AQQS doped H2SO4 
Redox-active aqueous 
28.5
PMMA 
PC-Fc doped TEABF4 
Redox-active organic 
1.89
PMMA 
PC-4-oxo TEMPO doped TEABF4 
Redox-active organic 
1.73
PVA 
EMIMBF4 doped H3PO4 
Redox-active ionic liquid 
39.3
PAN-b-PEG-b-PAN 
LiClO4 
Organic 
11 
PEO 
LiClO4-TiO2-Al2O3 
Organic 
0.03
PEOEMA 
BMIPF6 and LiPF6 
Ionic liquid   
0.94
PHEMA/chitosan 
EMIMCl 
Ionic liquid   
25 
Page 151 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 154 (native) -----
152 
 
PVdF-HFP 
EMITf 
Ionic liquid 
13 
PVdF-HFP 
EMITf 
Ionic liquid 
5.19
PVdF-HFP 
EMITf-NH4Tf 
Ionic liquid 
0.23
PMMA 
PC-EC-LiClO4 OR PC-EC-NaClO4 OR 
PC-EC-TEAClO4 
Organic 
1 
PAN 
[BMIM][TFSI] 
Ionic liquid 
2.42
PEGDA  
 [EMIM][TFSI] 
Ionic liquid 
9.4 
PVA 
p-benzenediol (PB) doped H2SO4 
Redox active aqueous 
34.8
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 155 (native) -----
153 
 
Table 3 Comparison of electrochemical performances of flexible solid-state symmetric designs based on differen
Electrode Material 
Electrolyte 
Specific 
capacitance 
Energy density 
Power density 
Capacitanc
Treated carbon cloth 
PVA-H2SO4 
920 mF/cm2 at 2 
mA/cm2 
1.4 
mWh/cm3 
280 mW/cm3 
100 %  aft
cyc
Graphene 
PVA-H2SO4 
80 F/g at 5 mV/s 
8.87 
Wh/kg 
7.142 kW/kg 
100 % ove
cycles (0.5
Polyaniline 
PVA-H2SO4 
237.5 mF/cm2 at 
10 mV/s 
24.31 
mWh/ cm3 
140 mW/cm3 
95.2 % ov
cycles (1 m
α-Fe2O3/rGO 
PVA-KOH 
32.9 mF/cm2 at 1 
mA/cm2 
1.46 mWh/cm3 
2011.8 
mW/cm3 
79.1 % ov
cycles (2.5
Carbon quantum 
dots/polypyrrole 
PVA-LiCl 
315 mF/cm2 at 
0.2 mA/cm2 
- 
- 
85.7 % ov
cycles (2 m
N/O co-doped 
graphene quantum dots 
PVA-H2SO4 
461 mF/cm2 at 
0.5 mA/cm2 
0.032 
mWh/cm2 
- 
87.5 % ov
cycles (15 
MWCNTs 
PVA-H3PO4 
2.02 F/cm3 
at 10 mV/s 
0.18 
mWh/cm3 
400 
mW/cm3 
94.1 % ov
cycles (0.1
MWCNTs 
PVA-H3PO4 
26.8 F/g at 1 A/g 
3.5 
Wh/kg 
28.1 
kW/ kg 
92 % over 5
(4 A
CNTs/NiCo2O4 
PVA-KOH 
337.3 
mF/cm2 at 0.1 
mA/cm2 
1.17 
mWh/cm3 
2430 mW/cm3 
95.6 % ov
cycles (
CuO/3D graphene 
PVA-LiCl 
64 mF/cm2 at 
0.25 mA/cm2 
0.0059 
mWh/cm2 
110 
µW/cm2 
86 % over 5
(5 mA
Expanded graphite foil 
PVA-H2SO4 
30.5 mF/cm2 at 1 
mA/cm2 
0.163 
mWh/cm3 
447 
mW/cm3 
92 % over 10
(20 mA
FeCo2S4–NiCo2S4 
PVA-KOH 
- 
46 
Wh/kg 
4.723 
kW/kg 
92 % over 3
(10 mA
MXene/graphene 
PVA-H3PO4 
216 F/cm3 
at 0.1 A/cm2 
3.4 mWh/cm3 
1600 mW/cm3 
85.2 % ov
cycles (1
MnO2 
PVA-LiCl 
776 F/g 
at 0.5 A/g 
0.17 
mWh/cm3 
- 
91 % over 20
(4 A
Page 153 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 156 (native) -----
154 
 
graphene/MoS2 
PVA-H3PO4 
19.44 F/cm3 
at 0.3 mA 
1.728 
mWh/cm3 
62 mW/cm3 
95 % over 1
graphene/polyaniline 
PVA-H2SO4 
665 F/g at  
1 A/g 
14.2 
mWh/cm3 
- 
100 % over 
(5 A
N-doped cotton-
derived carbon 
frameworks (NCCF)-
rGO 
PVA-KOH 
200 F/g at 0.1 A/g 
20 Wh/kg 
- 
94 % over 10
(3 A
Graphene 
PVA-H2SO4 
4.21 mF/cm2 at 
0.1 mA/cm2 
0.552 mWh/cm3 
561.9 mW/cm3 
94.8 % ov
cycles (0.1
MnO2 
PVA-KOH 
847.22 
mF/cm2 at 0.41 
mA/cm2 
0.0188 
mWh/cm2 
16.33 mW/cm2 
92.7 % ov
cycles (0.1
MnO2/CNT 
PVA-H3PO4 
830 F/g at 1 mV/s 
115.2 Wh/kg 
73.9 kW/kg 
89 % over 3
(20 m
MoS2/CNT 
PVA-H2SO4 
16.3 mF/cm2 at 
20 mV/s 
0.92 
mWh/cm3 
2100 
mW/cm3 
95.1 % ov
cycles (10
MoSe2 
PVA-KOH 
133 F/g at 2 A/g 
36.2 Wh/kg 
1.4 
kW/kg 
92 % over 2
(100 m
PEDOT:PSS/ 
MWCNT 
PVA-KOH 
380 F/g at 0.25 
A/g 
13.2 Wh/kg 
4.99 
kW/kg 
90 % over 1
(1 A
PANI/N-Carbon 
PVA-H2SO4 
122 mF/cm2 at 
0.05 mA/cm 2 
0.22 
mWh/cm2 
- 
91.3 % ov
cyc
(1 A
PEDOT:PSS 
PVA-H2SO4 
202 F/cm3 at 0.54 
A/cm3 
- 
- 
100 % ov
cycles (11
rGO/PANI 
PVA-H2SO4 
6.4 mF/cm2 at 
0.08 mA/cm2 
7.07 Wh/kg 
- 
72 % over 2
(0.1 mA
ZnS/CNTs 
PVA-KOH 
159.6 F/g at 1 A/g 
22.3 Wh/kg 
5 kW/kg 
91.8 % ov
cyc
(1 A
ZnCo2O4/rGO 
PVA-KOH 
143 F/g at 1 A/g 
11.44 Wh/kg 
1.382 kW/kg 
93.4 % ov
cyc
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 157 (native) -----
155 
 
(3 A
Pt/n-CNT@PANI 
PVA-H3PO4 
217.7 F/g at 0.2 
A/g 
30.22 Wh/kg 
9.072 kW/kg 
96 % over 5
(1.8 A
Waste paper fibers-
RGO-MnO2 
PVA-Na2SO4 
220 F/g at 1 A/g 
19.6 Wh/kg 
2.4 kW/kg 
85.3 % ov
cyc
(1 A
Porous carbon 
PVA-KOH 
81.3 F/g at 0.5 
A/g 
7.22 Wh/kg 
- 
-
SWCNTs/TiO2 
PVA-LiCl 
28 F/g at 20 mV/s 
- 
66.7 kW/kg 
100 % over 
 
SnS/S-Doped 
Graphene 
PVA-H2SO4 
2.98 mF/cm2 at 
60 mA/m2 
- 
- 
99  % ove
cyc
 
rGO/Mn3O4 
PVA-H3PO4 
45.5 F/cm3 at 50 
mA/cm3 
4.05 
mWh/cm3 
268 
mW/cm3 
85  % ove
cycles (2
rGO/PPy 
PVA-H3PO4 
0.51 F/cm2 at 0.1 
mA/cm2 
1.18 
mWh/cm3 
- 
-
MoSe2 
PVA-KOH 
133 F/g at 2 A/g 
36.2 Wh/kg 
1.4 kW/kg 
92 % over 2
(2 A
SnSe2 
PVA-H2SO4 
406 µF/cm2 at 20 
mA/m2 
- 
- 
100 % over 
(50 mA
SnSe 
PVA-H2SO4 
1176 µF/cm2 at 
45 mA/m2 
- 
- 
100 % over 
(60 mA
rGO/Ti3C2Tx 
PVA-KOH 
- 
63 mWh/cm3  
 
60 mW/cm3 
100 % ove
cycles (
 
 
 
 
 
Page 155 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 158 (native) -----
156 
 
Table 4. Summary of electrochemical performances of flexible solid-state asymmetric designs based on different p
electrodes with corresponding gel-electrolytes. 
Positive electrode 
Negative 
electrode 
Electrolyte 
Voltage 
window 
Specific 
capacitance 
Max. 
Energy 
density 
Max. 
Power 
density 
Co2.18Ni0.82Si2O5 
(OH)4 
Graphene 
KOH/PVA 
1.75 V 
194.3 
mF/cm2 
at 0.50 
mA/cm2 
0.496  
mWh/cm3 
38.8 
mW/cm3 
graphene/MnO2 
graphene/ 
polypyrrole 
KOH/PVA 
1.8 V 
2.69 F/cm3 
(175.2 F/g) 
at 1 mA/cm2 
1.23  
mWh/cm3 
- 
CW/PNC/PEDOT 
CW/CMK-3 
KOH/PVA 
1.45 V 
31.6 mF/cm2 
(3.16 F/cm3) 
at 0.4 
mA/cm2 
0.011  
mWh/cm2 
7.8  
mW/cm2 
Mn3O4/NGP 
 
Ni(OH)2/NGP 
NaOH/PVA 
1.3 V 
1.96 F/cm3 at  
50 mV/s 
0.35 
mWh/cm3 
32.5 
mW/cm3 
TiN@GNSs 
 
Fe2N@GNSs 
LiCl/PVA 
1.6 V 
60 F/g at  
50 mV/s 
15.4  
Wh/kg 
 
6.4 kW/kg  
 
Ni20[(OH)12(H2O)6][
(HP4)8(PO4)4].12H2
O 
graphene 
KOH/PVA 
1.47 V 
148 F/cm2 at 
0.5 mA/cm2 
0.446  
mWh/ cm3 
44.1 
mW/cm3 
NaCoPO4–Co3O4 
graphene 
KOH/PVA 
1.0 V 
28.6  
mF/cm2 
at 0.1 
mA/cm2 
0.39  
mWh/cm3 
50  
mW/cm3 
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 159 (native) -----
157 
 
NiCo2O4@PPy 
 
activated 
carbon (AC) 
KOH/PVA 
1.6 V 
165.4 F/g 
at 1 mA/cm2 
58.8  
Wh/kg 
10.2  
kW/kg 
Co3O4@C@Ni3S2 
AC 
KOH/PVA 
1.8 V 
- 
1.52  
mWh/cm3 
60000  
mW/cm3 
MoS2-
rGO/MWCNT 
rGO/MWCNT 
H2SO4 
/PVA 
1.4 V 
5.2 F/cm3 at 
0.16 A/cm3 
- 
- 
Carbon Fiber (CF) 
−Ni(OH)2 
CF−CNT 
KOH-PVA 
1.3 V 
- 
41.1 
Wh/kg  
3.5  
kW/kg 
K2Co3(P2O7)2-2H2O 
 
graphene 
KOH/PVA 
1.07 V 
6 F/cm3 at 10 
mA/cm3  
0.96 
mWh/cm3 
54.5 
mW/cm3 
MnO2/graphene/CF 
 
graphene 
hydrogel 
(GH)/ copper 
wire (CW) 
KCl/PAAK 
1.6 V 
2.54 F/cm3 at  
0.2 mA/cm2 
0.9  
mWh/cm3 
200 
mW/cm3 
CF@RGO@MnO2 
 
CF@TRGO 
KCl/PAAK 
1.6 V 
- 
1.23  
mWh/cm3 
270  
mW/cm3 
MnO2 
CoSe2 
LiCl/PVA 
1.6 V 
1.77 F/cm3 at 
1 mA/cm2 
0.588  
mWh/cm3 
282  
mW/cm3 
NiCo2O4/CC 
porous 
graphene 
papers (PGP) 
LiOH/PVA 
1.8 V 
71.32 F/g at 
5 mA/cm2  
60.9 
Wh/kg 
11.36 
kW/kg 
Co11(HPO3)8(OH)6-
Co3O4 
graphene 
KOH/PVA 
1.38 V 
1.84 F/cm3 at 
0.5 mA/cm2 
0.48  
mWh/cm3 
105  
mW/cm3 
CoMoO4/PPy 
AC 
KOH/PVA 
1.7 V 
- 
104.7 
Wh/kg 
971.43  
W/kg 
MnO2 
Fe2O3 
LiClO4/ 
PVA 
2.0 
147 F/g at  
5 mV/s  
41  
Wh/kg 
10  
kW/kg 
CuO 
Fe2O3 
Na2SO4/ 
CMC 
2.0 
79 F/g at 2 
mA/cm2 
23  
Wh/kg 
19  
kW/kg 
Page 157 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 160 (native) -----
158 
 
Ni/MnO2 
AC 
Na2SO4/ 
PVA 
2.5 V 
2.0 F/cm3 at 
5 mV/s 
0.78 
mWh/cm3 
50 
mW/cm3 
Cobalt carbonate 
hydroxide/N-doped 
graphene 
N-doped 
graphene 
KOH/PVA 
1.9 V 
153.5  
mF/cm2 at   
1.0 mA/cm2 
0.077  
mWh/cm2 
2.5  
mW/cm2 
γ-MnS 
Eggplant 
derived AC 
(EDAC) 
- 
1.6 V 
110.4 F/g at  
1.0 mA 
37.6 
Wh/kg 
181.2 
W/kg 
NiCo2Se4 
NiCo2O4@PPy 
KOH/PVA 
1.7 V 
14.2 F/cm3 at 
63.7 mA/cm3 
5.18 
mWh/cm3 
260  
W/cm3 
CoS 
AC 
KOH/PVA 
1.8 V 
47 F/g at 2 
A/g 
5.3 Wh/kg 
1.8 kW/kg 
Human hair/Ni 
/Graphene/MnO2 
human hair/Ni/ 
Graphene 
KOH/PVA 
1.8 V 
4.10 F/cm3 at 
100 mV/s 
1.81  
mWh/cm3 
- 
carbon 
fiber/MnO2 
carbon 
fiber/MoO3 
KOH/PVA 
2.0 V 
3.20 mF/cm2 
at 5 mA/cm2 
0.0027 
mWh/cm2 
0.53 
mW/cm2 
Co3O4/Co(OH)2 
AC 
KOH/PVA 
1. 4 V 
210 mF/cm2 
at 0.3 
mA/cm2 
9.4 
mWh/cm3. 
354 
mW/cm3 
MnO2 
CoP 
LiCl/PVA 
1.6 V 
1.94 F/cm3 at 
1 mA/cm2 
0.69 
mWh/cm3 
114.2 
mW/cm3 
CoMoO4 
Fe2O3 
KOH/PVA 
1.5 V 
3.6 F/cm3 at 1 
mA/cm2  
1.13 
mWh/cm3 
150 
mW/cm3 
CoMoO4@ 
NiMoO4·xH2O 
Fe2O3 
KOH/PVA 
1.6 V 
153.6 F/g at 
1 A/g 
41.8 Wh/kg 
12 kW/kg 
CuS/3D graphene 
3D graphene 
KOH/PVA 
1.6 V 
32 F/g  at 1 
A/g 
5 Wh/kg 
3.2 kW/kg 
Co3O4 
AC 
KOH/PVA 
1.5 V 
215 mF/cm2 
- 
- 
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 161 (native) -----
159 
 
at 1.5 
mA/cm2 
MnO2 
porous carbon 
cloth 
PVA/LiCl 
2 V 
1515 mF/cm2 
at 2 mA/cm2 
0.841 
mWh/cm2 
- 
MnO2@CNTs@3D 
graphene foams 
Ppy@CNTs@
3D graphene 
foams 
Na2SO4/ 
PVA 
1.8 V 
8.56 F/cm3 
(950 
mF/cm2) at 1 
mA/cm2 
3.85 
mWh/cm3 
630 
mW/cm3. 
MnO2@PANI 
3D 
graphene foam 
(GF) 
KOH/PVA 
1.5 V 
95.3 F/g at 1 
A/g 
37 Wh/kg 
386 W/kg 
Ni(OH)2-N-doped 
graphene (NG) 
NG 
H2SO4/PVA 
1.45 V 
255 mF/cm2 
at 1.0 
mA/cm2 
79.5 
mWh/cm2 
944 
mW/cm2 
Ni−Co LDHs/pen 
ink/nickel/CF 
Pen ink/ 
nickel/CF 
KOH/PVA 
1.55 V 
28.67 
mF/cm2 at 
0.5 A/g 
0.00957 
mWh/cm2 
1.841 
mW/cm2 
Ni-Co@Ni-Co LDH 
carbon fibers 
KOH/PVA 
1.5 V 
319 F/g at 2 
A/g 
100 Wh/kg 
15 kW/kg 
Co3O4-
nanocube/Co(OH)2-
nanosheet 
AC 
KOH/PVA 
1.4 V 
210 mF/cm2 
at 0.3 
mA/cm2 
9.4 
mWh/cm3 
354 
mW/cm3 
NiCo2S4@NiCo2O4 
AC 
KOH/PVA 
1.6 V 
0.41 F/cm2 at 
2 mA/cm2 
44.6 Wh/kg 
6.4 kW/kg 
NiCo2S4/Polyaniline 
AC 
KOH/PVA 
1.6 V 
152.1 F/g  at 
1 A/g 
54.06 
Wh/kg 
27.1  
kW/kg 
NiCo-LDH 
Carbon 
nanorods 
KOH/PVA 
1.7 V 
147.6 F/g  at 
1 A/g 
59.2 Wh/kg 
34 kW/kg 
MnO2 
Carbon 
LiCl/PVA 
2.0 V 
71.856 
0.766 
142.56 
Page 159 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 162 (native) -----
160 
 
mF/cm2 at 
0.5 mA/cm2 
mWh/cm3 
mW/cm3 
MnO2 
nanorods/rGO 
MoO3 
nanorods/rGO 
H3PO4/PVA 
1.6 V 
51.2 F/cm3 at  
2 mV/s 
18.2  
mWh/cm3 
3269  
mW/cm3 
Ni(OH)2/RGO/Ni 
RGO 
aerogel/Ni 
KOH/PVA 
1.6 V 
69 F/g at 2  
A/g 
24.5 Wh/kg 
10.3 kW/kg 
ZnCo2O4 
VN 
KOH/PVA 
1.6 V 
196.43 
mF/cm2 at 1 
mA/cm2 
64.76  
mWh/cm3 
8000 
mW/cm3 
MOF-MnOx 
AC 
KOH/PVA 
1.2 V 
175 mF/cm2 
at 0.5 
mA/cm2 
5.1 
mWh/cm3 
120 
mW/cm3 
 
 
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 163 (native) -----
Acronyms  
• Polyacrylamide – PAM 
• Polyvinyl alcohol – PVA 
• Poly(ethylene oxide)- PEO 
• Poly(methyl methacrylate) – 
PMMA 
• Poly(polyacrylate)- PAA 
• Poly(amine-ester) – PAE  
• Polyacrylonitrile (PAN),  
• Poly(vinylidene fluoride)- PVdF 
• Poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-
hexafluoropropylene) - PVdF-HFP 
• Poly-(ethylene glycol)- PEG 
• Poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate – 
PEGDA 
• Poly(2-ethoxyethyl methacrylate)-
PEOEMA 
• Silicotungstic acid – SiWA 
• H5BW12O40- BWA 
• Tetraethylammonium hydroxide – 
TEAOH 
• Dimethylformamide – DMF 
• Propylene carbonate – PC 
• Sodium 
bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide 
– NaTFSI 
• Ethylene carbonate – EC 
• Dimethyl carbonate – DMC 
• 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium 
chloride - BMIMCl 
• 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium 
tetrafluoroborate - EMIMBF4 
• 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium 
bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide - 
[EMIM][TFSI] 
• 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium 
hydrogen sulfate - EMIHSO4) 
• 1-methylimidazolium hydrogen 
sulfate - MIHSO4  
• Imidazolium hydrogen sulfate - 
ImHSO4 
• 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium 
hexafluorophosphate - BMIPF6 
• 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium 
chloride -EMIMCl 
• Bromamine acid sodium – BAAS 
• 1-anthraquinone sulfonic acid 
sodium – AQQS 
• 2-mercaptopyridine – PySH 
• Ferrocene – fc 
• 4-oxo-2, 2, 6, 6-
tetramethylpiperidinooxy - 4-oxo 
TEMPO 
• Tetraethylammonium 
tetrafluoroborate - TEABF4 
• 1-ethyl 3-methyl imidazolium 
trifluoromethanesulfonate – EMITf 
• Ammonium 
trifluoromethanesulfonate -NH4Tf 
Page 161 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews

----- Page 164 (native) -----
• 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium 
bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide – 
[BMIM][TFSI] 
• p-benzenediol – PB 
• Polyethylene terephthalate – PET 
• Polydimethylsiloxane – PDMS 
• Carboxymethyl cellulose – CMC 
• Polyethersulfone – PES 
• Polyoxometalates-POMs 
• Black Phosphorous- BP 
• Metal-organic Frameworks - MOFs  
 
Page 162 of 162
Chemical Society Reviews