

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sex differences in impulsivity: A meta-analysis 
 
 
Catharine P. Cross, Lee T. Copping and Anne Campbell 
Durham University

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
2 
 
ABSTRACT 
Men are over-represented in socially problematic behaviors, such as aggression and 
criminal behavior, which have been linked to impulsivity. We organize our review of 
impulsivity around the tripartite theoretical distinction between reward 
hypersensitivity, punishment hyposensitivity, and inadequate effortful control. 
Drawing on evolutionary, criminological, developmental, and personality theories, we 
predicted that sex differences would be most pronounced in risky activities with men 
demonstrating greater sensation seeking, greater reward sensitivity and lower 
punishment sensitivity. We predicted a small female advantage in effortful control. 
We analyzed 741 effect sizes from 277 studies, including psychometric and 
behavioral measures. Women were consistently more punishment sensitive (d = -
.33), but men did not show greater reward sensitivity (d = .01). Men showed 
significantly higher sensation seeking on questionnaire measures (d = .41) and on a 
behavioral risk taking task (d = .36). Questionnaire measures of deficits in effortful 
control showed a very modest effect size in the male direction (d = .08). Sex 
differences were not found on delay discounting or executive function tasks. The 
results indicate a stronger sex difference in motivational rather than effortful or 
executive forms of behavior control. Specifically, they support evolutionary and 
biological theories of risk taking predicated on sex differences in punishment 
sensitivity. A clearer understanding of sex differences in impulsivity depends upon 
recognizing important distinctions between sensation seeking and impulsivity, 
between executive and effortful forms of control, and between impulsivity as a deficit 
and as a trait.  
Keywords: impulsivity, sex, sensation seeking, effortful control, reinforcement 
sensitivity

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
3 
 
 
Men engage in impulsive and risky behaviors more frequently than women. 
They die younger than women and the higher male:female mortality ratio is 
particularly pronounced for deaths from external causes (Kruger & Nesse, 2006). 
Men drive more recklessly with fully 97 percent of dangerous driving offences 
committed by men (Beattie, 2008; Norris, Matthews & Riad, 2000). Men also have a 
significantly higher death rate from non-vehicle accidents such as falls, drowning, 
choking, electrocution, firearm accidents, and fires (Pampel, 2001). Violence-
precipitated visits to hospital accident and emergency services are higher among 
men (Shepherd, 1990). Men are more physically and verbally aggressive than 
women across data sources and nations (Archer, 2004, 2009; Bettencourt & Miller, 
1996; Eagly & Steffen, 1986; Hyde, 1986; Knight, Fabes & Higgins, 1996; Knight, 
Guthrie, Page & Fabes, 2002). Men constitute 76 percent of all criminal arrests in the 
United States, committing 89 percent of homicides and 82 percent of all violent crime 
(US Department of Justice, n.d.). Worldwide, men use drugs (alcohol, tobacco, 
cannabis and cocaine) more than women (Degenhardt et al., 2008). They participate 
more often in extreme sports, such as sky diving and mountain climbing (Harris, 
Jenkins & Glaser, 2006; Robinson, 2008). Men are also more likely than women to 
suffer from a range of psychopathologies characterized by externalizing and 
impulsive behaviors such as antisocial personality disorder, conduct disorder, 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and intermittent explosive disorder (American 
Psychiatric Association, 2000; Frank, 2000; Gershon & Gershon, 2002; Kessler et 
al., 2006; Moffitt, Caspi & Rutter, 2001).  
In all of these domains, impulsivity has been invoked as an explanatory 
variable. Sometimes impulsivity is embedded in a theory or model, but more often it

----- Page 4 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
4 
 
appears as an independent variable in regression analyses along with other 
plausible explanatory candidates. It is surprisingly rare, however, that sex differences 
in social and psychological pathologies have been considered in relation to sex 
differences in impulsivity in society at large. The present study uses meta-analysis to 
examine whether there are average sex differences in unselected community 
samples across a range of psychometric and behavioral measures of impulsivity. We 
also examine whether, in these samples, variance in men’s impulsivity scores is 
greater than women’s. Such a finding could explain men’s over-representation in 
extreme and problematic impulsive behaviors. (Though men would also be over-
represented at the left as well as the right tail of the distribution, low levels of 
impulsivity are unlikely to attract attention from educational, medical or judicial 
systems.) 
Impulsivity: Models, measures, and sex differences. 
A terse, broad, and widely-accepted definition of impulsivity is a “tendency to 
act spontaneously and without deliberation” (Carver, 2005, p. 313). However, the 
trait is far from unitary and Depue and Collins (1999, p.495) note that “impulsivity 
comprises a heterogeneous cluster of lower-order traits”. There have been a 
bewildering number of attempts to disaggregate impulsivity into more specific 
subtypes such as failure to plan (Patton, Stanford & Barratt, 1995), lack of 
perseverance (Whiteside & Lynam, 2001), venturesomeness (Eysenck & Eysenck, 
1985), poor self-discipline (Costa & McCrae, 1992) and novelty seeking (Cloninger, 
1987).  
In organizing our review of the literature, we focus on theoretical approaches 
to impulsivity highlighting the extent to which they emphasize over-attraction to 
reward (strong approach motivation), under-sensitivity to punishment (weak

----- Page 5 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
5 
 
avoidance motivation) or problems with effortful or higher-order control. In an 
automotive analogy, these can be thought of as a problem with a stuck accelerator, a 
problem of faulty brakes, or a problem of poor judgment by the driver. Many 
theoretical approaches to impulsivity explicitly invoke this distinction between 
approach, avoidance, and higher-order cognitive systems (Carver 2005; Cloninger, 
1987; Depue & Collins, 1999; Fowles, 1987; Gray, 1982; Nigg, 2001; Rothbart, 
Ahadi & Evans, 2000). This tripartite distinction also dovetails with proposals made 
by evolutionary, developmental, personality, criminological and clinical psychologists 
about the source of sex differences in impulsivity. In this brief overview, we describe 
the various theoretical orientations and formulate predictions of likely sex 
differences. We also note measures that have been developed to assess the 
constructs that are included in our meta-analysis. These are summarized in Table 1. 
Some theorists have been explicit in their recognition and explanation of sex 
differences in impulsivity. In other cases, we have inferred sex differences via 
theorists’ proposed explanations of psychopathologies that are more prevalent in 
one sex than the other.  
Reward sensitivity and approach motivation. 
Evolutionary theory. Aggressive behavior, as we have noted, is considerably 
more frequent and serious among men. Evolutionary approaches have been quite 
explicit in their predictions of sex differences in aggression. Across many species 
including our own, asymmetries of parental investment exert a significant impact on 
those aspects of psychology that have consequences for inclusive fitness. To the 
extent that effective polygyny was characteristic of hominid evolution (Archer, 2009; 
Larsen, 2003; Plavcan, 2001), men have had very high incentives for establishing 
intra-sexual dominance as a means of securing a large number of mates and

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
6 
 
increasing their reproductive success (Daly & Wilson, 1983). This competition can 
take the form of direct aggression, with correspondingly increased rates of homicide 
and decreased life expectancy, especially among men who are young and unmarried 
(Daly & Wilson, 1988; Wilson & Daly, 1997). Wilson and Daly (1985) suggested that 
the psychological mechanism underlying this male-on-male aggression is an 
increased ‘taste for risk’ among young men, a taste that also manifests itself in riskier 
decision-making, gambling, dangerous driving and drug use. This formulation 
suggests that sex differences should be most marked in those impulsivity measures 
that include a component of sensation seeking or risk taking. In emphasizing the 
appetitive nature of motivation (the positive attractions of risk), it also predicts sex 
differences in the sensitivity to reward associated with such risky enterprises.  
Sensation seeking. Zuckerman’s definition of sensation seeking as "the need 
for varied, novel, and complex sensations and experiences and the willingness to 
take physical and social risks for the sake of such experience" highlights the 
compelling attraction of novel experiences––an attraction of such intensity that the 
individual is willing to tolerate risks in their pursuit. Zuckerman and Kuhlman (2000, 
p. 1001) argue that “The approach gradient is higher and the avoidance gradient 
(anticipated anxiety) is lower in high sensation seekers than in low sensation seekers 
over the range of novel risk taking activities”. Sex differences have been found 
consistently on Zuckerman’s Sensation Seeking Scale (SSS-V) (Zuckerman, 1994). 
These appear on the Thrill and Adventure, Boredom Susceptibility and Disinhibition 
subscales but are absent on the Experience Seeking subscale which measures 
preferences for new experiences that are not marked by risk (e.g. eating exotic 
food). A newer measure, the Impulsive Sensation Seeking (ImpSS) scale of the 
Zuckerman Kuhlman Personality Questionnaire (ZKPQ), also shows sex differences

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
7 
 
(McDaniel & Zuckerman, 2003; Zuckerman, Kuhlman, Joireman, Teta & Kraft, 1993). 
Sex differences in a range of risky behaviors were found to be completely mediated 
by the sex difference in ImpSS (Zuckerman & Kuhlman, 2000). 
Zuckerman (1989, 1994, 2006) has suggested that men’s role in mate 
competition and hunting is the distal factor driving this desire for risk. Testosterone 
levels are correlated with sensation seeking, as well as with prioritization of short-
term goals, impulsivity, dominance, competition and sexual arousal (Archer, 2006). 
In terms of central nervous system action, ImpSS is proposed to result from the 
balance between the attraction of excitement and the avoidance of danger 
associated specifically with risky behaviors. The explanatory approach is biological: 
dopamine is involved in reward and approach behavior, while serotonin mediates 
restraint. Dopamine accelerates risky behavior because, when faced with danger, 
high sensation seekers experience stronger attraction than low sensation-seekers. 
Men’s greater sensation seeking chiefly results from a more reactive dopaminergic 
system (Zuckerman & Kuhlman, 2000). Zuckerman also acknowledges the 
relevance of inhibition mediated by the serotonergic system but his chief emphasis is 
on the attractions of risk taking among men.   
Criminology. Gottfredson and Hirschi (1990), in their General Theory of 
Crime, argued that the attractions of antisocial behavior are powerful, immediate, 
and evident. It is criminal desistance rather than involvement that requires 
explanation. They proposed that criminal behavior results from the interaction 
between attractive criminal opportunities and low self-control. The effect size for low 
self-control on crime (d = .41), in twenty-one empirical studies with 49,727 
participants, ranks as "one of the strongest known correlates of crime” (Pratt & 
Cullen, 2000, p.952).

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
8 
 
Noting the ubiquitous sex differences in criminal behavior, Gottfredson and 
Hirschi (1990, p. 147) argued that greater self-control among women resulted from 
internalization of the stronger external and familial control exercised over daughters, 
rather than sons. Rejecting the need for sex-specific explanations of crime, they 
argued that self-control was equally relevant to offending by men and women, and 
this has been substantiated (Blackwell & Piquero, 2005; Burton, Cullen, Evans, 
Alarid & Dunaway, 1998; Keane, Maxim & Teevan, 1993; Piquero & Rosay, 1998; 
Pratt & Cullen, 2000; Tittle, Ward & Grasmick, 2003). Women have greater self-
control than men (Keane et al., 1993; Nakhaie, Silverman & LaGrange, 2000; Tittle 
et al., 2003) and a strong hypothesis from the general theory of crime is that, when 
self-control is controlled, sex differences in criminal or delinquent involvement should 
become non-significant. This has been found in some studies (Burton et al, 1998; 
Tittle et al., 2003) and, even where it has not eliminated the effect of sex, it has 
reduced it substantially (La Grange & Silverman, 1999; Nakhaie et al., 2000).  
Low self-control has been measured as a combination of impulsivity, risk-
seeking, preference for simple tasks and physical activities, temper and self-
centeredness (Grasmick, Tittle, Bursik & Arneklev, 1993). However, a number of 
researchers have found the impulsivity and risk-seeking subscales to be almost as 
predictive as the full scale (Arneklev, Grasmick, Tittle & Bursik, 1993; Deschenes & 
Esbensen 1999; Longshore, Turner & Stein, 1996; Nakhaie et al., 2000; Piquero & 
Rosay, 1998; Wood, Pfefferbaum & Areneklev, 1993). Of the two traits, risk-seeking 
shows the stronger association with crime (Nakhaie et al, 2000; LaGrange & 
Silverman, 1999). It is for this reason, together with Gottfredson and Hirschi’s (1990, 
p.89) emphasis upon the implicit attractions of crime (“money without work, sex

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
9 
 
without courtship, revenge without court delays”), that we discuss this theory as 
representing an approach orientation to impulsivity.  
Three factor theories. Cloninger (1987) has advanced a biopsychological 
model of personality in the field of psychiatry. He originally postulated three 
genetically-based independent dimensions of personality: Novelty Seeking, Harm 
Avoidance, and Reward Dependence. The original measure of these traits was the 
Tridimensional Personality Questionnaire (TPQ) which was subsequently modified 
and renamed the Temperament and Character Inventory (TCI). Variations in the 
balance of these sensitivities have been used to explain a range of mental illnesses. 
Cloninger uses the term Novelty Seeking as an alternative to ‘impulsivity,’ clearly 
identifying its appetitive motivation (Cloninger, 1986).  Novelty seeking is associated 
with activity in the dopaminergic reward system and is expressed as a tendency to 
respond to novel stimuli with excitement. The scale is comprised of four facets: 
Exploratory Excitability, Impulsiveness, Extravagance, and Disorderliness. This form 
of impulsivity bears a strong resemblance to sensation seeking: Not only does it 
correlate highly (r = .68) with the Zuckerman’s ImpSS scale, but both scales 
correlate negatively with monoamine oxidase levels suggesting a common biological 
basis (Zuckerman & Cloninger, 1996). However, unlike sensation seeking, no sex 
difference was found for Novelty Seeking (d = -.04) in a recent meta-analysis 
(Miettunen, Veijola, Lauronen, Kantojarvi & Joukamaa, 2007). 
Eysenck and Eysenck’s (1968) early two-factor personality theory identified 
impulsivity as a component of Extraversion, linked to low cortical arousal and a 
consequent need for stimulation (resulting in sensation seeking). Impulsivity was 
later disaggregated into two components: Impulsiveness (poor impulse control); and

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
10 
 
Venturesomeness (stimulus hunger). The I7 inventory was developed to measure 
Impulsiveness and Venturesomeness as distinct traits (Eysenck, 1993).  
Venturesomeness shares the original quality of stimulus hunger, reflecting 
approach motivation, and hence Eysenck aligned it with Extraversion. However, 
evidence suggests it is more closely associated with the Psychoticism (P) dimension 
of tough-mindedness, hostility and non-conformity. Indeed Zuckerman (1989) 
suggested that the P factor really represents his dimension of impulsive sensation 
seeking.  In support of this, the ImpSS scale loads strongly on a psychoticism factor 
whose best marker is Eysenck’s P scale (Zuckerman et al., 1993).   In terms of item 
content, the Venturesomesness scale resembles sensation seeking, rather than 
impulsiveness (Zuckerman 1989).  Men score higher than women on 
Venturesomeness (Eysenck, Pearson, Easting & Allsopp, 1985), and it is positively 
correlated with the male hormone testosterone (Aluja & Torrubia, 2004; Coccaro, 
Beresford, Minar, Kaskow & Geracioti, 2007; Daitzman & Zuckerman, 1980). As with 
Zuckerman’s sensation seeking, we anticipate Venturesomeness will show a sex 
difference in the male direction.  
Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory. Gray (1970, 1982), a former student of 
Eysenck, proposed that extraversion and neuroticism should be rotated to form two 
new dimensions reflecting sensitivity to punishment (anxiety, associated with 
introversion and neuroticism) and sensitivity to reward (impulsivity, associated with 
extraversion and neuroticism). These new dimensions came to be called respectively 
the behavioral inhibition system (BIS) and the behavior approach system (BAS).  
Approach motivation is controlled by BAS which is sensitive to signals of 
unconditioned and conditioned reward, non-punishment, and escape from 
punishment. Gray labeled the personality manifestation of the BAS dimension as

----- Page 11 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
11 
 
‘impulsivity’, indicating that heightened reward sensitivity was viewed as the key 
source of impulsive behavior. Note that Gray’s reward sensitivity is not restricted to 
reward associated with sensation seeking or other risky enterprises: Activity in the 
BAS causes movement toward goals more generally. Emotionally, this system 
generates feelings of hope, elation, and satisfaction.  Dopaminergic pathways, 
especially between the ventral tegmental area of the midbrain and the nucleus 
accumbens, are implicated in its functioning. Gray made no specific predictions in his 
theory regarding sex differences although, like Eysenck, his formulation addressed 
clinical disorders where sex differences are well established. Gray’s theory has been 
studied extensively in relation to psychopathy, a predominantly male disorder (Cale 
& Lilienfeld, 2002). Patterson and Newman (1993) argued that psychopaths’ over-
sensitivity to reward results in hyper-arousal and a consequent failure to pause and 
reflect when reinforcers are withdrawn. This results in dysfunctional perseveration in 
mixed-incentive situations.    
Measures of reward sensitivity and approach motivation. Carver and White’s 
(1994) BIS/BAS psychometric scales have been widely used to assess Gray’s two 
dimensions of temperament. The BAS scale factors into three subscales: Reward 
Responsiveness (emotional enjoyment of reward), Drive (the pursuit of appetitive 
goals), and Fun Seeking (the tendency to seek out new, potentially rewarding, 
experiences). Clearly this last scale overlaps considerably with aspects of sensation 
seeking and some work suggests that, unlike the other two BAS scales, it loads on a 
separate factor that has been called ‘rash impulsiveness’ (Dawe, Gullo & Loxton, 
2004; Franken & Muris, 2006; Quilty & Oakman, 2004). Torrubia, Avila, Molto and 
Caseras (2001) developed another pair of scales to measure Gray’s two dimensions, 
the Sensitivity to Punishment and Sensitivity to Reward Questionnaire (SPSRQ).

----- Page 12 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
12 
 
SPSRQ Sensitivity to Reward is correlated with Eysenck’s I7 
Impulsiveness,,Zuckerman’s SSS and with Excitement Seeking in the Five Factor 
model (Mitchell, Kimbrel, Hundt, Cobb, Nelson-Gray & Lootens, 2007).  The Reward 
scale from the Generalized Reward and Punishment Expectancy Scales (GRAPES; 
Ball & Zuckerman, 1990) has also been used, and shows a positive correlation with 
sensation seeking. A recent meta-analysis found that women scored higher than 
men (d = -.63: Miettunen et al., 2007) on the Reward Dependency scale of the 
Cloninger’s TCI (although there are important differences in item content between 
this and the other reward dependence measures which will be discussed later).  
The two most widely used measures of sensation seeking and risk taking are 
Eysenck’s I7 Venturesomeness scale and Zuckerman’s Sensation Seeking Scale.  
The Monotony Avoidance scale of the Karolinska Scales of Personality also captures 
the intolerance of boredom that corresponds to the SSS-Boredom Susceptibility 
subscale. The more recent Zuckerman Kuhlman Personality Questionnaire (ZKPQ) 
contains a scale of Impulsive Sensation Seeking (ImpSS). Dickman (1990) 
distinguished between Dysfunctional Impulsivity (a tendency to act with less foresight 
than others leading the individual into difficult situations) and Functional Impulsivity 
(a tendency to respond quickly when the situation is optimal, such as taking 
advantages of unexpected opportunities). These form separate scales on the 
Dickman Impulsivity Inventory (DII). Those who score high on Functional Impulsivity 
are characterized as “enthusiastic, active individuals who are willing to take risks” 
(Dickman, 1990, p.98). This suggests, and data confirm, that Functional Impulsivity 
is closely aligned with sensation seeking: We therefore consider it with other 
sensation seeking measures. Other measures of sensation seeking include the 
UPPS Sensation Seeking scale, which resulted from Whiteside and Lynam’s factor

----- Page 13 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
13 
 
analysis of 21 impulsivity scales. Tellegen’s (1982) Multidimensional Personality 
Questionnaire (MPQ) contains a subscale of Harm Avoidance, the items and 
structure of which correspond to reversed sensation seeking and we analyze it 
together with other sensation seeking measures (See Table 1). 
Punishment insensitivity and avoidance motivation. 
Here we consider approaches to impulsivity that highlight a hyposensitivity to 
the negative consequences of impulsive acts. These are distinguished from 
approaches which view impulsivity as a failure of effortful control (which we discuss 
later) by virtue of the fact that they deal with deficits in reactive or motivational, rather 
than cognitive, control.  
Evolutionary theory. Campbell (1999, 2002) proposed an evolutionary 
account, complementary to that of Daly and Wilson (1988), that focuses on female 
disincentives for risk. Women’s reproductive success depends to a greater extent 
than men’s upon avoiding injury and death. This results from infants’ greater 
dependence on the mother than on the father, women’s higher parental investment 
in each offspring, and the limited number of offspring that a woman can bear in a 
lifetime. Hence women should be more sensitive to and more avoidant of danger 
than men, an effect which is mediated by higher levels of fear about physical injury 
or death. Cross-culturally, fear is experienced more intensely and frequently by 
women than by men (Brebner, 2003; Fischer & Manstead, 2000). As with Daly and 
Wilson’s formulation, the prediction is that sex differences will be manifest in those 
impulsivity inventories that contain an element of risk. But because Campbell’s 
proposed mediating variable is fear, her account predicts greater harm avoidance in 
women than in men, and possibly greater sensitivity to punishment reflected in 
higher BIS scores.

----- Page 14 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
14 
 
Three factor theories. In Cloninger’s tripartite theory, Harm avoidance is 
mediated by activity in a serotonergic punishment system and is manifest in a 
tendency to respond strongly to signals of aversive stimuli by inhibiting ongoing 
behavior. High scorers are "cautious, tense, apprehensive, fearful, inhibited, shy, 
easily fatigable, and apprehensive worriers" (Cloninger, 1987, p. 576). A recent 
meta-analysis (Miettunen et al., 2007) reported a small-to-moderate effect size 
favoring women on Harm Avoidance (d = -.33). 
When Eysenck disaggregated impulsivity, he aligned Impulsiveness with 
Psychoticism, a dimension characterized by insensitivity to punishment,poor impulse 
control , and a tendency to respond without regard to interpersonal consequences 
(Eysenck & Gudjonsson, 1989). However, Impulsiveness is not associated with 
testosterone as would be expected of a facet of Psychoticism (Aluja & Torrubia, 
2004; Coccaro et al., 2007; Daitzman & Zuckerman, 1980), and norms for 
impulsiveness show no sex differences (Eysenck et al., 1985). 
Reinforcement sensitivity theory. Gray’s (1970) theory proposed that behavior 
was governed by the balance between three motivational systems. He identified the 
BAS system, described earlier, as the basis for impulsivity. The behavioral 
avoidance system (BIS) is an aversive motivational system which is sensitive to 
signals of punishment, non-reward and novelty. Activity in the BIS inhibits behavior. 
Emotionally, the system is associated with feelings of fear, anxiety, and frustration. 
BIS has been localized to the right anterior cortex. Gray also argued for a third 
flight/fight system (FFS) sensitive to innately aversive stimuli and associated with 
Eysenck’s third dimension of Psychoticism.  
In a subsequent revision of the theory (Gray & McNoughton, 2000), the FFS, 
associated with fear, became responsible for avoidance as well as escape

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
15 
 
behaviors. The BIS, associated with anxiety, became responsible for resolving 
motivational conflicts between approach and avoidance. The BAS remained 
relatively unaltered. However these revisions, including the distinction between fear- 
and anxiety-related avoidance processes and the new role of the BIS, have not been 
reflected in personality inventories used to assess punishment sensitivity (but see 
Heym, Ferguson & Lawrence, 2008; Perkins & Corr, 2006). Most researchers 
continue to work with Gray’s original formulation (Bijttebier, Beck, Claes & 
Vandereycken, 2009; Smillie, 2008).  
As noted, Gray’s work has been applied to psychopathy. Although Gray 
proposed that overactive BAS was the source of impulsivity, Lykken (1957) 
suggested that psychopaths’ lack of fear resulted in a failure to form classically 
conditioned associations between fear and rule breaking. Thus psychopaths lack the 
normal negative reinforcer (fear reduction) required for active and passive avoidance 
learning. Fowles (1988) suggested that psychopaths have a weak behavioral 
inhibition system (BIS) and hence perform particularly poorly where passive 
avoidance (inhibition of a response) is required. A distinction has been made 
between primary and secondary psychopathy that may unite these different 
positions. Primary psychopaths, who correspond to the popular stereotype of the 
disorder, experience low levels of anxiety (weak BIS) which give rise to their 
antisocial actions (Lykken, 1995). Secondary psychopaths experience heightened 
negative emotions and are hyper-responsive to opportunities for reward reflected in 
stronger BAS (but normal BIS) reactivity. This proposal has recently received 
empirical support (Newman, MacCoon, Vaughn & Sadeh, 2005; Ross, Molto, Poy, 
Segarra, Pastor & Montanes, 2007; Wallace, Malterer & Newman, 2009).

----- Page 16 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
16 
 
In sharp contrast to psychopathy, anxiety disorders are found more often in 
women than in men (Frank, 2000), and anxiety was the original focus of Gray’s 
(1982) BIS punishment hypersensitivity formulation. A considerable body of work has 
established that anxiety is associated with preferential attention to threatening 
stimuli. Orienting responses occur before the nature or meaning of the stimuli is 
consciously registered, and this indicates the engagement of low-level reactive 
processes which are automatic, unintentional, and unconscious (Bar-Haim, Lamy, 
Pergamin, Bakermans-Kranenburg & van Ijzendoorn, 2007). This attentional bias 
has been shown both in patients suffering from a range of anxiety disorders (Barlow, 
2002) and in non-clinical samples high in trait anxiety (Mogg, Bradley, Dixon, Fisher, 
Twelftree  & McWilliams, 2000). Among people suffering from depression, women 
and girls more frequently ruminate about negative life events, which both 
exacerbates depressive symptoms and indicates an attentional preoccupation with 
punishment (Rood, Roelofs, Bogels, Nolen-Hoeksema & Schouten, 2009). Given 
women’s higher levels of sub-clinical anxiety and depression (Costa, Terracciano & 
McCrae, 2001), we expect women to be particularly sensitive to cues of punishment.  
Measures of punishment sensitivity. Carver and White’s (1994) BIS/BAS 
psychometric scales include a single BIS scale which measures sensitivity to signals 
of punishment. This scale correlates with measures of negative affectivity, negative 
temperament, and anxiety. Torrubia et al.’s (2001) SPSRQ Sensitivity to Punishment 
scale is correlated with Carver and White’s BIS, and with harm avoidance and 
anxiety (see also Caseras, Avila & Torrubia, 2003). Punishment sensitivity as 
measured by GRAPES correlates significantly with the BIS scale and anxiety 
(Gomez & Gomez, 2005).  The TPQ/TCI measure of Harm Avoidance assesses an 
individual’s tendency to respond intensively to signals of aversive stimuli by inhibiting

----- Page 17 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
17 
 
or stopping behavior (Cloninger, 1987).  We include it as a measure of punishment 
sensitivity. (Note that the identically named scale from the MPQ measures reversed 
sensation seeking, see Table 1). 
Effortful control. 
Effortful control describes the “ability to choose a course of action under 
conditions of conflict, to plan for the future, and to detect errors” (Rothbart 2007, 
p.207). Behaviorally, it is defined as the ability to inhibit a dominant response and 
perform a subdominant response. It is a major form of self regulation manifested as 
conscious or effortful decision-making in the service of longer-term objectives. It is 
the planfulness and executive nature of this ability that distinguishes it from the 
reactive or motivational theories that we have previously described.    
Evolutionary. MacDonald (2008) argued that although evolution has shaped 
dedicated psychological modules (adaptations) to solve recurrent evolutionary 
problems, the effortful control system can inhibit such ‘automatic’ evolved responses 
and thereby reduce impulsivity. MacDonald argued for sex differences in impulsivity 
based on strong sexual selection for male intrasexual competition which makes 
approach tendencies less amenable to override by effortful control: “Males are thus 
expected to be higher on behavioral approach systems (sensation seeking, 
impulsivity, reward seeking, aggression) and therefore on average be less prone to 
control prepotent approach responses” (MacDonald, 2008, p. 1018). This sex 
difference should be particularly marked during adolescence and young adulthood 
when reproductive and competitive drives are strongest. In addition, future 
discounting (a preference for immediate rather than delayed reward) may be 
adaptive for individuals growing up in highly stressful environments and may underlie 
the sex difference in risk taking (Kruger & Nesse, 2006; Wilson & Daly, 1997).

----- Page 18 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
18 
 
Bjorklund and Kipp’s (1996) proposal of evolved sex differences in impulsivity 
was not restricted to the domains of aggression and risk taking. They argued that 
inhibitory ability was especially critical to women’s reproductive success in relation to 
mate choice and offspring care. Because women contribute the lion’s share of 
parental investment, selectivity in mate choice is more important to women. This 
makes the ability to conceal sexual interest advantageous in the service of 
evaluating long-term mate prospects. Women can gain additional genetic and 
material resources from clandestine copulations and here again inhibitory control 
over the ‘leaked’ expression of sexual interest in other men would be beneficial in 
securing the commitment of a long-term partner. In addition, the protracted 
dependency of offspring places strain on a mother’s self-control. She must prioritize 
the infant’s needs over her own, inhibit aggressive impulses toward it and delay her 
own gratification–– all of which would be aided by improved inhibitory control. 
Bjorklund and Kipp proposed that women’s advantage in inhibition would be 
relatively domain-specific, and evident only in those tasks that assayed social and 
emotional restraint. Their narrative review supported this hypothesis, concluding that 
women’s greater inhibition was evident in the social domain (e.g. facial and bodily 
concealment of feelings), present though less strong in the behavioral domain (e.g. 
resistance to temptation), and absent in cognitive inhibition (e.g. Stroop test, memory 
interference, selective attention). This proposal predicts a female advantage in 
inhibitory control specifically in interpersonal domains.     
Developmental. Rothbart and co-workers explored the concept of effortful 
control as a form of self-regulation from a developmental perspective (Rothbart & 
Bates, 2006; Rothbart & Derryberry, 1981; Rothbart & Posner, 2006). Their model 
includes lower-level motivational approaches but is distinguished by its emphasis on

----- Page 19 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
19 
 
the child’s acquisition of higher-level cognitive control of impulsivity. In the early 
months, infants are primarily reactive to events and the two dimensions that capture 
variation in their temperamental responses map onto Gray’s BIS and BAS systems 
(Rothbart, 2007; Rothbart et al., 2000). These have been measured by scales 
assessing Negative Affectivity and Extraversion/Surgency, corresponding to BIS and 
BAS respectively. Together these two systems modulate avoidance and approach 
behavior. With increasing age the child develops effortful control, a form of self-
regulatory executive control in the affective domain (MacDonald, 2008). This system 
is superordinate to the more primitive motivational systems and it allows the 
individual to suppress reactive tendencies in the service of longer-term objectives. 
Attention shifting and behavioral inhibition allow the child to suppress prepotent but 
inappropriate behavior. The likely site of these processes is the ventromedial 
prefrontal cortex, particularly the orbitofrontal cortex and the ventral anterior 
cingulated cortex (MacDonald, 2008; Posner & Rothbart, 2009).  
Lower- and higher-level systems are not wholly independent because “the 
motivational circuits can function as specialized learning mechanisms, guiding the 
development of cortical representations in light of underlying appetitive and 
defensive needs” (Derryberry & Rothbart, 1997, p.639). Cross-lagged correlations 
have been reported between early fear and later effortful control (e.g. Kochanska & 
Knaack, 2003). This association is attributed to the greater amenability of more 
fearful children to parental socialization practices (Derryberry & Rothbart, 1997). 
Girls are more fearful than boys (Else-Quest, Hyde, Goldsmith & Van Hulle, 2006; 
Hsu, Soong, Stigler, Hong, & Liang, 1981; Maziade, Boudreault, Thivierge, Caperaa 
& Cote, 1984) and this suggests that girls may exceed boys in effortful control.  Else-
Quest et al.’s (2006) meta-analysis of childhood temperament differences revealed a

----- Page 20 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
20 
 
large effect size favoring girls for effortful control, d = -1.01. However, this dimension 
is a composite of scales from the Child Behavior Questionnaire reflecting an easy-
going, low-demand temperament which is apparently more characteristic of girls than 
boys. Impulsivity is measured separately as a subscale of the Extroversion/Surgency 
dimension (broadly corresponding to BAS or approach motivation) and this showed a 
smaller effect size in the male direction (d = .18). 
The development of the prefrontal cortex that mediates effortful control 
continues through adolescence and into adulthood (Casey, Getz & Galvan, 2008; 
Sternberg, 2007). Although impulsive behavior in childhood may result from the 
balance between the two lower-level reactive systems, in adulthood it is likely to be 
associated with weak or ineffective effortful control (Posner & Rothbart, 2009). 
Baumeister and colleagues (Baumeister, Vohs & Tice, 2007; Muraven & Baumeister, 
2000) use the term ‘self-control’ to refer to control over thoughts, emotions, 
performance and impulses. Self-control bears a strong similarity to effortful control 
and indeed Baumeister et al. (2007; p.351) describe it as a “deliberate, conscious, 
effortful subset of self-regulation”. It is assessed as an amalgam of self-discipline, 
deliberate/non-impulsive action, reliability, healthy habits, and work ethic (Tangney, 
Baumeister & Boone, 2004). Although sex differences have not been the focus of 
research, R. Baumeister (personal communication, February 18, 2010) has 
suggested a likely female advantage in self-control as a result of men’s stronger 
impulses, especially in the domains of sex and aggression.   
Measuring effortful control: Behavioral tasks. Effortful control has been 
studied using laboratory tasks (see Table 2 for a summary of tasks included in the 
present analysis). The range of tasks has been wide and the specific processes on 
which they depend underspecified. In some cases, the conceptual link to impulsivity

----- Page 21 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
21 
 
seems tenuous. Post hoc attempts to classify them empirically have not produced 
consistent findings, probably as a result of the different tasks selected for inclusion in 
the analyses (e.g. Kindlon, Mezzacappa, & Earls, 1995; Lane, Cherek, Rhodes, 
Pietras & Tcheremissine, 2003; Meda et al., 2009; Reynolds, Ortengren, Richards & 
de Wit, 2006; Reynolds, Penfold & Patak, 2008).  It is generally agreed that effortful 
control has two important characteristics: it involves the conscious suppression of a 
prepotent or dominant response, and it permits individuals to take a longer time 
perspective with regard to their actions. The distinction between these forms of 
control has been supported in factor analytic studies of behavioral tasks (Lane et al., 
2003; Reynolds et al., 2008; Reynolds, Ortengren et al., 2006) and by neuroimaging 
studies which implicate different neural pathways for the two processes (Band & van 
Boxtel, 1999; McClure, Laibson, Loewenstein, & Cohen, 2004). 
Four tasks have been widely interpreted as assessing the ability to suppress a 
dominant or prepotent response, which we will refer to as executive response 
inhibition (Conners, 2000; Kindlon et al., 1995; Lane et al., 2003; Reynolds et al., 
2008; Reynolds, Richards, & de Wit, 2006; Nigg, 2001). These are the Go/No-Go 
task, the Stop Signal task, the Stroop test, and the Continuous Performance task. 
These tasks may also be sensitive to failure of interference protection and to 
inattention (Dougherty et al., 2009; Reynolds et al., 2008).  
A second quality of effortful control is the ability to select actions by taking into 
account their long-term rather than immediate consequences. Individual differences 
in time horizons have been assessed chiefly by behavioral tasks where a choice 
must be made between a larger long-term and a smaller short-term reward (Lane et 
al., 2003; Reynolds et al., 2008).  The most popular measures are the Delay 
Discounting Task and its variants. More impulsive individuals are believed to show a

----- Page 22 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
22 
 
steeper rate of discounting. The Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) has also been 
interpreted as assessing time perspectives with regard to reward (Bechara, 
Damasio, Tranel & Damasio, 1997). More impulsive individuals persist in their 
attraction to short-term higher rewards despite the long-term loss to which this 
strategy leads. The Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) assesses a participant’s 
willingness to risk loss in the service of winning a higher monetary reward (Lejuez et 
al., 2002) and has been found to load on a common factor with delay discounting 
(Reynolds, Ortengren, et al., 2006; but see Meda et al., 2009). These three tasks are 
distinguished from lower-level ‘automatic’ responses to reward or punishment on the 
basis that the tasks require a conscious and deliberate decision.  
Other tasks used to assess impulsivity do not clearly align themselves with 
the distinction between behavioral disinhibition and time horizons. We refer to these 
as visual-cognitive tasks because they are united by their use of visual attention 
paradigms to explore various aspects of executive function including planning, set 
formation and switching, and motor control. Most infer impulsivity from the number of 
errors made on the task, based the assumption that impulsive individuals tend to 
trade speed for accuracy, although this proposal has been controversial (Block, 
Block & Harrington, 1974; Dickman & Meyer, 1988; Malle & Neubauer, 1991; 
Quiroga et al., 2007; Wilding, Pankhania & Williams, 2007).  
Measuring effortful control: Psychometric measures. The two cardinal aspects 
of impulsivity, failure to inhibit a prepotent response (e.g. “I say things without 
thinking”) and short time horizons (e.g. “I plan trips well ahead of time”) also appear 
as items in psychometric inventories. However, the two components are not always 
distinguished as separate scales. The two most commonly used inventories of 
general impulsivity are the Eysenck’s Impulsiveness questionnaires (I5, I6, I7 and

----- Page 23 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
23 
 
the EPI) and the total score from the Barratt Impulsiveness scale.  We also consider 
the Impulsivity scale of the Karolinska Scales of Personality as a general measure of 
impulsivity.    
In addition to these global measures, there is an arsenal of measures for 
assessing subtypes of impulsivity. Many of these have been derived from factor 
analyses of novel or extant items and scales. Because the factor solution depends 
on the selection of scales included, there is little consensus on the fundamental 
dimensions of impulsivity. We now briefly describe some of the major conceptual 
distinctions which we include as measures of specific impulsivity.  
The Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (most recent version BIS-11, see Patton et 
al., 1995; Stanford et al., 2009) distinguishes between; Attentional/Cognitive 
Impulsiveness (easily distracted and has difficulty in controlling thoughts); Motor 
Impulsiveness (acts without thinking and lacks perseverance); and Non-planning 
Impulsiveness (fails to make plans and is bored by cognitive complexity). The latter 
two scales correspond broadly to response disinhibition and short time horizon. A 
recent psychometric evaluation indicated no sex differences on any of the scales 
(Stanford et al., 2009).  
 
Whiteside and Lynam (2001) included many existing impulsivity scales (as 
well as the Big Five personality traits) in a factor analysis from which they derived 
their four UPPS measures. Lack of Premeditation (a failure to delay action in order to 
think or plan) incorporates the components of response disinhibition and time 
horizons. Lack of Perseverance captures poor self-discipline resulting in an inability 
to resist boredom and remain with a task until completion.  Urgency is the tendency 
to act rashly when experiencing strong negative affect. (Their fourth subscale, 
Sensation Seeking, is considered separately under sensation seeking measures.)

----- Page 24 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
24 
 
Dickman’s (1990) Dysfunctional Impulsivity scale reflects failure of 
deliberation and response inhibition, and we consider it as a subtype of impulsivity. 
We treat the Functional Impulsivity scale as a measure of sensation seeking, as 
discussed earlier. 
Other measures of impulsivity are factors or scales taken from global 
personality inventories. Tellegen’s (1982) Multidimensional Personality 
Questionnaire (MPQ) contains a facet scale of Control vs. Impulsiveness. We 
include this facet in preference to the higher-order factor of Constraint which 
aggregates Control vs. Impulsiveness with Harm Avoidance and Traditionalism. We 
also include the Impulsivity/Carelessness scale from the Social Problem Solving 
Inventory (D'Zurilla, Nezu & Maydeu-Olivares, 1996).  
In the NEO-PI-R, Costa and McCrae (1992) identified three forms of 
impulsivity. They employed the term Impulsiveness narrowly for a facet of 
Neuroticism defined as the ‘inability to control cravings and urges” (suggesting 
commonality with Whiteside and Lynam’s Urgency scale). Women score significantly 
higher with effect sizes of d = -.23 in the US and d = -.11 in other cultures (Costa et 
al. 2001). The authors explicitly note this facet “should not be confused with 
spontaneity, risk taking or rapid decision time”. This latter quality, which corresponds 
more closely with other researchers’ definitions, appears to be measured by 
Deliberation (“the tendency to think carefully before acting”) and perhaps by Self-
Discipline (“the ability to begin tasks and carry them through to completion despite 
boredom and other distractions”). Both of these are facets of Conscientiousness and 
sex differences are non- significant on both scales (Costa et al., 2001).  
Despite these distinctions between subtypes, there is considerable similarity 
between items that belong to different scales and load on different factors. Consider

----- Page 25 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
25 
 
for example two items: ‘I am a steady thinker’ and ‘I am a careful thinker’. Both are 
from the BIS-11 but the first assesses Attentional Impulsiveness and the second 
Motor Impulsiveness. The following three items again seem to have similar 
meanings but come from different scales and inventories : ‘I have trouble controlling 
my impulses’ (UPPS Urgency); ‘I act on impulse’ (BIS Motor Impulsiveness) and ‘I 
often make up my mind without taking the time to consider the situation from all 
angles’ (Dickman Dysfunctional Impulsivity). The various scales include a mixture of 
items reflecting poor inhibition of behavior, over-fast decision-making, restlessness, 
inattention, low anxiety and failure of long-term planning. Many rely on general 
statements such as “I am an impulsive person” where the respondent must 
effectively employ their own understanding of impulsivity to formulate an answer.  
In studies where psychometric and behavioral measures are both employed, 
weak or non-significant correlation between them are typically reported (Crean, de 
Wit & Richards, 2000; Gerbing, Ahadi, & Patton, 1987; Helmers, Young & Pihl, 1995; 
Lane et al., 2003; Malle  & Neubauer, 1991; Milich & Kramer, 1984; Paulsen & 
Johnson, 1980; Mitchell, 1999; Reynolds et al., 2008; Reynolds, Ortengren, et al., 
2006; Reynolds, Richards, et al., 2006; White et al. 1994). Those significant 
correlations that do emerge do not appear to be differentially identified with 
behavioral and trait measures where congruence might be expected (Kirby, Petry & 
Bickel, 1999; Mobini, Grant, Kass & Yeomans, 2007; Swann, Bjork, Moeller & 
Dougherty, 2002).  
Overview of the study. 
As the preceding discussion indicates, there is a wide range of measures 
designed to assess impulsivity based on disparate theoretical approaches and 
operationalisations. A researcher wishing to use impulsivity as an explanatory

----- Page 26 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
26 
 
variable might use any one of these, depending on his or her definition of impulsivity 
and reason for wanting to measure it. Part of the aim of the present analysis was to 
demonstrate the variety of ways that psychologists measure impulsivity and to 
examine the extent to which significant sex differences depend upon the choice of 
measure and conceptual approach. We therefore begin our analysis by computing 
effect sizes separately for each measure of impulsivity.  Following this, we group the 
measures into domains based on differences in the conceptualisation and 
measurement of impulsivity.  
Six domains of impulsivity measurement.   
We group the measures into the following six domains (See Table 1 for an 
overview): (1) Reward Sensitivity, (2) Punishment Sensitivity, (3) Sensation Seeking 
and Risk Taking, (4) General Impulsivity (5) Specific Forms of Impulsivity, and (6) 
Behavioral Measures of impulsivity. What follows is a brief outline of each domain. 
Reward and Punishment Sensitivity are included as two distinct domains to 
address the suggestion that impulsivity might be explained by oversensitivity to 
reward or by deficiencies in sensitivity to punishment. Sensation Seeking and Risk 
Taking measures are distinguishable from impulsivity measures by their greater 
emphasis on risk, sensation and danger than on the impulsiveness of the action. 
Such inventories clearly identify themselves as concerned with sensation seeking or 
subtypes thereof.  
General Impulsivity includes inventories which pose questions at a general 
level (e.g. “I am an impulsive person”) rather than specifying contexts or 
distinguishing psychological functions. Impulsivity is generally assessed here as a 
global construct as opposed to subtypes (e.g. motor impulsiveness). Studies 
reporting total scores derived from summing or averaging specific subscales are

----- Page 27 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
27 
 
analyzed here. Specific Forms of impulsivity assess impulsivity in specific 
psychological processes or contexts. Specific measures stem from factor analytic 
studies indicating that impulsivity is multidimensional. (Note that UPPS Sensation 
Seeking and Dickman Functional Impulsivity are included in the Sensation Seeking 
category rather than Specific Forms.)  Behavioral Measures are included as a 
separate domain to maintain the distinction between psychometric self-report 
measures and behavioral tasks. This domain includes: Executive Response 
Inhibition tasks (e.g. the Stop Task); Visual-cognitive tasks (e.g. the Matching 
Familiar Figures Test); The Iowa Gambling Task; Delay Discounting; and the Balloon 
Analogue Risk Task. (For a description of these tasks, see Table 2.) 
Hypothesised sex differences 
Men are expected to score higher on Sensation Seeking and Risk Taking 
measures. At an evolutionary level, this expectation derives from men’s lower 
parental investment and the consequent reproductive benefits associated with risk 
taking in the service of mate competition and hunting. This male advantage, to the 
extent that it derives from an evolved module, is likely to occur at a motivational level 
and to be resistant to conscious or strategic control (MacDonald, 2008). Most 
theorists attribute men’s greater sensation seeking to a strong appetitive motivation 
and thus predict that men should demonstrate higher BAS or sensitivity to reward 
than women. We therefore predict a male advantage on measures of Reward 
Sensitivity. However, Campbell argues from an evolutionary perspective that 
women’s aversion to sensation seeking results from their lower threshold for 
experiencing fear. Similarly Cloninger, from a proximal genetic and neurochemical 
basis, argues for greater Harm Avoidance by women. Women’s higher levels of 
anxiety and depression suggest a greater sensitivity to threatening stimuli. We

----- Page 28 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
28 
 
expect this to be reflected in higher BIS and sensitivity to punishment scores among 
women. We therefore predict a female advantage on measures of Punishment 
Sensitivity 
Effortful control is represented in three of our measurement domains: General 
Impulsivity, Specific Forms of impulsivity, and Behavioral Measures of impulsivity.  
Developmental studies have shown a large effect size favoring girls for effortful 
control (Else-Quest et al., 2006) and, in their narrative review, Bjorklund and Kipp 
(1996) claimed a female advantage in social and behavioral tasks in line with their 
evolutionary hypothesis. Several researchers have proposed that the greater 
strength of male drives makes them harder to hold in check (MacDonald, 2008; 
Zuckerman, 1994). All of this suggests that effortful control will be stronger in women 
than in men. 
When we consider effortful control conceptualizations of impulsivity, however, 
sex differences are likely to depend on the inventory or task used (Costa et al., 2001; 
Feingold, 1994; McCrae et al., 2005). Different Behavioral Measures appear to 
assess very different components of impulsivity ranging from errors in spatial 
navigation to a tendency to favor immediate over delayed reward. Psychometrically 
measured Specific Forms of impulsivity also cover a broad range of behaviors from 
an inability to resist food when depressed to a tendency not to plan tasks carefully. 
Furthermore, the general wording of some General Impulsivity measures (e.g. “I act 
on impulse”) may result in men and women tending spontaneously to think of 
different sex-typical contexts. This would diminish the power to detect consistent sex 
differences. Therefore, while we tentatively predict that women will demonstrate 
greater effortful control than men, we expect considerable inconsistency in the

----- Page 29 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
29 
 
domains of Behavioral Measures and Specific Forms of Impulsivity and only a 
modest effect of sex on General Measures. 
Variance ratios 
In addition to examining sex differences in central tendency, we also compute 
male:female variance ratios for different measures of impulsivity. A male-biased 
variance ratio has been found for a number of physical and psychological traits 
(Hedges & Nowell, 1995; Lehre, Lehre, Laake & Danbolt, 2009). From an 
evolutionary perspective, Archer and Mehdikhani (2003) proposed that men are freer 
than women to vary in their levels of parental investment, giving rise to greater male 
variability on sexually selected traits. Their analysis bore this out for measures of 
physical aggression and mate choice. The present data afford the opportunity to 
extend this proposal of greater male variance, as well as a higher male mean, to 
impulsivity –– a trait that has also been argued to be sexually selected (Daly & 
Wilson, 1988).    
Method 
Sample of studies 
The initial search was conducted using the database PsycINFO which has a 
broad coverage of psychology and social science journals as well as unpublished 
dissertations. Search terms included the key words ‘impulsivity’ and ‘impulsiveness’ 
but not ‘sex’ or ‘gender’ in order to prevent selection bias. Specific inventories were 
not searched for because the aim was to identify the range of measures used for 
assessing impulsivity. This was especially important due to historic variations in the 
conceptualization and operationalizaton of this concept. The following search limits 
were imposed: (1) Human populations only, (2) English language only, (3) Male and

----- Page 30 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
30 
 
female populations, (4) Age groups above the age of 10, and (5) Articles published 
between 1980 and 2008. The search yielded 3,156 abstracts.  
Abstracts were screened and any articles failing to meet the following criteria 
were removed: (1) The study was empirical. (2) The sample included a minimum of 
10 males and 10 females. (3) Data from normative samples were reported (defined 
as samples with no specified a priori selection factors regarding traits or behaviors). 
For example, samples of alcoholics or children of alcoholics were excluded whilst 
studies of the drinking habits of normative student populations were included. Where 
clinical studies were examined, data were only recorded from normative control 
groups. (4) Self-reported, psychometric and/or behavioral measures were used. (5) 
Impulsivity was measured as an independent construct. For instance, some common 
ADHD checklists amalgamate hyperactivity and impulsivity into a single dimension 
and report a single combined measure. Such scales were excluded. (6) Data were 
presented or potentially available from which a sex difference could be calculated.  
Where abstracts did not provide sufficient information to establish whether they met 
the inclusion criteria, they were included in the next stage of the selection process. 
One thousand and sixty five articles were downloaded or requested through 
interlibrary loan and 70 unpublished dissertations were downloaded via the ProQuest 
database. If an article met the inclusion criteria but lacked sufficient data for an effect 
size to be computed, authors were contacted by email if the article had been 
published within the last 5 years. Two hundred and three such requests were made 
with 75 usable responses. In twelve cases, authors provided additional data from 
studies not identified in the initial search.  
Two hundred and forty four articles and 33 unpublished studies were included 
in the meta-analysis, giving a total of 277 studies with 310 samples. From these, 741

----- Page 31 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
31 
 
d values were calculated (See Appendix 1 in conjunction with the references for a 
listing of all studies included in the analysis). 
Coding the studies. 
For each study, the following information was coded: (1) All statistics relevant 
to the magnitude of the sex difference (means, standard deviations, correlations, t 
and F tests), (2) The number of male and female participants, (3) The measure(s) of 
impulsivity employed in the study, (4) The population studied (university, community, 
schools or colleges), (5) The age of the sample (mean, standard deviation, or range), 
(6) The nationality of the sample, (7) The publication status of the study, and (8) The 
sex of the first author. The coding of categorical variables was undertaken by two 
coders. Cohen’s kappa was calculated as a measure of interrater agreement and 
ranged from .83 (age) to 1.00 (publication status). Discrepancies were checked and 
resolved by agreement between the two coders.  Across all measures, 741 effect 
sizes were analyzed with a total sample size of 149,496 participants from 27 different 
countries (see Table 3).  
Grouping by category and domain.  
Effect sizes were grouped into forty measurement categories (see Table 1). 
Of these, thirty five represented established measures. Some studies, however, 
used measures created specifically for their study, unpublished measures, or 
measures that did not appear more than twice in the whole sample of studies. These 
were placed into one of five general categories: General Impulsivity Other Measures, 
Sensation Seeking Other Measures, Risk Taking, Impulse Control, and Visual-
Cognitive tasks.     
Measures were also grouped into six domains of impulsivity, as outlined in the 
Introduction (see Table 1). Given the lack of consensus about the dimensionality and

----- Page 32 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
32 
 
conceptualization of impulsivity, some researchers may disagree with these 
groupings. Results are therefore presented to allow examination on both a category-
by-category basis and by domain. 
Statistical Analysis 
Statistical Independence. The requirement of independence of observations 
means that the same sample could not be included multiple times when computing 
an aggregate effect size. Many studies used multiple measures of impulsivity. 
Aggregating studies by measure does not violate this requirement of independence. 
However in the domain-level analysis, where multiple measures from a sample were 
grouped in the same domain, the mean of the d values for the measures were 
included. Effect sizes and variance ratios were calculated for all categories and 
domains.  
Mean difference effect sizes. Formulae for calculating effect sizes were taken 
from Lipsey & Wilson (2001). For reported measures, Cohen's d was calculated (by 
dividing the difference between male and female means by an estimate of the pooled 
standard deviation). 
 
   Four effect sizes were reported by the authors. Where d values were not 
reported, d was calculated either by converting existing parametric statistics such as 
F (15 effect sizes), t (12 effect sizes), or r values (72 effect sizes), or directly from 
published or provided means and standard deviations (559 effect sizes). Seventy-
nine values were estimated as 0 where non-significant gender differences were 
reported but no relevant statistics could be located. In the Results section, summary 
effect sizes including and excluding these conservatively estimated d values are

----- Page 33 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
33 
 
reported. Following convention, female means were subtracted from male means so 
that positive d values represent higher male than female scores. 
Outliers, heterogeneity and moderator analysis. Outliers were identified on a 
category-by-category basis as follows. Cases where the effect size was estimated as 
0 due to insufficient data were removed.  Z-scores were calculated for the remaining 
d values. Values of d with z scores outside the range of -2.5 and 2.5 were classified 
as outliers and subsequently removed from analysis. Results are reported both 
including and omitting outliers.    
The heterogeneity statistic, Q, was calculated for each analysis. Q statistics 
test for equality of effect sizes within each analysis, and follow a chi square 
distribution with k -1 degrees of freedom (Hedges & Olkin, 1985). A simplified 
formula is as follows: 
 
Where 
   , 
 , and  is the number of effect sizes. 
 
Significant Q statistics are indicative of the presence of a non-heterogeneous 
dispersion between effect sizes, but not its magnitude. Q can be sensitive to sample 
size (Higgins & Thompson, 2002; Hardy & Thompson, 1998), and its significance is 
expected when analyzing considerable numbers of studies (Higgins, 2008). 
Heterogeneity is incorporated into estimates of effect size via random effects 
models. 
Random Effects Model. Random effects models make the assumption that the 
variation between studies is attributable not only to sampling differences between 
studies, but other, unspecified influences within studies. It assumes effect size

----- Page 34 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
34 
 
parameters to be randomly sampled and estimates these parameters based on the 
population (but see Schulze, 2004). The random effects model is particularly 
appropriate when effect sizes are significantly heterogeneous. The conceptual 
background of this study suggested that heterogeneity within the various measures 
and domains was likely and so a random effects model was implemented a priori.   
Moderator analyses were performed for each measure, the purpose being to 
explore study variables potentially accounting for variability in effect sizes. Significant 
Q statistics were not considered prerequisites for running a moderator analysis (see 
Rosenthal & DiMatteo, 2002). The moderator variables tested were as follows: age 
(grouped by mean age into five levels: 10-15 years, 15-18 years, 18-21 years, 21-30 
years, 30-40 years, 40 years and over); population (grouped into three categories: 
university students, community samples, school samples); geographical area 
(grouped into three categories: USA, Canada & Central America; UK, Europe, 
Australia & New Zealand; Asia, Africa, & the Middle East); sex of first author; and 
publication status of the study. The test statistic for the moderator analysis is QB, 
which is analogous to the F statistic in ANOVA (Hedges & Pigott, 2004). A significant 
QB denotes that the effect sizes for the different subgroups in the analysis differ 
significantly.  
Publication bias. In many of the studies retrieved for this meta-analysis, sex 
was not a variable of interest. This makes publication bias less likely. Nevertheless, 
the possibility of publication bias was explored where possible. Two methods were 
employed. First, a moderator analyses was run to determine if effect sizes for 
published studies significantly differed from unpublished studies. Second, following 
Begg and Mazumdar (1994), the rank correlation between standard error (largely a 
function of sample size) and effect size for studies within domains was calculated.

----- Page 35 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
35 
 
This is a statistical analogue of a funnel plot. The assessment of publication bias by 
any means is unreliable where the number of studies is small (Borenstein, Hedges, 
Higgins, & Rothstein, 2009), therefore this test was implemented only for categories 
with at least 20 studies. The results of tests for publication bias are presented in 
Table 11. 
Variance Ratios. These were calculated wherever sufficient data were 
available, resulting in 475 values. Ratios were computed by dividing the male 
variance by the female variance. Greater male than female variability is therefore 
reflected in values greater than one. Following previous authors (Else-Quest et al., 
2006), ratios were transformed via base-10 log before calculating category means. 
Untransformed ratios are presented in Tables 4-8.  
Statistical Software. d values and Q statistics were calculated using SPSS; 
while the random effects models, moderator analyses, and tests for publication bias 
were run using CMA Version 2 (Biostat Inc., 2008). 
Results 
Tables 4 to 7 report effect sizes by measure and associated statistics, as well 
as the overall effect size for the impulsivity domains to which they have been 
assigned: Reward Sensitivity, Punishment Sensitivity Sensation Seeking and Risk 
Taking, and General Impulsivity. We do not aggregate the results from Specific 
Forms of Impulsivity and Behavioral Measures of Impulsivity because, in these 
domains, aggregation would violate the distinctiveness of the measures. Results 
from these domains are presented in Tables 8 and 9, respectively. For a complete 
list of effect sizes and variance ratios for all studies, see the Appendix. This 
Appendix also identifies the authors of the study, the N of males and females,

----- Page 36 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
36 
 
moderator variables coded (age, population, geographical area, sex of first author, 
published or unpublished source) and the impulsivity measures used.  
Table 10 shows the significant moderator variables for each measure. All 
moderators significant at p<.05 are reported in these tables but, because of the large 
number of analyses run and the consequent inflated likelihood of Type 1 errors, only 
those that were significant at p < .01 are discussed in the text. We also restrict our 
discussion of significant variance ratios to those where p < .01. 
Reward sensitivity 
Overall effect sizes. For the domain general analysis, there were 18 effect 
sizes, all but one of which were computed (Table 4). The overall effect size was 
negligible and non-significant (d = .01). However, there was marked variation in the 
direction and magnitude of effect sizes for specific measures.  
The effect size for the BAS Total score was non-significant but slightly favored 
women (d = -.13). This was chiefly due to women’s significantly higher scores on the 
BAS Reward subscale (d = -.27). The BAS Reward scale poses questions about 
emotional responsiveness (e.g. ‘When good things happen to me, it affects me 
strongly’). Women outscored men even more strongly on the TCI scale of Reward 
Dependence (d = -.56). This scale, despite its name, is composed of subscales 
specifically assessing “sentimentality, social sensitivity, attachment and dependence 
on approval by others” (Center for Wellbeing, n.d.). These are areas where past 
research suggests women should score highly (Cross & Madsen 1997). 
The female advantage on these scales stands in contrast to the sex difference 
favoring men on the SPSRQ and GRAPES Reward scales (d = .44). These latter two 
scales contain many items that oriented to competitive success and ambition (e.g. 
SPSRQ: “Are you interested in money to the point of being able to do risky jobs?”;

----- Page 37 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
37 
 
GRAPES: “I expect that I will rise to the top of any field of work I am or will be 
engaging in”). Thus there appeared to be differences in the conceptualization and 
contextualization of reward that are potentially confounded with masculinity and 
femininity.   
The remaining two BAS scales (Drive, d = .06 and Fun, d = .08) were non-
significant. Again, this might be related to the way in which the constructs are 
operationalized. While the Drive scale appears to have an appetitive component 
reflecting ambition, it differs from the SPSRQ in that it does not refer specifically to 
money or status. Instead, the item wording is again very general (e.g. “I go out of my 
way to get things I want”). The Fun scale contains items that appear to tap 
impulsivity (e.g. ‘I often act on the spur of the moment’). It is therefore perhaps 
unsurprising that the modest effect sizes on these two scales were very much in line 
with that found for the domain of General Impulsivity (see General Impulsivity). 
Moderator analysis. Only the BAS Total and the BAS Reward scale showed 
significant heterogeneity. Moderator analyses were performed on all measures (see 
Table 10). Only one was significant at p < .01: Age moderated the sex difference in 
BAS Reward, with the sex difference being smaller for samples aged 18-21 years (d 
= -.16) than for the 21-30 age group (d = -.54).  
Variance ratios. Mean anti-log variance ratios can be found in Table 4. None 
are significantly different from 1. 
Punishment sensitivity 
Overall effect sizes. For the domain general analysis, there were 18 
independent effect sizes, all but one of which were computed (Table 5). There was a 
significant, small-to-moderate, effect size favoring women (d = -.33) although, once 
again, there was variation in the magnitude as a function of the measure used.

----- Page 38 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
38 
 
All three measures showed a difference in favor of women, two of which were 
significant. TCI Harm Avoidance (d = -.43) assesses feelings of anxiety in 
unpredictable situations (e.g. “Usually I am more worried than most people that 
something might go wrong in the future”). The gist of the item content is very similar 
to that of the BIS, on which there was a moderate to large sex difference (d = -.63). 
BIS items are also concerned with anxiety in the face of failure (e.g. ‘I feel worried 
when I think I have done poorly at something important’, ‘If I think something 
unpleasant is going to happen I usually get pretty "worked up”’.) Both TCI Harm 
Avoidance and the BIS therefore assess emotional responses to actual or 
anticipated punishment. 
The aggregated effect size for SPSRQ and GRAPES measures was again in 
the female direction but only approached significance (d = -.12). Many of the 
GRAPES items appear to tap pessimism and anticipatory worry in a similar way to 
the above scales (e.g. “When there is a disease going around, I worry about getting 
it”, “In light of all the crime in the world. I expect to be the victim of a mugging or an 
assault at some point during my life.”). However the SPSRQ items seem to capture 
social assertiveness versus shyness (e.g. (“Would you be bothered if you had to 
return to a store when you noticed you were given the wrong change?”, ‘Do you 
generally avoid speaking in public?’) The content therefore appears to be more 
associated with extraversion-introversion, on which we would not expect a marked 
sex difference (Costa et al., 2001; Schmitt, Realo, Voracek, & Allik, 2008).  
Moderator analysis.  Only the effect sizes for punishment sensitivity as 
measured by the SPSRQ or GRAPES scales showed significant heterogeneity. 
Moderator analyses were performed on all categories. Age moderated the sex

----- Page 39 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
39 
 
difference on the BAS Reward Scale, such that the sex difference was more 
pronounced in the 21-30 age group (d = -.54) than the 18-21 age group (d = -.16). 
Variance ratios. Mean anti-log variance ratios can be found in Table 5. None 
are significantly different from 1. 
Sensation seeking and risk taking  
Overall effect sizes. Table 6 reports effect sizes for the aggregated domain of 
sensation seeking and risk taking and the 13 measures which it subsumes. For the 
domain general analysis, there were 130 independent effect sizes, of which five were 
estimated as zero. d values for MPQ Harm Avoidance were reverse scored before 
being combined with the other measures in this domain. The overall effect size was 
small to moderate in size with significantly higher sensation seeking and risk taking 
among men (d = .41).  
Turning to the measures subsumed in this domain, ten of the thirteen 
measures had significant sex differences and all reflected greater sensation seeking 
by men. The largest effect size was for MPQ and Personality Research Form (PRF; 
Jackson, 1994) measures of Harm Avoidance (d = -.78). The MPQ Harm Avoidance 
questionnaire offers respondents a choice between two somewhat aversive activities 
from which they select the one that they would least like to undertake (e.g. ‘Having to 
walk around all day on a blistered foot’ or ‘Sleeping out on a camping trip in an area 
where there are rattlesnakes’). High scorers prefer safer activities even if they are 
tedious and do not enjoy the excitement of adventure (Tellegen, 1982). This scale 
appeared to magnify the sex differences found on the similarly structured SSS Thrill 
& Adventure which differs in offering a positive choice between two alternatives (e.g. 
‘I would like to try surfboard riding’ or ‘I would not like to try surfboard riding’).

----- Page 40 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
40 
 
Four of the measures showed moderate sex differences including I7 
Venturesomeness (d = .51); SSS Total (d = .50); SSS Disinhibition (d = .57); SSS 
Thrill & Adventure Seeking (d = .41); and UPPS Sensation Seeking (d = .49). Slightly 
lower effect sizes were found for Risk Taking (d = .38); Dickman Functional 
Impulsivity (d = .24); and Sensation Seeking Other Measures (d = .22). The ZKPQ 
ImpSS scale includes items separately assessing impulsivity and sensation seeking 
and the effect size of .19 was non-significant with high heterogeneity (based on 4 
studies). The two scales measuring intolerance of monotony showed quite small 
effect sizes; SSS Boredom Susceptibility (d = .20) and KSP Monotony Avoidance (d 
= .15). SSS Experience Seeking, which captures a desire for novel but safe 
activities, showed a non-significant effect size of .01. This provides more evidence 
that it is reference to risk taking which produces sex differences. 
Moderator analysis. For most of the measures within the domain of sensation 
seeking and risk taking, there was significant heterogeneity. The exceptions were: 
SSS Total, Risk Taking, KSP Monotony Avoidance and MPQ/PRF Harm Avoidance. 
Moderator analyses were performed for all measures (see Table 10).  
The sex difference on Eysenck’s I7 Venturesomeness scale appears to be 
moderated by age. With the exception of a small number of samples aged 30-40 
(d = .84), the largest effect sizes are present in the 15-18 (d = .63) and the 18-21 (d 
= .54) age groups, with effect sizes in the other age groups ranging from .37 to .46. 
This suggests that, in general, the sex difference in Venturesomeness is largest in 
young adults. No other moderators were significant in this domain. 
Variance ratios. Mean anti-log variance ratios can be found in Table 6. Only 
the variance ratio for SSS Disinhibition is significantly larger than 1 (p < .01),

----- Page 41 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
41 
 
indicating greater male variability on this measure. There is little evidence for greater 
male then female variability in general within this domain. 
Measures of general impulsivity 
Overall effect sizes. Although the domain general effect size (from 206 
independent effect sizes, 180 of which were computed) was significant, it was 
extremely small in magnitude (d = .08), indicating slightly higher levels of impulsivity 
in men.  
 Table 7 shows the mean weighted effect sizes for each of the four measures 
included in this domain. There was no significant sex difference on Eysenck-based 
measures of impulsiveness. The Karolinska Scales of Personality (KSP) impulsivity 
scale was also non-significant. While the sex differences on the BIS-11 Total, (d = 
.12), and on Impulsivity Other Measures, (d = .13), showed men to be significantly 
more impulsive, the effect sizes were again small in magnitude. 
Moderator analysis. For all measures within the domain of general impulsivity 
except the KSP Impulsivity measure, there was significant heterogeneity. Moderator 
analyses were performed on all measures (see Table 10). Population moderated the 
sex difference in KSP impulsivity. The two community samples showed a small but 
significant sex difference in the female direction (d = -.18), while there was no sex 
difference in University samples. 
Variance ratios. Mean anti-log variance ratios can be found in Table 7. None 
of them are significantly different from one at p < .01.  
Specific forms of impulsivity 
Overall effect sizes. Nine measures of specific forms of impulsivity were 
analyzed, with a total of 128 independent effect sizes (111 of which were computed) 
from 56 studies. Table 8 shows the mean weighted effect sizes for these measures.

----- Page 42 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
42 
 
For most of the measures, there was no sex difference. There were significant but 
small sex differences in the male direction on: BIS-11 Cognitive Impulsivity (d = .13), 
indicating men’s greater difficulty in concentrating and focusing attention; on BIS-11 
Non-Planning (d = .15), suggesting men’s lesser tendency to consider the future; and 
on Dickman’s Dysfunctional Impulsivity (d = .12), which captures a failure of 
premeditation resulting in negative consequences. There was a small to moderate 
effect size on Impulsivity / Carelessness in the Social Problem Solving Inventory 
(SPSI, d = .32), indicating that men are more likely than women to rush into ill-
considered ‘solutions’ to interpersonal problems. There was also a small but 
significant sex difference in the female direction on UPPS Urgency (d = -.10), 
indicating that women are more likely to report that their impulse control is disrupted 
by negative affect, or that they feel regret for their impulsive actions. The overall 
picture is that there are weak, inconsistent sex differences in these specific forms of 
impulsivity. 
Moderator analysis.  For most of the specific measures of impulsivity, there 
was significant heterogeneity in the effect sizes. The exceptions were: UPPS 
Premeditation, UPPS Urgency, Dickman Dysfunctional Impulsivity, and the SPSI. 
Moderator analyses were performed for all measures. Table 10 presents those 
categorical variables that were found to have a significant moderating effect on the 
sex difference.  
The sex difference in BIS Non-Planning was moderated by geographical area, 
with samples from the US, Canada, and Central America showing a moderate sex 
difference in the male direction (d =.30), and samples from the UK, Europe, 
Australia, and New Zealand showing no sex difference. The sex difference in UPPS 
Lack of Perseverance was moderated by age: the sex difference in the male

----- Page 43 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
43 
 
direction appears only in samples aged over 21 (d = .38). In UPPS Urgency, age 
also moderated the magnitude of the sex difference in an inconsistent fashion. Here, 
an effect size in favor of women was confined to the age 15-18 age group (d = -.31). 
The significant moderation by population sampled may be an artifact of this age 
effect; the effect size was significant and in the female direction for the school 
samples, (d = -.26), but not for undergraduate samples.   
The sex difference in Impulse Control also appears to be moderated by age, 
but in an inconsistent fashion. The two samples aged 15-18 show roughly equal sex 
differences in opposite directions, resulting in an overall null result, samples aged 
18-21 show a sex difference in the male direction (d = .40), while samples aged over 
21 show a small sex difference in the female direction (d= -.17). Geographical area 
also appears to moderate the sex difference in impulse control:  the two samples 
from the UK, Europe, Australia and New Zealand show a substantial sex difference 
in the female direction (d = - .55),  while those from the US, Canada, and Central 
America show a small sex difference in the male direction (d = .17).  
Variance ratios. Mean anti-log variance ratios can be found in Table 8. None 
were significantly different from 1.  
Behavioral measures of impulsivity 
Overall effect sizes. The 48 studies in this domain produced 64 independent 
effect sizes, of which 43 were computed. Effect sizes are presented in Table 9. A 
significant sex difference, moderate in size and in the male direction, was found on 
the BART (d = .36). This suggests that men are willing to continue the pursuit of a 
reward in the face of increasing risk for longer than women. Since the BART is a 
measure of risk taking, it is not surprising that the significant sex difference is

----- Page 44 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
44 
 
consistent with those found in the general domain of sensation seeking and risk 
taking. 
On the IGT, men were found to perform significantly better (i.e. less 
impulsively) than women (d = -.34). This, in contradiction to developmental and 
evolutionary predictions relating to effortful control, suggests that women are less 
able than men to resist a monetary reward in the short term in order to avoid a 
greater monetary loss later. However, it should be noted that the IGT was not 
designed to assess impulsivity but decision making. Bechara, Damasio, Damasio, 
and Anderson (1994: 8) noted that a patient who performed poorly on the IGT due to 
damage to the prefrontal cortex was “not perseverative, nor is he impulsive”. Men’s 
superior performance on this task may actually be the consequence of women’s 
greater punishment sensitivity: there is evidence that women prefer an IGT strategy 
which minimizes the frequency of punishment, even though this may be 
disadvantageous in the long run (Goudriaan, Grekin, Sher, 2007). This raises 
questions about the validity of attributing poor performance on this task uniquely to 
impulsivity. Delay discounting, also used as a measure of the propensity to resist 
small short-term rewards as part of a long-term strategy, showed no sex difference. 
Although this is consistent with our finding that general measures of impulsivity did 
not differ between the sexes, it should be noted that delay discounting measures 
only one of the many facets thought to be subsumed by the construct of impulsivity 
(Smith & Hantula, 2008). Correlations between delay discounting and psychometric 
measures of impulsivity are typically weak (Reynolds et al., 2006; Smith & Hantula, 
2008) 
Where impulsivity is inferred from errors on visual-cognitive tasks, a sex 
difference in the female direction is found (d = -.26). The use of visuospatial tasks to

----- Page 45 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
45 
 
infer impulsivity also raises problems of validity. These measures were not 
developed as measures of impulsivity but as tests of, among other things: spatial 
ability (the SODT-R; Quiroga et al, 2007); intelligence (The Porteus Maze; Porteus, 
1950; The Tower of London Test; Shallice, 1982); and visual attention (the Trail 
Making Test; Reitan, 1958). Although the MFFT was developed to measure a form of 
impulsivity, concerns about its construct validity have been raised before (Block et al, 
1974). Attributing errors on visuospatial tasks to impulsivity may be particularly 
misleading where sex differences are of interest: the sex difference in visuospatial 
ability is one of the most robust in the literature (Voyer, Voyer, & Bryden, 1995), so a 
sex difference on these tasks might well be due to this difference in ability rather 
than impulsivity. 
Consistent with Bjorklund and Kipp’s (1996) review, no sex differences were 
found where impulsivity assessment was based on Executive Response Inhibition 
Tasks. As outlined in previous sections, these included Stroop tasks, the Stop task, 
and the Go/no-go task. These tasks are not direct measures of impulsivity but of 
attention (MacLeod, 1991); inhibitory motor control (Band & van Boxtel, 1999); and 
passive avoidance learning (Newman, Widom, & Nathan, 1985), respectively. 
Correlations between these measures and psychometric measures of impulsivity are 
often weak or absent (Casillas, 2006: Enticott et al, 2006; Reynolds, Ortengren, et al, 
2006; Reynolds, Richards, et al, 2006; Rodriguez-Fornells, Lorenzo-Seva, & Andres-
Pueyo, 2002; but see Logan, Schachar, & Tannock, 1997). It has been suggested 
that performance on the Stop task may only be impaired when trait impulsivity is 
exceptionally high (Enticott et al., 2006) so that using it to infer impulsivity in normal 
populations may be problematic.

----- Page 46 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
46 
 
Moderator analysis. Moderator analyses were run for the BART, delay 
discounting, and Executive Response Inhibition (there were too few studies to run 
moderator analyses for the IGT or the visuospatial tasks). The results are presented 
in Table 10. Although small numbers of studies mean that these results must be 
interpreted with caution, both the analysis by age and the analysis by population 
suggest that the sex difference in measures of impulsivity based on Executive 
Response Inhibition is moderated by age. A sex difference in the male direction is 
present in younger samples (age 10-15 years, d = .71; school samples, d = .62), 
while older samples (21-30 years) show no significant sex difference, or a small sex 
difference in the female direction (community samples, d = -.18). This suggests that, 
on these tasks, boys may lag behind girls in their ability to inhibit prepotent 
responses earlier in life, before catching up later on. 
Variance ratios. Mean anti-log variance ratios can be found in Table 9. Men were 
found to vary more widely than women on Stroop-related tasks. No other variance 
ratios were significantly different from 1. 
Publication bias.   
Sex differences were not the object of study in most of the studies retrieved 
for this meta-analysis and the likelihood of publication bias is therefore reduced. 
Moderator analysis using publication status as a moderator variable found no 
evidence that effect sizes differed between published and unpublished studies. 
Furthermore, rank correlations between standard error and effect size were not 
significant (see Table 11). Although in some domains there were insufficient studies 
to test for publiaction bias, the tests that could be conducted revealed no evidence 
for publication bias.

----- Page 47 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
47 
 
Discussion 
We organize our discussion in terms of the theoretical distinction made in the 
Introduction between lower-order (reward and punishment sensitivity) and higher-
order (effortful control) theories of impulsivity.  We then consider sex differences in 
variance ratios. We end with a summary and suggestions for future developments in 
the field.  
Reward and Punishment Sensitivity in relation to Sensation Seeking.  
The aggregate measure of reward sensitivity showed no significant sex 
difference.  However it appears that the various measures within this domain are 
measuring very different constructs.  On the TCI, items refer specifically to social 
sensitivity and attachment, and the effect size favoring women probably reflects the 
greater salience of this domain to women. This is also true of the BAS Reward 
Scale, where much emphasis is placed on the strength of emotional responses to 
positive events. There is evidence that women experience emotions more intensely 
than men and are more willing to articulate them (Brebner, 2003: Vigil, 2009), which 
may account for women’s higher scores. In contrast, the SPSRQ/GRAPES scales 
emphasize strong pursuit of reward, particularly in the form of money or status, and 
here a sex difference favoring men is observed. This sex difference fits well with the 
predictions outlined in the introduction regarding men’s greater approach motivation 
in the pursuit of dominance.   
Where sex differences in reward sensitivity are of theoretical interest, the 
choice of reward sensitivity measure is crucial. It is essential to consider what, if any, 
particular form of reward is most relevant. It must also be made clear whether 
‘sensitivity’ to reward refers to the extent to which reward is liked, or the extent to

----- Page 48 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
48 
 
which reward is pursued. Our data suggest that this subtle difference in 
operationalizing ‘sensitivity’ can lead to sex differences in opposite directions.  
Measures of punishment sensitivity were consistently in the female direction.  
Although the differences between measures were less dramatic than for reward 
sensitivity, we found again that measures with a stronger emphasis on emotion 
produced larger sex differences in the female direction. This suggests that the extent 
to which we observe sex differences in punishment sensitivity depends on the extent 
to which measures refer specifically to fear and anxiety, rather than to general dislike 
or avoidance. As with reward sensitivity, the selection of the appropriate instrument 
to measure punishment sensitivity will depend on the context of the research.  
Explanations of sensation seeking and risk taking have drawn on these lower 
order theories in terms of affective and neurochemical responses to prospective 
reward and punishment. It is in the domain of sensation seeking that sex differences 
were most marked. Sensation seeking is a trait characterized by strong affective 
motivation –– unlike impulsivity, where the presence of affective motivation is 
ambiguous.  We propose that sensation seeking ––and its cousins novelty seeking, 
risk taking, fun seeking, venturesomeness, and reversed harm avoidance –– 
constitute a distinctive trait that should not be subsumed under the general concept 
of impulsivity. At a conceptual level, Zuckerman’s definition of sensation seeking 
makes no reference to acting without deliberation. Zuckerman himself has noted that 
parachute jumpers do not jump from planes on impulse; they plan carefully, checking 
their equipment, drop site, parachute, and timings. As operationalised in most self-
report questionnaires, sensation seeking items do not make reference to the failure 
of deliberation which is the hallmark of impulsive action. Empirically, impulsivity and 
sensation seeking frequently appear as distinct factors in multivariate analyses.

----- Page 49 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
49 
 
Depue and Collins (1999), reviewing 11 factor analytic studies of major personality 
scales, found that sensation seeking, novelty seeking, and risk taking scales showed 
a distinct clustering and were only loosely associated with scales measuring ‘non-
affective’ impulsivity. Several other studies using a range of impulsivity scales have 
also identified a factor of sensation seeking distinct from other aspects of impulsivity 
(Flory, Harvey, Mitropoulou, New, Silverman, Siever et al., 2006; Magid & Colder, 
2007; Miller, Joseph & Tudway, 2004; Smith et al., 2007; Whiteside & Lynam, 2001; 
Zelenski & Larsen, 1999). The fact that sensation seeking loads on a distinct 
dimension argues as much for its statistical and conceptual distinctiveness as it does 
for its status as a facet of impulsivity. In the present analysis, it was noticeable that 
sex differences were considerably weaker on the ZKPQ ImpSS than on the SSS-V. 
When factor analyzed, ImpSS splits into its two constituent factors of impulsivity and 
sensation seeking (Zuckerman and Kuhlman, n.d.). This may account for the dilution 
of the effect size on this measure with weaker sex differences in impulsivity 
counteracting the stronger sex differences in sensation seeking.  
Within the domain of sensation seeking and risk taking, we found some 
encouraging evidence of consistency between psychometric and behavioral 
measures. The BART task was developed as a measure of risk taking (Lejuez, 
Read, Kahler, Richards, Ramsey, Stuart, et al, 2002), and there is good evidence for 
its construct validity (Aklin, Lejuez, Zvolensky, Kahler, & Gwadz, 2005; Hunt, Hopko, 
Bare, Lejuez, & Robinson, 2005). It is not surprising that this task shows a significant 
sex difference in the male direction. Unlike the behavioral tasks which measured a 
failure to inhibit a pre-potent response, the BART measures the active pursuit of 
reward. In a factor analytic study, the BART has been found to be distinct from

----- Page 50 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
50 
 
executive inhibition tasks (Reynolds, Ortengren et al., 2006). This adds to the 
empirical evidence for a distinction between impulsivity and risk taking. 
Evolutionary theories, predicated on differential parental investment, predict 
higher risk taking by males and these are supported by the current review. Greater 
male risk taking is not unique to our species, and such a conserved and sex-specific 
evolutionary adaptation is likely to be instantiated at a relatively low level in terms of 
neural structure. Emotional and motivational factors are sufficient to generate 
individual differences in appetite for and aversion to risk.  Within the evolutionary 
framework, a distinction can be drawn between Campbell’s argument that women 
are more sensitized than men to negative outcomes (punishment sensitivity) and 
Daly and Wilson’s argument that men experience a greater positive attraction to risk 
(reward sensitivity). 
Campbell’s position is supported by our finding that women were consistently 
higher in measures of punishment sensitivity. Women’s risk aversion was evident 
also in their markedly higher scores on MPQ Harm Avoidance. On this measure, in 
which respondents choose the less objectionable of two aversive activities, the effect 
size (d = -.78) is almost twice as big as that found on the SSS Thrill & Adventure 
scale (d = .41), which offers an appetitive choice regarding engagement in risky 
activities. This suggests that women may be even more prone to avoid risky 
activities than men are to seek them out.  
In a meta-analysis of sex differences in risk taking, Byrnes et al. (1999) found 
greater risk taking by men over a range of paradigms but these were most marked in 
studies involving real rather than hypothetical risk.  In reference to the distinction 
between higher-level cognitive and lower-level motivational processes, they note 
“…the processes involved in the transition of cognitions to behaviors (e.g. fear

----- Page 51 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
51 
 
responses) may explain gender differences in risk taking more adequately than the 
cognitive processes involved in the reflective evaluation of options”  (Byrnes et al., 
1999, p.378). They propose that these lower-level motivational factors may play as 
strong a role as cognition in risky decision making. This “risk as feelings” idea was 
developed by Loewenstein et al. (2001), who noted that emotional reactions to risk 
can and frequently do occur without cognitive intervention, and that sex differences 
in fear and anxiety underlie women’s more cautious, risk-averse decisions (Lerner & 
Keltner, 2000). In the areas of health maintenance and extreme sports (Harris, 
Jenkins & Glaser 2006), which present real threats to physical integrity, the sex 
difference in risk taking is best explained by women’s greater anticipation of negative 
consequences and by their higher ratings of the severity of those negative 
consequences should they occur.  
Although Campbell originally predicted women’s greater fear specifically in the 
context of prospective physical injury, many studies have now demonstrated greater 
fear and anxiety in women across a range of contexts (see Campbell, 2006). Women 
exceed men cross-culturally on the Vulnerability (d = -.43) and Anxiety facets (d = -
.36) of the NEO-R (Costa et al., 2001).  Anxiety is strongly linked to a lower threshold 
for detecting and attending to threat, and experimental studies demonstrate this 
threshold to be lower in women than in men (McLean & Anderson, 2009).    
Daly and Wilson’s (1988) complementary thesis emphasizes men’s greater 
attraction to risk. In this view, men engage in more dangerous activities as a result of 
the inherent attractions of the activities (e.g. scuba-diving, parachute jumping). 
Though it is evident why potentially life-threatening activities might promote fear and 
avoidance, it is less clear why some individuals should find them inherently 
attractive. Daly and Wilson argue that men use such activities to advertise their

----- Page 52 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
52 
 
courage as part of intrasexual competition, thus gaining greater reproductive 
success; this masculine taste-for-risk therefore represents an evolved module.  
Consistent with this is Zuckerman’s argument that the physiological arousal resulting 
from such activities signals reward in the brain. Although measures of reward 
sensitivity do not provide unanimous support for this appetitive view, we note that 
men’s scores do exceed women’s where questionnaire items focus on competitive 
dominance striving.   
The attraction of risky activities to men, however, need not depend upon 
heightened male sensitivity to reward but can be explained in terms of their lower 
punishment sensitivity as follows (Campbell, 2002).  Typically an inverted U-shaped 
function describes the relationship between the arousal (low - high) generated by an 
activity and its subjective hedonic valence to the actor (pleasant - unpleasant). If 
men have a higher fear threshold, their function will be right-displaced relative to 
women’s.  Hence a higher degree of arousal will be necessary to generate the same 
degree of pleasure.  Men will show a shift from enjoyment to excitement (and from 
apprehension to fear) at higher levels of arousal compared to women. Hence a high-
speed car ride that is unpleasant (aversive) to women could be exciting (attractive) to 
men.  
Effortful control.  
 We consider general measures, specific forms of impulsivity and behavioral 
measures as assessing higher-order or effortful control since they presuppose an 
explicit, conscious decision with regard to action or inaction.  The sex difference in 
general measures of impulsivity, although statistically significant, was small in 
magnitude. The most widely used psychometric measure of general impulsivity, 
Eysenck’s I7 Impulsiveness questionnaire, showed no significant sex difference. The

----- Page 53 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
53 
 
analysis of specific measures added to the picture of weak, inconsistent sex 
differences in impulsivity.  Measures of behavioral impulsivity were very inconsistent, 
with some suggesting greater female impulsivity, some suggesting greater male 
impulsivity, and some showing no sex difference. This inconsistency is likely to be 
due to variation in the constructs measured by these tasks. Within the domain of 
higher order processes, it is relevant to highlight the distinction between ‘hot’ effortful 
control and ‘cool’ executive function control (Ardila, 2008; Happanay, Zelazo & 
Stuss, 2004; MacDonald 2008). Both are higher order processes governing 
subcortical processes.  
Executive function governs cognition in emotionally neutral conditions and has 
been localized to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Cummings 1993; Fuster, 1997). 
Many of the behavioral tasks included in our analysis assess this kind of inhibition, 
where impulsivity is manifested in an inability to inhibit motor responses, maintain 
attention, develop and execute a plan, or switch to a new dimensional set. Executive 
functions of this kind are correlated with general intelligence, where sex differences 
are likely to be minimal (Jensen, 1998). Our analysis indicates that sex differences 
are non-significant on these ‘cool’, executive function tasks (Stroop, Go/No-Go, Stop, 
CPT). The Delay Discounting Task also showed no sex difference. Although this task 
involves monetary incentives and might, therefore, be considered an affective task, 
we suggest that it relies primarily on the ‘cooler’ executive form of decision-making. 
In most studies, participants’ choices are entirely hypothetical, since the high sums 
involved (e.g. $1,000) make it impossible to honor their choices. In other studies, 
participants are told there is a small (e.g. 10%) probability that one of their choices 
might be honored (e.g. McLeish & Oxoby 2007), or one trial is randomly selected for 
payment (e.g. Reynolds, Richards et al., 2006). Given that participants make as

----- Page 54 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
54 
 
many as 400 sequential choices, it is clear that the task has a strong hypothetical 
component. Hypothetical decisions draw on ‘cooler’ cognitive forms of decision-
making which are assumed to be based on rationality and expected utility theory 
(Loewenstein, Weber, Hsee, & Welch, 2001; Madden, Begotka, Raiff & Kastern, 
2003). In their meta-analysis, Byrnes, Miller, and Schafer (1999) found a very small 
tendency for men to make riskier decisions in these hypothetical choice-dilemma 
tasks (d = .07).  
Although women demonstrated higher ‘impulsivity’ in visual-cognitive tasks, 
this result should be treated with caution. Most of these tasks were not originally 
designed to assess impulsivity. By employing number of errors as the measure of 
impulsive responding, they conflate men’s established superior visual spatial abilities 
with lower impulsivity (Voyer, Voyer, & Bryden, 1995). The findings from the IGT 
should also be treated with caution since, as we have noted, this was not originally 
designed as an impulsivity measure (Bechara et al., 1994) and the sex difference 
may reflect women’s greater punishment sensitivity (Goudriaan et al., 2007). 
 ‘Hot’ forms of inhibition refer to control over social and affective processes; 
the effortful control system. It has been localized to the orbitofrontal region of the 
prefrontal cortex which has bidirectional connections with limbic systems structures, 
notably the amygdala (Davidson, Putnam & Larson, 2000; Rolls, 2000). There is 
suggestive, though not yet conclusive, evidence that women may have an advantage 
in affective inhibition: women have greater binding potential for serotonin in several 
regions including the amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex (Parsey et al., 2002). They 
also have greater orbitofrontal volume (Goldstein et al., 2001; Wood, Heitmiller, 
Andreason & Nopoulos, 2008) and greater functional connectivity between the OFC 
and the amygdala (Meyer-Lindenberg, Buckholtz, Kolachana, Hariri, Pezawas,

----- Page 55 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
55 
 
Wabnitz et al., 2006). Following MacDonald and Baumeister’s argument that men’s 
stronger appetitive impulses are less amenable to cortical over-ride, we anticipated 
sex differences in effortful control   
The weak sex difference that we found (d = .08) begs the question of the 
extent to which psychometric impulsivity measures are accessing hot versus cold 
inhibitory control. This is not easy to determine. Questions of the kind “I am an 
impulsive person” do not indicate whether the relevant context is affectively loaded 
or neutral. Some respondents might interpret this item as referring to affectively ‘hot’ 
contexts such as a love affair or an argument; while others might think of a ‘cool’ 
context such as an ill-considered chess move. Any tendency for men to interpret 
items in one way and women in another could distort or obscure sex differences. 
Future studies could usefully examine whether sex differences are systematically 
moderated by the requirement for hot –– as opposed to cool –– behavior control. 
This would entail clearer exposition of the factors that render a decision ‘affective’ 
rather than emotionally neutral. Consider an item such as “I plan tasks carefully”. A 
negative response to this item might reflect a deficit in the ‘cool’ executive ability to 
plan or a social-affective ‘hot’ preference for spontaneity over predictability.  
That said, the management of social interactions appears to be a strong 
candidate for affective effortful control. In accord with Bjorklund and Kipp’s (1996) 
proposal, men are more impulsive than women in social problem solving. While this 
may, as Bjorklund and Kipp suggest, derive from the evolutionary advantages 
accruing to women who could suppress and conceal emotion toward others, it is also 
consistent with women’s greater interpersonal interests. Women have been credited 
with more sensitive social skills and with a stronger interpersonal orientation than 
men (Cross & Madson, 1997; Hall, 1984; Horgan, Mast, Hall & Carter, 2004; Su,

----- Page 56 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
56 
 
Rounds & Armstrong, 2009). It may be that their superior performance results from a 
stronger dependence on, and motivation to sustain, social relationships. This might 
derive from evolutionary pressures associated with survival and childcare (Taylor, 
Klein, Lewis, Gruenewald, Gurung & Updegraff, 2000). 
The distinction between executive function and effortful control might reflect 
more than simply the presence or absence of an affective component. Performance 
on executive function tasks is often referred to in terms of ‘ability’ or ‘deficit’, implying 
degrees of competence; impulsive actions are seen as 'failures' of effortful control. 
As with intelligence, more executive function is better than less. According to this 
view, sex differences in effortful control will produce male overrepresentation in 
problem behavior due to men’s greater propensity for ‘failure’ to act in a controlled 
manner. It is not clear, however, that effortful control should be viewed in this way. 
An overly strong effortful control system is associated with internalizing behavior 
problems (Murray & Kochanska, 2002). Rather than a competence, effortful control 
might be best conceptualized as a personality style. In this case, actions which we 
construe as impulsive represent a preference which might in some circumstances be 
beneficial (Carver, 2005; Dickman, 1991; MacDonald, 2008). Stable individual 
differences will exist in the tendency to make a particular kind of choice, such as 
spontaneity versus restraint. As with other personality traits (Penke, Denissen, & 
Miller, 2007), effortful control may be neither an unalloyed good nor an absolute 
hindrance; it may simply be something that varies between people. According to this 
trait view of effortful control, a sex difference in effortful control could account for 
both the overrepresentation of men and boys in externalizing pathologies and the 
overrepresentation of women and girls in internalizing ones. Understanding whether 
sex differences in effortful control represent competency failures or personality traits

----- Page 57 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
57 
 
is important in addressing sex-linked social problems including aggression, 
substance misuse, and accidental deaths. 
Our weak and inconsistent results for effortful control contrast with the very 
marked sex difference found in children (Else-Quest et al., 2006).  Effortful control in 
children is measured with the Child Behavior Questionnaire (Rothbart et al., 2001) by 
summing five scales which appear to asses ‘cool’ executive functions and avoidance 
of high sensory stimulation. In the former domain, effect sizes were small for the 
measures of attention focus (d = -.16) and attention shifting (d = -.31). Effect sizes 
reflecting tolerance for low levels of sensation were somewhat higher; perceptual 
sensitivity (detection of slight, low intensity stimuli, d = -.38), low intensity pleasure 
(enjoyment of situations involving low stimulus intensity d = -.29), and inhibitory 
control (capacity to suppress approach responses in uncertain situations or when 
instructed, d = -.41). These latter measures appear to capture aspects of (reversed) 
sensation hunger. It may be that the aggregated effortful control value (d = -1.01) 
disproportionately reflects these sex differences in sensation seeking and, if this is 
the case, is somewhat more consistent with our findings for adults. As noted 
previously, the Child Behavior Questionnaire assesses Impulsiveness separately 
from effortful control as speed of response initiation (a facet of Extraversion / 
Surgency).  Here, the effect size of d =.18 is only slightly larger than our adult values 
for several Impulsivity measures.  Alternatively, differences in data sources may 
explain the apparent convergence of the sexes with age. In Else-Quest et al.’s 
(2006) meta-analysis, the vast majority of the data came from parents’ or teachers’ 
ratings of child behavior. The larger sex difference they report might reflect gender 
stereotyping effects associated with third party reports, a possibility considered by 
the authors.

----- Page 58 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
58 
 
To the extent that sex differences in impulsivity do indeed narrow with age, 
differential neuronal maturation may be a candidate explanation. Both sexes acquire 
stronger inhibitory control as they move toward adulthood and this may be tied to the 
late maturation of prefrontal areas –– especially the dorsolateral and ventromedial 
regions (Hooper, Luviana, Conklin & Yarger, 2004). Girls show an earlier maturation 
peak in frontal lobe areas but, during adolescence, boys show a sharper increase in 
grey matter reduction and white matter development (Giedd et al., 2006). There is 
also evidence that boys and girls may recruit different neuronal circuits to solve the 
same inhibitory control problem (Christakou et al., 2009): This could be usefully 
investigated in future work.  
Variance ratios.  
Archer & Mehdikhani (2003) proposed that traits which reflect sexually 
selected characteristics should show significantly greater variance among males 
than among females. This proposal stems from the fact that men have more freedom 
to vary in their sexual strategy in terms of offering high or low levels of paternal 
investment. Greater male variance, therefore, stems from the retention of both male 
strategies in the gene pool. Women, as a sex, are more constrained in the levels of 
maternal investment they must make, which results in lower intrasexual variance. 
Greater male than female variance has been found on a number of physical (Lehre 
et al., 2009) and psychological (Archer & Mehdikhani, 2003; Hedges & Nowell, 1995) 
measures. Operationally, sexual selection is inferred when the sexes vary in central 
tendency. Sensation seeking and punishment sensitivity are therefore candidates for 
examining Archer and Mehdikhani’s thesis. Variance ratios did not differ significantly 
from 1 here or on other impulsivity measures, except on the SSS Disinhibition scale. 
This is surprising given that sex differences in risk taking are thought to arise from

----- Page 59 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
59 
 
differential parental investment (Daly & Wilson, 1988). Furthermore, differences in 
central tendency strongly suggest the action of sexual selection. The exclusion 
criteria of the current analysis might account for this null finding. For reasons outlined 
in the preceding sections, we excluded clinical and incarcerated samples. This 
places a constraint on the observed variability. Given the overrepresentation of men 
and boys in pathological and criminal behavior in which risk taking is a factor, it is not 
unreasonable to suggest that this constraint may affect the male variance more than 
the female variance, leading to a null result here. Our observation of equal variance 
is therefore inconclusive, rather than contradictory to Archer and Mehdikhani’s 
thesis.  
Summary and suggestions 
Our results suggest that sex differences are most evident in low-level 
motivational responses captured by punishment and reward sensitivity, risk taking, 
and sensation seeking. Where human behavioral sex differences mirror those found 
in other species, the most likely neural sites are lower-level limbic system processes 
that are phylogenetically conserved. Greater risk taking by males is characteristic of 
a number of mammalian species (Daly & Wilson, 1983). For example, male common 
chimpanzees are more reckless, impulsive, and active than females (King, Weiss & 
Sisco, 2008). The present results suggest that it may be women’s greater sensitivity 
to –– and anxiety about –– the punishing consequences of risky action that deters 
them from the same level of engagement as men.  
Sex differences are much smaller for effortful control and this suggests that it 
has been less subject to sexual selection. The ability to control the expression of 
emotions is key to sustaining the stable social groups on which both sexes depend 
(Barklay, 2001; MacDonald, 2008). The enlargement of the human neocortex has

----- Page 60 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
60 
 
been attributed to the need for fast and flexible behavioral adjustment to 
unpredictable changes within the lifetime of the individual (Plotkin, 1997). Such 
demands have been as great for men as for women and, where selection acts 
equally on both sexes, sex differences are not expected. The marked over-
representation of men in aggressive and sexual social pathologies may tell us more 
about the strength of sexual selection acting on male sexuality and aggression than 
the natural selection pressures operating on impulse restraint.  
We end with three lessons that we have learned from undertaking this 
analysis which we hope will be helpful in guiding future research. 
Impulsivity is not unitary. In our introduction, we highlighted the distinctly non-
unitary nature of impulsivity as a construct. Attempts to integrate various 
psychometric and behavioral measures into a coherent and replicable set of 
dimensions have not been entirely successful. This may be due to a heavy reliance 
on factor analysis: The pool of measures entered into the analyses vary between 
studies, so different results are produced. Elucidating the dimensionality of 
impulsivity requires convergent evidence: one promising route might be through 
imaging studies where the neural structures and circuits associated with different 
forms of impulsivity may indicate their distinctiveness (e.g. Dalley, Mar, Economidou 
& Robbins, 2008; Davidson, Jackson, & Kalin, 2000; Llewellyn, 2008; Meyer-
Lindenberg et al., 2006; Smillie, 2008). Until such clarity is achieved, we can only 
urge caution. Our analysis shows that sex differences depend very much on the 
inventory or task that is employed. Generalizations from a specific measure to 
impulsivity more generally must be made tentatively and must acknowledge the 
multifaceted nature of the construct.

----- Page 61 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
61 
 
 Impulsivity may be both ‘hot’ and ‘cool’. An important distinction within 
impulsivity is between different forms of higher-order control. Executive function is 
primarily concerned with cognitive aspects of impulsivity manifested in failures of 
attention maintenance and switching, and the establishment and reorganization of 
dimensional sets. These rely on different neural structures (dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex) than those recruited in effortful control over emotional and affective states 
(orbitofrontal prefrontal cortex). We find no sex differences in the former and 
evidence of small differences in the latter. These conclusions must remain tentative 
until we have a clearer understanding of the extent to which various tasks and 
measures uniquely assess one system rather than the other. Behavioral tasks vary 
greatly in which system they engage and it is often unclear whether a given task is 
being processed affectively or cognitively. For example, there has been a tendency 
to assume that the use of monetary incentives is sufficient to render a task affective.  
It would be helpful to have this confirmed by neuroimaging studies, especially in 
regard to possible sex differences. The corresponding ambiguity in psychometric 
inventories arises from the use of non-specific item wording: “‘I often act without 
thinking” can be interpreted to apply to cool executive disinhibition (e.g. careless 
mistakes in solving a mathematical problem) or to an override of affective effortful 
control (e.g. insulting your boss).  
Impulsivity is not sensation seeking. There is a clear conceptual and empirical 
distinction between sensation seeking and impulsivity. Though there is little 
unanimity on the definition of impulsivity, it has been variously described as acting 
without deliberation, failure to inhibit a prepotent response, lack of planning, and 
failure of perseverance. None of these characteristics applies to sensation seeking 
activities. We suggest that sensation seeking should be recognized as a dimension

----- Page 62 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
62 
 
of personality distinct from impulsivity, rather than a trait subsumed by it. Our results 
provide support for this: they clearly indicate that sex differences are small for 
impulsivity but considerably more marked for sensation seeking.  Using the two 
constructs interchangeably may produce misleading results with regard to sex 
differences.  
Many impulsive actions are harmless: hugging someone out of happiness, 
buying a treat on the spur of the moment, or opting for a new dish at a restaurant are 
hardly dangerous. Parachuting, rock-climbing, or skiing, although risky, are not 
impulsive --- they require planning, training, and a measured consideration of the 
risk. Clearly, some actions may be both impulsive and risky: running across a road, 
having sex with a stranger, or accepting an offer of drink or drugs, for example 
(Campbell & Muncer, 2009). The assessment of actions which are both risky and 
impulsive is an area in need of attention.  We believe that it is this form of impulsive 
risk taking –– risky impulsivity –– which is most likely to underlie aggressive and 
criminal behavior.

----- Page 63 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
63 
 
References 
References marked with an asterisk indicate studies included in the meta-analysis. 
*Abramowitz, A., & Berenbaum, H. (2007). Emotional triggers and their relation to 
impulsive and compulsive psychopathology.  Personality and Individual 
Differences, 43, 1356-1365. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2007.04.004 
*Acheson, A., Richards, J.B., & de Wit, H. (2007). Effects of sleep deprivation on 
impulsive behaviors in men and women. Physiology & Behavior, 91, 579-587. 
doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2007.03.020  
*Adams, C.D., Kelley, M.C., & McCarthy, M. (1997). The Adolescent Behaviour 
Checklist: Development and initial psychometric properties of a self report 
measure for adolescents with ADHD. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 26, 
(1), 77-86. doi:10.1207/s15374424jccp2601_8 
*Aidman, E.V., & Kollaras-Mitsinikos, L. (2006). Personality dispositions in the 
prediction of posttraumatic stress reactions.  Psychological Reports, 99, 569-
580. doi:10.2466/PR0.99.6.569-580 
*Aklin, W.M., Lejuez, C.W., Zvolensky, M.J., Kahler, C.W., & Gwadz, M. (2005).  
Evaluation of behavioural measures of risk taking propensity with inner city 
adolescents.  Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 215-228. 
doi:10.1016/j.brat.2003.12.007 
*Alexander, F., Allen, C., Brooks, J., Cole, C., & Campbell, A. (2004). Reason to 
believe: Representations of aggression as phenomenological read-out. Sex 
Roles, 51, 647-659. doi:10.1007/s11199-004-0716-z

----- Page 64 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
64 
 
*Allen, T.J., Moeller, F.G., Rhoades, H.M. & Cherek, D.R. (1998). Impulsivity and 
history of drug dependence. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 50, 137-145. 
doi:10.1016/S0376-8716(98)00023-4 
*Alter, C.E. (2001). Creativity styles and personality characteristics. Dissertation 
Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 62, (1-B), 
590. 
*Aluja, A., & Blanch, A. (2007). Comparison of impulsiveness, venturesomeness and 
empathy (I-sub-7) structure in English and Spanish samples:  Analysis of 
different structural equation models.  Personality and Individual Differences, 
43, 2294-2305. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2007.07.019 
Aluja, A., & Torrubia, R. (2004). Hostility-aggressiveness, sensation seeking and sex 
hormones in men: Re-exploring their relationship. Neuropsychobiology, 50, 
102-107. doi:10.1159/000077947 
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of 
mental disorders (4th ed- TR). Washington, DC: Task Force. 
doi:10.1176/appi.books.9780890423349 
 
*Anderson, K.L. (1986). Androgyny, flexibility and individualism. Journal of 
Personality Assessment, 50, 265-278. doi:10.1207/s15327752jpa5002_13 
*Anestis, M.D., Selby, E.A., & Joiner, T.E. (2007). The role of urgency in maladaptive 
behaviors.  Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45, 3018-3029. 
doi:10.1016/j.brat.2007.08.012

----- Page 65 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
65 
 
*Antonowicz, D.H. (2002). Hostile attributional biases, driving anger, and roadway 
aggression among university students: Application of a model of affective 
aggression. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and 
Engineering, 63, (4-B), 2099. 
Archer, J. (2004). Sex differences in aggression in real-world settings: A meta-
analytic review. Review of General Psychology, 8, 291-322. 
doi:10.1037/1089-2680.8.4.291 
Archer, J. (2006). Testosterone and human aggression: An evaluation of the 
challenge hypothesis. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 30, 319-335. 
Archer, J. (2009). Does sexual selection explain human sex differences in 
aggression? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32, 249-311. 
doi:10.1017/s0140525x09990951 
*Archer, J., Kilpatrick, G., & Bramwell, R. (1995). Comparison of two aggression 
inventories. Aggressive Behavior, 21, 371-380. doi:10.1002/1098-
2337(1995)21:5<371::AID-AB2480210506>3.0.CO;2-P 
Archer, J., & Mehdikhani, M. (2003). Variability among males in sexually selected 
attributes. Review of General Psychology, 7, 219-236. doi:10.1037/1089-
2680.7.3.219 
*Archer, J., & Webb, I.A. (2006). The relation between scores on the Buss-Perry 
aggression questionnaire and aggressive acts, impulsiveness, 
competitiveness, dominance and sexual jealousy.  Aggressive Behavior, 32, 
464-473. doi:10.1002/ab.20146

----- Page 66 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
66 
 
Ardila, A. (2008). On the evolutionary origins of executive functions. Brain and 
Cognition, 68, 92-99.  doi:10.1016/j.bandc.2008.03.003 
Arneklev, B. J., Grasmick, H. G., Tittle, C. R., & Bursik, R. J. (1993). Low self-control 
and imprudent behavior. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 9, 225–247.  
doi:10.1007/BF01064461 
Arnett, J. (1994). Sensation seeking: A new conceptualization and a new scale. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 16(2), 289-296.  doi:10.1016/0191-
8869(94)90165-1. 
*Avila, C., & Parcet, M.A. (2000). The role of Gray's impulsivity in anxiety-mediated 
differences in resistance to extinction. European Journal of Personality, 14, 
185-198. doi:10.1002/1099-0984(200005/06)14:3<185::AID-
PER370>3.3.CO;2-L 
*Baca-García, E., Oquendo, M.A. Saiz-Ruiz, J., Mann, J.J., & de Leon, J. (2006). A 
pilot study on differences in aggression in New York City and Madrid, Spain 
and their possible impact on suicidal behaviour.  Journal of Clinical 
Psychiatry, 67, 375-380. doi:10.4088/JCP.v67n0306 
*Baca-Garcia, E., Vaquero, C., Diaz-Sastre, C.,Garcia-Resa, E., Saiz-Ruiz, J., & 
Fernandez-Piqueras, J. et al. (2004). Lack of association between the 
serotonin transporter promoter gene polymorphism and impulsivity or 
aggressive behaviour among suicide attempters and healthy volunteers.  
Psychiatry Research, 126, 99-106. doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2003.10.007

----- Page 67 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
67 
 
*Bagge, C., Nickell, A., Stepp, S., Durrett, C., Jackson, K., & Trull, T.J. (2004). 
Borderline personality disorder features predict negative outcomes 2 years 
later. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 113, 279-288. doi:10.1037/0021-
843X.113.2.279 
*Baker, F., Johnson, M.W., & Bickel, W.K. (2003). Delay discounting in current and 
never-before cigarette smokers: Similarities and differences across 
commodity, sign, and magnitude. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 112, 382-
392. doi:10.1037/0021-843X.112.3.382 
*Baker, J.R., & Yardley, J.K. (2002). Moderating effect of gender on the relationship 
between sensation seeking-impulsivity and substance use in adolescents. 
Journal of Child and Adolescent Substance Abuse, 12, 27-43. 
doi:10.1300/J029v12n01_02 
Ball, S.A., & Zuckerman, M. (1990). Sensation seeking, Eysenck’s personality 
dimensions and reinforcement sensitivity theory in concept formation.  
Personality and Individual Differences, 11, 343-353.  
*Balodis, I.M., Johnsrude, I.S., & Olmstead, M.C. (2007). Intact preference 
conditioning in acute intoxication despite deficient declarative knowledge and 
working memory.  Alcoholism:  Clinical and Experimental Research, 31, 1800-
1810. doi:10.1111/j.1530-0277.2007.00482.x 
Band, G.P.H., & van Boxtel, G.J.M. (1999). Inhibitory motor control in stop 
paradigms: review and reinterpretation of neural mechanisms.  Acta 
Psychologica, 101, 179-211.  doi:10.1016/S0001-6918(99)00005-0

----- Page 68 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
68 
 
*Bare, R.L. (2006). Psychopathic traits in college students: Electrodermal reactivity, 
anxiety, disinhibition, risk-taking, and executive functioning. Dissertation 
Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 67, (2-B), 
1140. 
Bar-Haim, Y., Lamy, D., Pergamin, L., Bakermans-Kranenburg,M. J., & van 
IJzendoorn,M. H. (2007). Threat-related attentional bias in anxious and 
nonanxious individuals: A meta-analytic study. Psychological Bulletin, 133, 
1−24.  doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.133.1.1 
Barkley, R.A. (2001). The executive functions and self-regulation: An evolutionary 
neuropsychological perspective.  Neuropsychology Review, 11, 1-29. 
Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety 
and panic. New York: Guilford.  doi:10.1016/S1077-7229(03)80027-5 
Barratt, E. S. (1985).  Impulsiveness subtraits: Arousal and information processing. 
In J.T. Spence and C.E. Izard (Eds). Motivation, emotion and personality (pp. 
137–146). Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers. 
*Bates, M.E., & Labouvie, E.W. (1995). Personality-environment constellations and 
alcohol use: A process oriented study of intraindividual change during 
adolescence. Psychology of Addictive Behaviours, 9, 23-35. doi: 
10.1037/0893-164X.9.1.23   
Baumeister, R.F., Vohs, K.D., & Tice, D.M. (2007). The strength model of self-
control.  Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 351-355.  
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8721.2007.00534.x

----- Page 69 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
69 
 
*Bazargan-Hejazi, S., Gaines, T., Duan, N., & Cherpitel, C.J. (2007). Correlates of 
injury among ED visits: Effects of alcohol, risk perception, impulsivity and 
sensation seeking behaviors.  American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 
33, 101-108. doi:10.1080/00952990601087455 
Beattie, G. (2008). Sex differences in driving and insurance risk: Understanding the 
neurobiological and evolutionary foundations of the differences. Manchester: 
University of Manchester 
Bechara, A., Damasio, A. R., Damasio, H., & Anderson, S. W. (1994). Insensitivity to 
future consequences following damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition, 
50, 7-15. 
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Damasio, A.R. (1997). Deciding 
advantageously before knowing the advantageous strategy.  Science, 275, 
1293-1295.  doi:10.1126/science.275.5304.1293 
Begg, C. B., & Mazumdar, M. (1994). Operating characteristics of a rank correlation 
test for publication bias. Biometrics, 50, 1088-1101. doi:10.2307/2533446 
*Bembenutty, H., & Karabenick, S.A. (1998). Academic delay of gratification. 
Learning and Individual Differences, 10, 329-346. doi:10.1016/S1041-
6080(99)80126-5   
*Berlin, H.A., Rolls, E.T., & Iversen, S.D. (2005). Borderline personality disorder, 
impulsivity, and the orbitofrontal cortex.  American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 
2360-2373. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.162.12.2360

----- Page 70 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
70 
 
Bettencourt, B. A., & Miller, N. (1996). Gender differences in aggression as a 
function of provocation: A meta-analysis.  Psychological Bulletin, 119, 422-
447. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.119.3.422 
Bijttebier, P., Beck, I., Claes, L., & Vandereycken, W. (2009). Gray's Reinforcement 
Sensitivity Theory as a framework for research on personality-
psychopathology associations. Clinical Psychology Review, 29, 421-430. 
doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2009.04.002 
*Billieux, J., Rochat, L., Rebetez, M.M.L., & Van der Linden, M. (2008). Are all facets 
of impulsivity related to self-reported compulsive buying behaviour? 
Personality and Individual Differences, 44, 1432-1442. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2007.12.011 
*Bjork, J.M., Hommer, D.W., Grant, S.J., & Danube, C. (2004). Impulsivity in 
abstinent alcohol-dependent patients: Relation to control subjects and type  
1-/type 2-like traits.  Alcohol, 34, 133-150. doi:10.1016/j.alcohol.2004.06.012 
Bjorklund, D.F., & Kipp, K. (1996). Parental investment theory and gender 
differences in the evolution of inhibition mechanisms. Psychological Bulletin, 
120, 163-188. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.120.2.163 
Blackwell, B.S. & Piquero, A.R. (2005). On the relationships between gender, power 
control, self-control and crime.  Journal of Criminal Justice, 33, 1-17.  
doi:10.1016/j.jcrimjus.2004.10.001 
Block, J., Block, J. H., & Harrington, D. M. (1974). Some misgivings about the 
Matching Familiar Figures test as a measure of reflection-impulsivity. 
Developmental Psychology,10, 611-632.  doi.org/10.1037/h0037047

----- Page 71 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
71 
 
Borenstein, M., Hedges, L. V., Higgins, J. P. T., & Rothstein, H. R. (2009). 
Introduction to Meta-Analysis. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
doi:10.1002/9780470743386 
Brebner, J. (2003). Gender and emotions.  Personality and Individual Differences, 
34, 387-394. doi:10.1016/S0191-8869(02)00059-4  
*Brezo, J., Paris, J., Tremblay, R., Vitaro, F., Zoccolillo, M., & Herbert, M. et al. 
(2006).  Personality traits as correlates of suicide attempts and suicidal 
ideation in young adults. Psychological Medicine, 36, 191-202. 
doi:10.1017/S0033291705006719 
*Brown, S.M., Manuck, S.B., Flory, J.D., & Hariri, A.R. (2006). Neural basis of 
individual differences in impulsivity: Contributions of corticolimbic circuits for 
behavioural arousal and control.  Emotion, 6, 239-245. doi:10.1037/1528-
3542.6.2.239 
Burton, V. S., Cullen, F. T., Evans, T. D., Alarid, L. F., & Dunaway, R. G. (1998). 
Gender, self-control, and crime. Journal of Research in Crime and 
Delinquency, 35, 123– 147.  doi:10.1177/0022427898035002001 
Byrnes, J.P., Miller, D.C., & Schafer, W.D. (1999). Gender differences in risk taking: 
A meta-analysis.  Psychological Bulletin, 125, 367-383. doi:10.1037/0033-
2909.125.3.367 
*Caci, H., Deschaux, O., & Bayle, F.J. (2007). Psychometric properties of the French 
versions of the BIS/BAS scales and the SPSRQ. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 42, 987-998. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2006.09.008

----- Page 72 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
72 
 
*Caci, H., Nadalet, L., Baylé.F.J, Robert, P., & Boyer, P. (2003a). Functional and 
dysfunctional impulsivity: Contribution to the construct validity. Acta 
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 107, (1), 34-40. doi:10.1034/j.1600-
0447.2003.01464.x 
*Caci, H., Nadalet, L., Baylé.F.J, Robert, P., & Boyer, P. (2003b). Cross-cultural 
study of the Impulsiveness-Venturesomeness-Empathy questionnaire (IVE-7). 
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 44, 381-387. doi:10.1016/S0010-440X(03)00105-
6 
Cale, E., & Lilienfeld, S.O. (2002).  Sex differences in psychopathy and antisocial 
personality disorder: A review and integration. Clinical Psychology Review, 
22, 1179–1207.  doi:10.1016/S0272-7358(01)00125-8 
*Calvete, E., & Cardenoso, O. (2005). Gender differences in cognitive vulnerability to 
depression and behaviour problems in adolescents. Journal of Abnormal 
Child Psychology, 33, 179-192. doi:10.1007/s10802-005-1826-y  
*Camatala, C.D., & Nagoshi, C.T. (1995). Stress, depression, irrational beliefs and 
alcohol use and problems in a college student sample. Alcoholism: Clinical 
and Experimental Research, 19, 142-146. doi:10.1111/j.1530-
0277.1995.tb01482.x 
Campbell, A. (1999). Staying alive: Evolution, culture and intra-female aggression.  
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 203-252. 
doi:10.1017/S0140525X99001818

----- Page 73 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
73 
 
Campbell, A. (2002). A mind of her own: The evolutionary psychology of women.  
Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Campbell, A. (2006). Sex differences in direct aggression: What are the 
psychological mediators? Aggression and Violent Behavior, 11, 237-264. 
doi:10.1016/j.avb.2005.09.002 
Campbell, A., & Muncer, S. (2009). Can ‘risky’ impulsivity explain sex differences in 
aggression?  Personality and Individual Differences, 47, 402-406. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2009.04.006 
Carver, C.S. (2005). Impulse and constraint: Perspectives from personality 
psychology, convergence with theory in other areas and potential for 
integration. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 9, 312-333. 
doi:10.1207/s15327957pspr0904_2 
Carver, C.S., & White, T.L. (1994). Behavioral inhibition, behavioral activation, and 
affective responses to impending reward and punishment: The BIS/BAS 
Scales.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 319-333. 
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.67.2.319 
*Case, S. (2007). Indicators of adolescent alcohol use: A composite risk factor 
approach.  Substance Use and Misuse, 42, 89-111. doi: 
10.1080/10826080601094280  
*Caseras, X., Avila, C., & Torrubia, R. (2003). The measurement of individual 
differences in Behavioural Inhibition and Behavioural Activation Systems: A 
comparison of personality scales. Personality and Individual Differences, 34, 
(6), 999-1013. doi:10.1016/S0191-8869(02)00084-3

----- Page 74 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
74 
 
Casey, B.J., Getz, S. & Galvan, A. (2008). The adolescent brain.  Developmental 
Review, 28, 62-77. doi:10.1016/j.dr.2007.08.003 
*Casillas, A. (2006). Personality and neuropsychological correlates of impulsivity. 
Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and 
Engineering, 66, (8-B), 4476. 
Center for Wellbeing (n.d.)  TCI: A comprehensive assessment of personality.  
Washington University in St. Louis: School of Medicine. 
http://psychobiology.wustl.edu/7dimensions.html 
*Chabrol, H., Montovany, A., Ducongé, E., Kallmeyer, A., Mullet, E., & Leichsenring, 
F. (2004). Factor structure of the Borderline Personality Inventory in 
adolescents. European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 20, 59–65 
doi:10.1027/1015-5759.20.1.59 
*Chen, A.C.H., Porjesz, B., Rangaswamy, M., Kamarajan, C., Tang, Y., Jones, K.A., 
et al. (2007). Reduced frontal lobe activity in subjects with high impulsivity and 
alcoholism. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 31, 156-165. 
doi:10.1111/j.1530-0277.2006.00277.x 
*Cherpital, C.J. (1993). Alcohol, injury and risk taking behavior: Data from a national 
sample. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 17, 762-766. 
doi:10.1111/j.1530-0277.1993.tb00837.x 
Christakou, A., Halari, R., Smith, A. B., Ifkovits, E., Brammer, M., & Rubia, K. (2009). 
Sex-dependent age modulation of frontostriatal and temporo-parietal 
activation during cognitive control. Neuroimage, 48, 223-236. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.06.070

----- Page 75 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
75 
 
*Chung, T., & Martin, C.S. (2002). Concurrent and discriminant validity of DSM-IV 
symptoms of impaired control over alcohol consumption in adolescents. 
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 26, 485-492. 
doi:10.1111/j.1530-0277.2002.tb02565.x 
*Claes, L., Vertommen, H., & Braspenning, N. (2000). Psychometric properties of the 
Dickman Impulsivity Inventory. Personality and Individual Differences, 29, 27-
35. doi:10.1016/S0191-8869(99)00172-5 
* Clark, L., Roiser, J.P., Cools, R., Rubinsztein, D.C., Sahakian, B.J., & Robbins, 
T.W. (2005). Stop signal response inhibition is not modulated by tryptophan 
depletion or the serotonin transporter polymorphism in healthy volunteers: 
Implications for the 5-HT theory of impulsivity.  Psychopharmacology, 182, 
570-578. doi:10.1007/s00213-005-0104-6 
*Clarke, D. (2004). Impulsiveness, locus of control, motivation and problem 
gambling.  Journal of Gambling Studies, 20, 319-345. doi:10.1007/s10899-
004-4578-7 
*Clarke, D. (2006). Impulsivity as a mediator in the relationship between depression 
and problem gambling. Personality and Individual Differences, 40, 5-15. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2005.05.008 
*Clift, S.M., Wilkins, J.C., & Davidson, E.A.F. (1993). Impulsiveness, 
venturesomeness and sexual risk-taking among heterosexual GUM clinic 
attenders. Personality and Individual Differences, 15, 403-410. 
doi:10.1016/0191-8869(93)90068-E

----- Page 76 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
76 
 
Cloninger, C.R.  (1986). A unified biosocial theory of personality and its role in the 
development of anxiety states. Psychiatric Developments, 4, 167-226. 
Cloninger, C.R. (1987). A systematic method for clinical description and classification 
of personality variants. A proposal.  Archives of General Psychiatry, 44, 573 - 
88. 
Coccaro, E.F., Beresford, B., Minar, P., Kaskow, J., & Geracioti, T. (2007). CSF 
testosterone: Relationship to aggression, impulsivity, and venturesomeness in 
adult males with personality disorder.  Journal of Psychiatric Research, 41, 
488-492. doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2006.04.009   
*Colder, C.R., & Stice, E. (1998). A longitudinal study of the interactive effects of 
impulsivity and anger on adolescent problem behavior. Journal of Youth and 
Adolescence, 27, 255-274.doi: 10.1023/A:1022889202419 
*Colom, R., Escorial, S., Shih, P.C., & Privado, J. (2007). Fluid intelligence, memory 
span, and temperament difficulties predict academic performance of young 
adolescents.  Personality and Individual Differences, 42, 1503-1514. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2006.10.023 
Colom, R., Contreras, J., Shih, P. C., & Santacreu, J. (2003). The assessment of 
spatial ability with a single computerized test. European Journal of 
Psychological Assessment, 19(2), 92-100.  10.1027//1015-5759.19.2.92. 
*Compton, M.T., & Kaslow, N.J. (2005). Self-reported psychotic symptoms predict 
impulsivity among African-American patients in an urban non-psychiatric 
medical setting.  Psychiatry Research, 135, 35-44. 
doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2005.03.004

----- Page 77 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
77 
 
Conners, C.K. (2000). Conner’s continuous performance test (CPT II). North 
Tonawanda, NY: Multi-Health Systems.  
*Cooper, M. L., Agocha, V. B., & Sheldon, M.S. (2000). A motivational perspective 
on risky behaviors: The role of personality and affect regulatory processes. 
Journal of Personality, 68, 1059-1088. doi:10.1111/1467-6494.00126 
*Cooper, M.L., Wood, P.K; Orcutt, H.K. & Albino, A. (2003). Personality and the 
predisposition to engage in risky or problem behaviors during adolescence. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 390-410. doi:10.1037/0022-
3514.84.2.390 
*Copping, L.T. (2007). Social class and social representation: Is impulsivity the 
mediator? Unpublished  Dissertation.  
*Corr, P.J., Pickering, A.D., & Gray, J.A. (1995). Sociability/impulsivity and caffeine 
arousal: Critical flicker/fusion frequency and procedural learning. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 18, 713-730. doi:10.1016/0191-8869(95)00001-M 
*Corulla, W.J. (1987). Psychometric investigation of the Eysenck Personality 
Questionnaire (Revised) and its relationship to the I7 Impulsiveness 
Questionnaire. Personality and Individual Differences, 8, 651-658. doi: 
10.1016/0191-8869(87)90062-6 
Costa, P.T., & McCrae, R.R. (1992). Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO PI-R) 
and NEO Five Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI): Professional manual. Odessa, FL: 
Psychological Assessment Resources.    
Costa, P. T., Jr., Terracciano, A., & McCrae, R. R. (2001). Gender differences in 
personality traits across cultures: Robust and surprising findings. Journal of

----- Page 78 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
78 
 
Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 322–331. doi:10.1037/0022-
3514.81.2.322 
Crean, J.P., de Wit, H. & Richards, J.B. (2000). Reward discounting as a measure of 
impulsive behavior in a psychiatric outpatient population. Experimental and 
Clinical Psychopharmacology, 8, 155-162.  doi:10.1037/1064-1297.8.2.155 
*Cross, C.P. (2007, September). Risky impulsivity predicts sexual and aggressive 
behaviour in undergraduates. Poster presented at the meeting of the 
Association for the Study of Animal Behaviour, Newcastle University. 
*Cross, C.P. (2008, March). Individual differences in sexual and aggressive 
behaviour: the role of risky impulsivity. Paper presented at the first biennial 
conference of the International Family Aggression Society, University of 
Central Lancashire. 
*Cross, C.P. (2009).  Sex differences in aggression and sociosexuality: the role of 
risky impulsivity. Manuscript submitted for publication. 
Cross, S. E., & Madson, L. (1997). Models of the self: Self-construals and gender. 
Psychological Bulletin, 122, 5-37. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.122.1.5 
Cummings, J.L. (1993).  Frontal-subcortical circuits and human behaviour. Archives 
of Neurology, 50, 873-880. 
*Curran, M.F. (2006). Risk taking as a contributing factor to driving while under the 
influence of alcohol. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The 
Sciences and Engineering, 67, (3-B), 1741.

----- Page 79 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
79 
 
*Curry, L.A. (2005). Affect, decision making, and adolescent risk behavior. 
Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and 
Engineering, 65, (12-B), 6685.    
*Curry, T.R., & Piquero, A.R. (2003). Control ratios and defiant acts of deviance: 
Assessing additive and conditional effects with constraints and impulsivity. 
Sociological Perspectives, 46, 397-415. doi:10.1525/sop.2003.46.3.397 
*Cyders, M.A, Smith, G.T., Spillane, N.S., Fischer, S., Annus, A.M., & Peterson, C. 
(2007).  Integration of impulsivity and positive mood to predict risky behaviour:  
Development and validation of a measure of positive urgency. Psychological 
Assessment, 19, 107-118. doi:10.1037/1040-3590.19.1.107 
*d’Acremont, M., & Van der Linden, M. (2005). Adolescent impulsivity: Findings from 
a community sample. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 34, 427-435. 
doi:10.1007/s10964-005-7260-1 
*Dahlen, E.R., Martin, R.C., Ragan, K., & Kuhlman, M.M. (2004). Boredom 
proneness in anger and aggression: Effects of impulsiveness and sensation 
seeking. Personality and Individual Differences, 37, 1615-1627. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2004.02.016 
*Dahlen, E.R., Martin, R.C., Ragan, K., & Kuhlman, M.M. (2005).  Driving anger, 
sensation seeking, impulsiveness, and boredom proneness in the prediction 
of unsafe driving.  Accident Analysis and Prevention, 37, 341-348. 
doi:10.1016/j.aap.2004.10.006

----- Page 80 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
80 
 
Daitzman, R .J. & Zuckerman, M. (1980) Disinhibitory sensation seeking, personality, 
and gonadal hormones. Personality and Individual Differences 1, 103-110.  
doi:10.1016/0191-8869(80)90027-6 
Dalley, J.W., Mar, A.C., Economidou, D. & Robbins, T.W. (2008).  Neurobehavioral 
mechanisms of impulsivity: Fronto-striatal systems and functional 
neurochemistry. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 90, 250-260. 
doi:10.1016/j.pbb.2007.12.021 
Daly M., & Wilson, M. (1983). Sex, evolution and behavior: Adaptations for 
reproduction. Boston, MA: Willard Grant Press.  
Daly M., & Wilson, M. (1988) Homicide. New York: Aldine de Gruyter. 
*Davelaar, P.M., Araujo, F.S., & Kipper, D.A. (2008).  The Revised Spontaneity 
Assessment Inventory (SAI-R): Relationship to goal orientation, motivation, 
perceived self-efficacy and self-esteem. The Arts in Psychotherapy, 35, 117-
128. doi:10.1016/j.aip.2008.01.003 
Davidson, R.J., Jackson, D.C., & Kalin, N.H. (2000). Emotion, plasticity, context, and 
regulation: Perspectives from affective neuroscience. Psychological Bulletin, 
126, 890-909. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.126.6.890 
Davidson, R.J., Putnam, K.M., & Larson, C.L. (2000). Dysfunction in the neural 
circuitry of emotion regulation: A possible prelude to violence. Science, 289, 
591-594. doi:10.1126/science.289.5479.591

----- Page 81 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
81 
 
*Davis, R.A., Flett, G.L., & Besser, A. (2002).Validation of a new scale for measuring 
problematic Internet use: Implications for pre-employment screening. 
CyberPsychology & Behavior, 5, 331-345. doi:10.1089/109493102760275581  
*Davis, C., Patte, K., Tweed, S., & Curtis, C. (2007). Personality traits associated 
with decision-making deficits.  Personality and Individual Differences, 42,  
279-290. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2006.07.006 
Dawe, S., Gullo, M. J., & Loxton, N. J. (2004). Reward drive and rash impulsiveness 
as dimensions of impulsivity: Implications for substance misuse. Addictive 
Behaviors, 29, 1389–1405. doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2004.06.004 
*De Flores, T., & Valdes, M. (1986). Behaviour pattern A: Reward, fight or 
punishment? Personality and Individual Differences, 7, 319-326. doi: 
10.1016/0191-8869(86)90007-3 
Degenhardt, L., Chiu, W.T., Sampson, N., Kessler, R.C., Anthony, J.C., Angermeyer, 
M., et al. (2008) Toward a global view of alcohol, tobacco, cannabis, and 
cocaine use: Findings from the WHO World Mental Health Surveys. PLoS 
Medicine, 5,1053-1067.  e141. doi:10.1371/journal.    
Derryberry, D., & Rothbart, M.K. (1997). Reactive and effortful processes in the 
organization of temperament.  Development and Psychopathology, 9, 633-
652.  doi:10.1017/S0954579497001375 
Deschenes, E.P., & Esbensen, F.A. (1999). Violence and gangs: Gender differences 
in perception and behavior. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 15, 63-96. 
*de Wit, H., Engasser, J.L., & Richards, J.B. (2002). Acute administration of d-
amphetamine decreases impulsivity in healthy volunteers.

----- Page 82 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
82 
 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 27, 813-825. doi:10.1016/S0893-133X(02)00343-
3 
*de Wit, H., Flory, J.D., Acheson, A., McCloskey, M., & Manuck S.B. (2007). IQ and 
nonplanning impulsivity are independently associated with delay discounting 
in middle-aged adults. Personality and Individual Differences, 42, 111-121. 
doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2006.06.026 
*Deffenbacher, J.L., Filetti, L.B., Richards, T.L., Lynch, R.S., & Oetting, E.R. (2003). 
Characteristics of two groups of angry drivers. Journal of Counselling 
Psychology, 50, 123-132. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.50.2.123 
*DePasquale, J.P., Geller, E.S., Clarke, S.W., &  Littleton, L.C. (2001). Measuring 
road rage: Development of the Propensity for Angry Driving Scale. Journal of 
Safety Research, 32, 1-16. doi:10.1016/S0022-4375(00)00050-5 
Depue, R.A., & Collins, P.F. (1999). Neurobiology of the structure of personality: 
Dopamine, facilitation of incentive motivation, and extraversion. Behavioural 
and Brain Sciences, 22, 491-569. doi:10.1017/S0140525X99002046    
*Dhuse, S.R. (2006). Consequences of binge drinking: Risk and protective factors.  
Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and 
Engineering, 67, (1-B), 537.   
*Diaz, A., & Pickering, A.D. (1993). The relationship between Gray’s and Eysenck’s 
personality spaces. Personality and Individual Differences, 15, 297-305. 
doi:10.1016/0191-8869(93)90220-W

----- Page 83 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
83 
 
Dickman, S.J. (1990). Functional and dysfunctional impulsivity: Personality and 
cognitive correlates.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 95-
102. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.58.1.95 
Dickman, S., & Meyer, D. E. (1988). Impulsivity and speed-accuracy tradeoffs in 
information processing. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 
274-290.  doi:10.1037/0022-3514.54.2.274 
*Dinn, W.M, Harris, C.L., Aycicegi, A., Greene, P., & Andover, M.S. (2002). Positive 
and negative schizotypy in a student sample: Neurocognitive and clinical 
correlates. Schizophrenia Research, 56, 171-185. doi:10.1016/S0920-
9964(01)00230-4 
*Doran, N., McChargue, D., & Cohen, L. (2007a). Impulsivity and the reinforcing 
value of cigarette smoking. Addictive Behaviors, 32, 90-98. 
doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2006.03.023  
*Doran, N., Spring, B., & McChargue, D. (2007b). Effect of impulsivity on craving and 
behavioural reactivity to smoking cues. Psychopharmacology, 194, 279-288. 
doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2006.03.023 
Dougherty, D.M., Mathias, C.W., Marsh-Richard, D.M., Furr, R.M., Nouvion, S.O., & 
Dawes, M.A. (2009). Distinctions in behavioral impulsivity: Implications for 
substance abuse research.  Addictive Disorders and their Treatment, 8, 61-
73.   doi:10.1097/ADT.0b013e318172e488 
*Driscoll, H., Zinkivskay, A., Evans, K., & Campbell, A. (2006). Gender differences in 
social representations of aggression: The phenomenological experience of 
differences in inhibitory control? British Journal of Psychology, 97, 139-153

----- Page 84 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
84 
 
*Durante, M. (2002). A logistic regression analysis of biodata and personality 
predictors of job retention among detention officers. Dissertation Abstracts 
International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 63, (5-B), 2579.     
*D'Zurilla, T.J., Maydeu-Olivares, A., & Kant, G.L. (1998). Age and gender 
differences in social problem-solving ability. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 25, (2), 241-252. doi:10.1016/S0191-8869(98)00029-4 
D'Zurilla, T. J., & Nezu, A. M. (1990). Development and preliminary evaluation of the 
Social Problem-Solving Inventory. Psychological Assessment: A Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 2, 156-163. 
D'Zurilla, T., Nezu, A. & Maydeu-Olivares, A. (1996). Manual for the social problem-
solving inventory–Revised. North Tonawanda, NY: Multi-Health Systems. 
Eagly, A.H., & Steffen, V. (1986). Gender and aggressive behaviour: A meta-analytic 
review of the social psychological literature. Psychological Bulletin, 100, 3-22. 
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.100.3.309 
Else-Quest, N.M., Hyde, J.S., Goldsmith, H.H., & Van Hulle, C.A. (2006). Gender 
differences in temperament: A meta analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 33-
72. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.132.1.33 
*Enticott, P.G., Ogloff, J.R.P., & Bradshaw, J.L. (2006). Associations between 
laboratory measures of executive inhibitory control and self-reported 
impulsivity. Personality and Individual Differences, 41, 285-294. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2006.01.011 
*Epstein, J.N., Erkanli, A., Conners, C.K., Klaric, J., Costello, J.E., & Angold, A. 
(2003a). Relations between Continuous Performance Test performance

----- Page 85 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
85 
 
measures and ADHD behaviors. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 31, 
543-554. doi:10.1023/A:1025405216339  
*Epstein, L.H., Richards, J.B., Saad, F.G., Paluch, R.A., Roemmich, J.N., & Lerman, 
C. (2003b). Comparison between two measures of delay discounting in 
smokers. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 11, 131-138. 
doi:10.1037/1064-1297.11.2.131 
Evendon, J.L. (1999). Varieties of impulsivity. Psychopharmacology, 146, 348-361. 
doi:10.1007/PL00005481 
Eysenck, H.J., & Eysenck, M.W. (1985). Personality and individual differences: A 
natural science approach.  New York: Plenum Press. 
Eysenck, H.J., & Eysenck, S.B.G. (1968). Manual for the Eysenck Personality 
Inventory. San Diego: Educational and Industrial Testing Service.  
Eysenck, H.J., & Gudjonsson, G.H. (1989). The causes and cures of criminality.  
New York: Plenum. 
*Eysenck, S.B.G. (1981). Impulsiveness and antisocial behaviour in children. Current 
Psychological Research, 1, 31-37. doi:10.1007/BF02684423 
Eysenck, S.G.B. (1993). The I7: Development of a measure of impulsivity and its 
relationship to the superfactors of personality.  In W.G. McCown, J.L. Johnson 
& M.B. Shure (eds) The impulsive client: Theory, research and treatment. (pp. 
141-149). American Psychological Association, Washington, D.C.

----- Page 86 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
86 
 
*Eysenck, S.B.G., & Abdel-Khalek, A.M. (1992). Cross cultural comparisons of the I7 
Impulsiveness Scales for Egyptian and English adults. European Journal of 
Psychological Assessment, 8, 149-153. 
*Eysenck, S.B.G., Daum, I., Schugens, M.M., & Diehl, J.M. (1990). A cross cultural 
study of impulsiveness, venturesomeness and empathy: Germany and 
England. Zeitschrift Fur Differentielle Und Diagnostiche Psychologie, 11, 209-
213. 
Eysenck, S. B. G., & Eysenck, H. J. (1978). Impulsiveness and venturesomeness: 
Their position in a dimensional system of personality description. 
Psychological Reports, 43(3), 1247-1255. 
*Eysenck, S.B.G., & Jamieson, R.N. (1986). A cross cultural study of personality: 
American and English children. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 1, 
199-208. 
*Eysenck, S.B.G., Pearson, P.R., Easting, G., & Allsopp, J.F. (1985). Age norms for 
impulsiveness, venturesomeness and empathy in adults. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 6, 613-619. doi:10.1016/0191-8869(85)90011-X 
*Fallgatter, A.J., & Herrmann, M.J. (2001). Electrophysiological assessment of 
impulsive behavior in healthy subjects. Neuropsychologia, 39, 328-333. 
doi:10.1016/S0028-3932(00)00115-9   
Farrington, D. P., Loeber, R., & van Kammen, W. B. (1990). Long-term criminal 
outcomes of hyperactivity–impulsivity–attention deficit and conduct problems 
in childhood. In L. N. Robins, & M. Rutter (Eds.), Straight and devious

----- Page 87 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
87 
 
pathways from childhood to adulthood (pp. 62–81). Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Feingold, A. (1994). Gender differences in personality: A meta-analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin, 116, 429–456. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.116.3.429 
*Feldman, D.J. (1999). Haste and disinhibition: An analysis of impulsive cognitive 
style manifest in adult performance on neuropsychological measures. 
Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and 
Engineering, 59, (11-B), 6063 
*Fingeret, M.C., Moeller, F.G., & Stotts, A. (2005). Gender differences among MDMA 
users on psychological and drug history. Addictive Disorders and Their 
Treatment, 4, 43-48. doi:10.1097/01.adt.0000146604.18946.97 
Fischer, A.H., & Manstead, A.S.R. (2000). Gender and emotions in different cultures.  
In A.H. Fischer (Ed.) Gender and emotion: Social psychological perspectives 
(pp. 71-94).  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511628191 
*Fischer, S., & Smith, G.T. (2004). Deliberation affects risk taking beyond sensation 
seeking. Personality and Individual Differences, 36, 527–537 
doi:10.1016/S0191-8869(03)00112-0 
*Flannery, D.J., Vazsonyi, J.T., Torquati, J., & Fridrich, A. (1994). Ethnic and gender 
differences in risk for early adolescent substance use.  Journal of Youth and 
Adolescence, 23, 195-213. doi:10.1007/BF01537445

----- Page 88 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
88 
 
*Flora, R.L. (2007). Behavioral undercontrol and alcohol consumption. Dissertation 
Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 68, (1-B), 
620. 
*Flory, J.D., Harvey, P.D., Mitropoulou,V., New, A.S., Silverman, J.M., Siever, L.J., et 
al. (2006). Dispositional impulsivity in normal and abnormal samples. Journal 
of Psychiatric Research, 40, 438-447. doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2006.01.008 
*Ford, C.M. (1995). Psychosocial correlates of contraceptive and HIV/STD 
preventive behaviors among college students. Dissertation Abstracts 
International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 55, (10-B), 4590. 
*Fossati, A., Barratt, E.S., Acquarini, E., & Di Ceglie, A. (2002). Psychometric 
properties of an adolescent version of the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale-11 for 
a sample of Italian high school students. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 95, 621-
635. 
*Fossati, A., Barratt, E.S., Carretta, I., Leonardi, B., Graziolia, F., & Maffeia, C. 
(2004). Predicting borderline and antisocial personality disorder features in 
nonclinical subjects using measures of impulsivity and aggressiveness. 
Psychiatry Research, 125, 161–170. doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2003.12.001 
*Fossati, A., Ceglie, A.Di., Acquarini, E., & Barratt, E.S. (2001). Psychometric 
properties of an Italian version of the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale-11 (BIS-11) 
in nonclinical subjects. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 57, 815-828. 
doi:10.1002/jclp.1051

----- Page 89 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
89 
 
Fowles, D.C. (1987). Application of a behavioural theory of motivation to the 
concepts of anxiety and impulsivity. Journal of Research in Personality, 21, 
417-436. doi:10.1016/0092-6566(87)90030-4 
Fowles, D.C. (1988). Psychophysiology and psychopathology: A motivational 
approach. Psychophysiology, 25, 373-391. doi:10.1111/j.1469-
8986.1988.tb01873.x 
*Fox, H.C., Axelrod, S.R., Paliwal, P., Sleeper, J., & Sinha, R. (2007). Difficulties in 
emotion regulation and impulse control during cocaine abstinence. Drug and 
Alcohol Dependence, 89, 298-301. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2006.12.026 
Frank, E. (Ed.) (2000). Gender and its effects on psychopathology.  Arlington, VA: 
American Psychiatric Press.  
Franken, I.H.A., & Muris, P. (2006). Gray’s impulsivity dimension: A distinction 
between reward sensitivity versus rash impulsiveness. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 40, 1337-1347. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2005.11.016 
*Franken, I.H.A., Nijs, I., & Van Strien, J.W. (2005). Impulsivity affects mismatch 
negativity (MMN) measures of preattentive auditory processing. Biological 
Psychology, 70, 161-167. doi:10.1016/j.biopsycho.2005.01.007 
*Fu, A-T., Ko, H-C., Wu, J.Y-W., Cherng, B-L., & Cheng, C-P. (2007). Impulsivity and 
expectancy in risk for alcohol use:  Comparing male and female college 
students in Taiwan. Addictive Behaviors, 32, 1887-1896. 
doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2007.01.003

----- Page 90 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
90 
 
Fuster, J.M. (1997). The prefrontal cortex: Anatomy, physiology and 
neuropsychology.  Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven.  
*Galanti, K., Gluck, M.E., & Geliebter, A. (2007). Test meal intake in obese binge 
eaters in relation to impulsivity and compulsivity. International Journal of 
Eating Disorders, 40, 727-732. doi:10.1002/eat.20441 
*Gargallo, B. (1993). Basic variables in reflection-impulsivity: A training programme 
to increase reflectivity. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 8, 151-
167. doi:10.1007/BF03173159 
*Garland, T.A. (1999). The relationship between the diagnosis of ADHD in adults, 
gender and sensation seeking. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: 
The Sciences and Engineering, 60, (5-B), 2338. 
Gerbing, D.W., Ahadi, S.A., & Patton, J.H. (1987). Toward a conceptualization of 
impulsivity: Components across the behavioural and self-report domains.  
Multivariate Behavioral Research, 22, 357-379. 
doi:10.1207/s15327906mbr2203_6 
Gershon, J., & Gershon, J. (2002). A meta-analytic review of gender differences in 
ADHD.  Journal of Attention Disorders, 5, 143-154. 
doi:10.1177/108705470200500302 
*Giancola, P.R., & Parrott, D.J. (2005). Differential effects of past-year stimulant and 
sedative drug use on alcohol-related aggression. Addictive Behaviors, 30, 
1535-1554. doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2005.02.011

----- Page 91 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
91 
 
Giedd, J. N., Clasen, L. S., Lenroot, R., Greenstein, D., Wallace, G. L., Ordaz, S., et 
al. (2006). Puberty-related influences on brain development. Molecular and 
Cellular Endocrinology, 254, 154-162. doi:10.1016/j.mce.2006.04.016 
*Glicksohn, J., & Nahari, G. (2007). Interacting personality traits? Smoking as a test 
case.  European Journal of Personality, 21, 225-234. doi:10.1002/per.609 
Goldstein, J.M., Seidman, L.J., Horton, N.J., Markris, N., Kennedy, D.N., Caviness, 
V.S., et al. (2001). Normal sexual dimorphism of the adult human brain 
assessed in vivo magnetic resonance imaging. Cerebral Cortex, 11, 490-497. 
doi:10.1093/cercor/11.6.490 
Gomez, R. & Gomez, A. (2005).  Convergent, discriminant and concurrent validities 
of measures of the behavioural approach and behavioural inhibition systems: 
Confirmatory factor analytic approach.  Personality and Individual Differences, 
38, 87–102. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2004.03.011  
Gottfredson, M., & Hirschi, T. (1990). A general theory of crime. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press. 
*Goudriaan, A.E., Grekin, E.R., & Sher, J. (2007). Decision making and binge 
drinking: A longitudinal study. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental 
Research, 31, 928-938. doi:10.1111/j.1530-0277.2007.00378.x 
*Grano, N., Keltikangas-Jarvinen, L., Kouvonen, A., Puttonen, S., Viartanen, M., 
Vahtera, J., et al. (2007).  Association of impulsivity with sleep duration and 
insomnia in an employee population.  Personality and Individual Differences, 
43, 307-318. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2006.11.022

----- Page 92 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
92 
 
Grasmick, H.G., Tittle, C.R., Bursik, R.J., & Arneklev, B.J. (1993). Testing the core 
empirical implications of Gottfredson and Hirschi’s general theory of crime.  
Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 30, 5-29. 
doi:10.1177/0022427893030001002 
Gray, J. A. (1970). The psychophysiological basis of introversion-extraversion. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 8, 249−266.  doi:10.1016/0005-
7967(70)90069-0 
Gray, J.A. (1982). The neuropsychology of anxiety. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Gray, J. A., & McNaughton, N. (2000). The neuropsychology of anxiety: An enquiry 
into the functions of the septo-hippocampal system. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
*Green, F.W. (1995). Trait impulsivity and sexual behaviors related to HIV 
transmission. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences 
and Engineering, 56, (1-B), 557. 
*Gudjonsson, G.H., Einarsson, E., Bragason, O.O., & Sigurdsson, J.F. (2006).  
Personality predictors of self-reported offending in Icelandic students. 
Psychology, Crime and Law, 12, 383-393. doi:10.1080/10683160500056929 
*Gupta, U., & Gupta, B.S. (1998). Environmental schematization in men and women 
and its relation to certain personality variables. Journal of the Indian Academy 
of Applied Psychology, 24, (1-2), 99-104. 
Hall, J. A. (1984). Nonverbal sex differences: Communication accuracy and 
expressive style. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

----- Page 93 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
93 
 
Happanay, K., Zelazo, P.D., & Stuss, D.T. (2004). Development of orbitofrontal 
function: Current themes and future directions.  Brain and Cognition, 55, 1-10.   
doi:10.1016/j.bandc.2004.01.001 
Hardy, R. J., & Thompson, S. G. (1998). Detecting and describing heterogeneity in 
meta-analysis. Statistics in Medicine, 17, 841-856. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-
0258(19980430)17:8<841::AID-SIM781>3.0.CO;2-D 
Harris, C. R., Jenkins, M., & Glaser, D. (2006). Gender differences in risk 
assessment: Why do women take fewer risks than men? Judgment and 
Decision Making Journal, 1, 48-63 
*Hartman, M.L., & Rawson, H.E. (1992). Differences in and of correlates of sensation 
seeking in male and female athletes and non-athletes. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 13, 805-812. 
*Hawton, K., Rodham, K., Evans, E., & Weatherall, R. (2002). Deliberate self harm in 
adolescents: Self report survey in schools in England. British Medical Journal, 
325, 1207-1211. doi:10.1136/bmj.325.7374.1207 
*Heaven, P.C.L. (1989). Orientation to authority and its relation to impulsiveness. 
Current Psychology: Research and Reviews, 8, 38-45. 
doi:10.1007/BF02686736      
*Heaven, P.C.L. (1991). Venturesomeness, impulsiveness and Eysenck’s 
personality dimensions: A study among Australian adolescents. Journal of 
Genetic Psychology, 152, 91-99.

----- Page 94 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
94 
 
Hedges, L. V., & Nowell, A. (1995). Sex differences in mental test scores, variability, 
and numbers of high scoring individuals. Science, 269, 41–45. 
doi:10.1126/science.7604277 
Hedges, L. V., & Olkin, I. (1985). Statistical methods for meta-analysis. London: 
Academic Press. 
 
Hedges, L. V., & Pigott, T. D. (2004). The power of statistical tests for moderators in 
meta-analysis. Psychological Methods, 9, 426-445. doi:10.1037/1082-
989X.9.4.426 
 
*Heerey, E.A., Robinson, B.M., McMahon, R.R., & Gold, J.M. (2007). Delay 
discounting in schizophrenia. Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 12, (3), 213-221. 
doi:10.1080/13546800601005900 
Helmers, K.F., Young, S.N. & Pihl, R.O. (1995). Assessment of measures of 
impulsivity in healthy male volunteers.  Personality and Individual Differences, 
19, 927-935. doi:10.1016/S0191-8869(95)00107-7 
*Henle, C.A. (2005). Predicting workplace deviance from the interaction between 
organizational justice and personality. Journal of Managerial Issues, 17, 247-
263. 
*Herba., C.M., Tranah, T., Rubia, K., & Yule, W. (2006). Conduct problems in 
adolescence: Three domains of inhibition and effect of gender. Developmental 
Neuropsychology, 30, 659-695. doi:10.1207/s15326942dn3002_2

----- Page 95 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
95 
 
*Hewlett, P., & Smith, A. (2006). Correlates of daily caffeine consumption. Appetite, 
46, 97-99. doi:10.1016/j.appet.2005.10.004 
Heym, N., Ferguson, E., & Lawrence, C. (2008). An evaluation of the relationship 
between Gray's revised RST and Eysenck's PEN: Distinguishing BIS and 
FFFS in Carver and White's BIS/BAS scales. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 45, 709−715.  doi:10.1016/j.paid.2008.07.013 
Higgins, J. P. T. (2008). Heterogeneity in meta-analysis should be expected and 
appropriately quantified. International Journal of Epidemiology, 37, 1158-
1160. doi:1158-1160.10.1093/ije/dyn204 
Higgins, J. P. T., & Thompson, S. G. (2002). Quantifying heterogeneity in a meta-
analysis. Statistics in Medicine, 21, 1539-1558. doi:10.1002/sim.1186 
Hooper, C.J., Luviana, M., Conklin, H.M., & Yarger, R.S. (2004). Adolescents’ 
performance on the Iowa Gambling Task: Implications for the development of 
decision making and ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Developmental 
Psychology, 40, 1148–1158. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.40.6.1148 
Horgan, T.G., Mast, M.S., Hall, J.A., & Carter, J.D. (2004). Gender differences in 
memory for the appearance of others. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 30, 185-196. doi:10.1177/0146167203259928 
Hsu, C., Soong, W., Stigler, J.W., Hong, C. & Liang, C. (1981). The temperamental 
characteristics of Chinese babies. Child Development, 52, 1337-1340.  
doi:10.2307/1129528

----- Page 96 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
96 
 
*Hulsey, C.D. (2001). Predictors of problem gambling among college students. 
Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and 
Engineering, 61, (7-B), 3847. 
*Hunt, M.K., Hopko, D.R., Bare, R., Lejuez, C.W., & Robinson E.V. (2005). Construct 
validity of the Balloon Analog Risk Task (BART): Associations with 
psychopathy and impulsivity. Assessment, 12, 416-428. 
doi:10.1177/1073191105278740 
*Hutchinson, G.T., Patock-Peckham, J.A., Cheong, J., & Nagoshi, C.T. (1998). 
Irrational beliefs and behavioral misregulation in the role of alcohol abuse 
among college students. Journal of Rational-Emotive and Cognitive Behavior 
Therapy, 16, 61-74. doi: 10.1023/A:1024950407778 
Hyde, J.S. (1986). Gender differences in aggression. In J.S. Hyde & M.C.Linn (Eds.) 
The psychology of gender: Advances through meta-analysis (pp. 51-66). 
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
*Jack, S.J., & Ronan, K.R. (1998). Sensation seeking among high- and low-risk 
sports participants. Personality and Individual Differences, 25, 1063-1083. doi: 
10.1016/S0191-8869(98)00081-6 
*Jackson, C.P., & Matthews, G. (1988). The prediction of habitual alcohol use from 
alcohol related expectancies and personality. Alcohol and Alcoholism, 23, 
305-314. 
Jackson, D. N. (1994). Jackson Personality Inventory—Revised manual. Research 
Psychologists Press, Port Huron, MI.

----- Page 97 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
97 
 
*January, E.W. (2003). Young adult offspring of divorced/separated parents: An 
investigation of their needs for control, structure, and order. Dissertation 
Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 64, (3-B), 
1494. 
Jensen, A. R. (1998). The g Factor: The Science of Mental Ability.  Westport, CT: 
Praeger Publishers. 
*Johnson, M.W., Bickel, W.K., & Baker, F. (2007). Moderate drug use and delay 
discounting: A comparison of heavy, light, and never smokers. Experimental 
and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 15, 187-194. doi:10.1037/1064-
1297.15.2.187 
*Jollant, F., Bellivier, F., Leboyer, M., Astruc, B., Torres, S., Verdier, R., et al. (2005). 
Impaired decision making in suicide attempters. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 162, 304-310. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.162.2.304 
*Justus, A.N., Finn, P.R., & Steinmetz, J.E. (2001). P300, disinhibited personality, 
and early-onset alcohol problems. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental 
Research, 25, 1457-1466. doi:10.1111/j.1530-0277.2001.tb02147.x 
Kagan, J., Rosman, B. L., Day, D., Albert, J., & Phillips, W. (1964). Information-
processing in the child: Significance of analytic and reflective attitudes. 
Psychological Monographs, 78, 1-37. 
*Kazemi, D.M. (2007). Problematic drinking among college students: The role of 
impulsivity and resistance to change. Dissertation Abstracts International: 
Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 68, (3-B), 1591.

----- Page 98 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
98 
 
Keane, C., Maxim, P., & Teevan, J. (1993). Drinking and driving, self-control, and 
gender. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 30, 30– 46. 
doi:10.1177/0022427893030001003 
*Keilp, J.G., Sackeim, H.A., & Mann, J.J. (2005). Correlates of trait impulsiveness in 
performance measures and neuropsychological tests. Psychiatry Research, 
135, 191-201. doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2005.03.006 
Kessler, R.C., Coccaro, E.F., Fava, M., Jaeger, S., Jin, R., & Walters, E. (2006). The 
prevalence and correlates of DSM-IV intermittent explosive disorder in the 
National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 
669-678. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.63.6.669   
*Ketzenberger, K.E., & Forrest, L. (2000). Impulsiveness and compulsiveness in 
alcoholics and nonalcoholics. Addictive Behaviors, 25, 791-795. 
doi:10.1016/S0306-4603(00)00062-9 
Kindlon, D., Mezzacappa, E., & Earls, F. (1995).  Psychometric properties of 
impulsivity measures: Temporal stability, validity and factor structure. Journal 
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Discipline, 36, 645-661.  
doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.1995.tb01316.x 
King, J.E., Weiss, A., & Sisco,M.M. (2008). Aping humans: Age and sex effects in 
chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and human (Homo sapiens) personality.   
Journal of Comparative Psychology, 122, 418-427. doi: 10.1037/a0013125 
*Kirby, K.N., Godoy, R., Reyes-Garcia, V., Byron, E., Apaza, L., Leonard, W., et al. 
(2002). Correlates of delay-discount rates: Evidence from Tsimane’

----- Page 99 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
99 
 
Amerindians of the Bolivian rain forest. Journal of Economic Psychology, 23, 
291-316. doi:10.1016/S0167-4870(02)00078-8     
*Kirby, K.N., & Petry, N.M. (2004). Heroin and cocaine abusers have higher discount 
rates for delayed rewards than alcoholics or non-drug-using controls. 
Addiction, 99, 461-471. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2003.00669.x 
Kirby, K.N., Petry, N.M., & Bickel, W.K. (1999). Heroin addicts have higher discount 
rates for delayed rewards than non-drug-using controls.  Journal of 
Experimental Psychology General, 128, 78-87.  doi:10.1037/0096-
3445.128.1.78 
*Kirby, K.N., Winston, G.C., & Santiesteban, M. (2005). Impatience and grades: 
Delay-discount rates correlate negatively with college GPA. Learning and 
Individual Differences, 15, 213-222. doi:10.1016/j.lindif.2005.01.003    
*Kirkcaldy, B.D., Eysenck, M., Furnham, A.F., & Siefen, G. (1998). Gender, anxiety 
and self-image. Personality and Individual Differences, 24, 677-684. 
*Klinteberg, B.A., Schalling, D., Edman, G., Oreland, L., & Asberry, M. (1987). 
Personality correlates of platelet Monoamine Oxidase (MAO) activity in female 
and male subjects. Neuropsychobiology, 18, 89-96. doi:10.1159/000118399 
Knight, G.P., Fabes, R.A., & Higgins, D.A. (1996). Concerns about drawing causal 
inferences from meta-analyses: An example in the study of gender differences 
in aggression. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 410-421. doi:10.1037/0033-
2909.119.3.410

----- Page 100 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
100 
 
Knight, G.P., Guthrie, I.K., Page, M.C., & Fabes, R.A. (2002). Emotional arousal and 
gender differences in aggression: A meta-analysis. Aggressive Behavior, 28, 
366-393. doi:10.1002/ab.80011 
Kochanska, G., & Knaack, A. (2003). Effortful control as a personality characteristic 
of young children: Antecedents, correlates, and consequences.  Journal of 
Personality, 71, 1087-1112.  doi:10.1111/1467-6494.7106008 
*Kollins, S.H. (2003). Delay discounting is associated with substance use in college 
students.  Addictive Behaviors, 28, 1167-1173. doi:10.1016/S0306-
4603(02)00220-4 
*Krueger, R.F., Markon, K.E., Patrick, C.J., Benning, S.D., & Kramer, M.D. (2007). 
Linking antisocial behaviour, substance use, and personality: An integrative 
quantitative model of the adult externalizing spectrum. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 116, 645-666. doi:10.1037/0021-843X.116.4.645 
Kruger, D. J., & Nesse, R. M. (2006). An evolutionary life-history framework for 
understanding sex differences in human mortality rates. Human Nature, 17, 
74-97. doi:10.1007/s12110-006-1021-z 
LaGrange, T. C., & Silverman, R. A. (1999). Low self-control and opportunity: 
Testing the general theory of crime as an explanation for gender differences 
in delinquency. Criminology, 37, 41– 72.  doi:10.1111/j.1745-
9125.1999.tb00479.x 
Lane, S.D., Cherek, D.R., Rhodes, H.M., Pietras, C.J., & Tcheremissine, O.V. 
(2003).    Relationships among laboratory and psychometric measures of 
impulsivity: Implications in substance abuse and dependence. Addictive

----- Page 101 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
101 
 
Disorders and Their Treatment, 2, 33-40. doi:10.1097/00132576-200302020-
00001  
Larsen, C.S. (2003). Equality for the sexes in human evolution?  Early hominid 
sexual dimorphism and implications for mating systems and social behaviour. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 100, 9103-9104.  doi:10.1073/pnas.1633678100 
Lehre, A.C., Lehre, K.P., Laake, P., & Danbolt, N.C. (2009). Greater intrasex 
phenotype variability in males than in females is a fundamental aspect of 
gender differences in humans. Developmental Psychobiology, 51, 198-206. 
doi:10.1002/dev.20358 
*Lehnart, K.L., Overhober, J.C., & Spiritio, A. (1994). Internalized and externalized 
anger in adolescent suicide attempters. Journal of Adolescent Research, 9, 
105-119. doi:10.1177/074355489491008 
*Lejuez, C. W.,  Aklin, W.M.,  Jones, H.A.,  Richards, J.B., Strong, D.R., Kahler, 
C.W. et al. (2003). The balloon analogue risk task (BART) differentiates 
smokers and nonsmokers. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 
11, 26-33. doi:10.1037/1064-1297.11.1.26      
*Lejuez, C. W., Read, J.P., Kahler, C.W., Richards, J.B., Ramsey, S.E., Stuart, G.L., 
et al. (2002). Evaluation of a behavioral measure of risk taking: The Balloon 
Analogue Risk Task. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 8, 75-84. 
doi:10.1037/1076-898X.8.2.75

----- Page 102 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
102 
 
*Lennings, C.J. (1991). The Schalling Sensation Seeking and Impulsivity Scales: 
Their relationship to time perspective and time awareness. A preliminary 
report. Psychological Reports, 69, 131-136. doi:10.2466/PR0.69.5.131-136 
*Lennings, C.J., & Burns, A.M. (1998). Time perspective: Temporal extension, time 
estimation, and impulsivity. Journal of Psychology: Interdisciplinary and 
Applied, 132, 367-380. doi:10.1080/00223989809599271 
Lerner, J. S., & Keltner, D. (2000). Beyond valence: Toward a model of emotion-
specific influences on judgement and choice. Cognition & Emotion, 14(4), 
473-493. doi:10.1080/026999300402763 
*Leshem, R., & Glicksohn, J. (2007).  The construct of impulsivity revisited.  
Personality and Individual Differences, 43, 681-691. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2007.01.015 
*Li, C-S.R., & Chen, S-H. (2007). Obsessive-compulsiveness and impulsivity in a 
non-clinical population of adolescent males and females. Psychiatry 
Research, 149, 129-138. doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2006.05.001 
*Li, C-S.R., Huang, C-Y., & Sun, C-W.V. (2007). Gender differences in punishment 
and reward sensitivity in a sample of Taiwanese college students. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 43, 475-483. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2006.12.016 
*Lijffijt, M., Caci, H., & Kenemans, J.L. (2005). Validation of the Dutch translation of 
the I7 questionnaire. Personality and Individual Differences, 38, 1123-1133. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2004.07.010

----- Page 103 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
103 
 
Lipsey, M.W., & Wilson, D.B. (2001). Practical Meta Analysis. London: Sage 
Publications Ltd. 
Llewellyn, D.J. (2008). The psychology of risk taking: Toward the integration of 
psychometric and neuropsychological paradigms. American Journal of 
Psychology, 121, 363-376. 
*Llorenet, M., & Torrubia, R. (1988). Type A behaviour patterns and personality 
variables: The correlations of impulsivity and anxiety as compared to 
extraversion and neuroticism. European Journal of Psychiatry, 2, 38-45.   
Loewenstein, G.F., Weber, E.U., Hsee, C.K., & Welch, N. (2001). Risk as feelings.  
Psychological Bulletin, 127, 267-286. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.127.2.267 
Logan, G. D., Schachar, R. J., & Tannock, R. (1997). Impulsivity and inhibitory 
control. Psychological Science, 8, 60-64 
*Lonczak, H.S., Neighbors, C., & Donovan, D.M. (2007). Predicting risky and angry 
driving as a function of gender. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 39, 536–
545. doi:10.1016/j.aap.2006.09.010 
Longshore, D., Turner, S., & Stein, J. A. (1996). Self-control in a criminal sample: An 
examination of validity. Criminology, 34, 209– 228.  doi:10.1111/j.1745-
9125.1996.tb01203.x 
*Lopez Viets, V.C. (2001). Psychosocial variables and college student gambling. 
Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and 
Engineering, 61, (7-B), 3850.

----- Page 104 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
104 
 
*Luengo, M.A., Carrillo-de-la-Pena, M.T., & Otero, J.M. (1990). The components of 
impulsiveness: A comparison of the I7 Impulsiveness Questionnaire and the 
Barratt Impulsiveness Scale. Personality and Individual Differences, 12, 657-
667. doi:10.1016/0191-8869(91)90220-6 
*Lundahl, L.H. (1995). Separation of the effects of family history of alcoholism, heavy 
drinking, and gender on personality functioning and sensitivity to alcohol in 
college students. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The 
Sciences and Engineering, 56, (5-B), 2874. 
*Lyke, J.A., & Spinella, M. (2004). Associations among aspects of impulsivity and 
eating factors in a nonclinical sample. International Journal of Eating 
Disorders, 36, 229-233. doi:10.1002/eat.20025 
Lykken, D.T. (1957). A study of anxiety in the sociopathic personality.  Journal of 
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 55, 6-10. doi: 10.1037/h0047232 
Lykken, D. T. (1995). The antisocial personalities. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
MacDonald, K. (2008). Effortful control, explicit processing, and the regulation of 
human evolved predispositions. Psychological Review, 115, 1012-1031. 
doi:10.1037/a0013327 
Macleod, C. M. (1991). Half a century of research on the Stroop effect: An integrative 
review. Psychological Bulletin, 109, 163-203. 
*Macpherson, J., Sternhagen, S., Miller, T., Devitt, M., Petros, T.V., & Beckwith, B. 
(1996). Effect of caffeine, impulsivity and gender on the components of text

----- Page 105 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
105 
 
processing and recall. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 4, 
438-446. doi:10.1037/1064-1297.4.4.438    
Madden, G.J., Begotka, A.M., Raiff, B.R., & Kastern, L.L. (2003). Delay discounting 
of real and hypothetical rewards.  Experimental and Clinical 
Psychopharmacology, 11, 139–145. doi:10.1037/1064-1297.11.2.139 
*Magid, V., & Colder, C.R., (2007).  The UPPS Impulsive Behavior Scale:  Factor 
structure and associations with college drinking.  Personality and Individual 
Differences, 43, 1927-1937. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2007.06.013 
*Magid, V., MacLean, M.G., & Colder, C.R. (2007). Differentiating between sensation 
seeking and impulsivity through their mediated relations with alcohol use and 
problems. Addictive Behaviors, 32, 2046-2061. 
doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2007.01.015 
*Malle, B.F., & Neubauer, A.C. (1991). Impulsivity, reflection, and questionnaire 
response latencies: No evidence for a broad impulsivity trait. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 12, 865-871. doi:10.1016/0191-8869(91)90153-3 
*Mallet, P., & Vignoli, E. (2007). Intensity seeking and novelty seeking:  Their 
relationship to adolescent risk behaviour and occupational interests. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 43, 2011-2021. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2007.06.018 
*Manuck, S.B., Flory, J.D., McCaffery, J.M., Matthews, K.A., Mann, J.J., & Muldoon, 
M.F. (1998). Aggression, impulsivity, and central nervous system serotonergic 
responsivity in a nonpatient sample. Neuropsychopharmacology, 19, 287-299.

----- Page 106 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
106 
 
*Maras, P., Brosnan, M., Faulkner, N., Montgomery, T., & Vital, P. (2006). 'They are 
out of control': Self-perceptions, risk-taking and attributional style of 
adolescents with SEBDs. Emotional & Behavioural Difficulties, 11, 281-298. 
doi:10.1080/13632750601043861 
*Marczinski, C.A., Combs, S.W., & Fillmore, M.T. (2007). Increased sensitivity to the 
disinhibiting effects of alcohol in binge drinkers. Psychology of Addictive 
Behaviors, 21, 346-354. doi:10.1037/0893-164X.21.3.346 
*Matczak, A. (1990). Reflection-impulsivity: Need for stimulation and intellectual 
potentialities. Polish Psychological Bulletin, 21, 17-25.  
*Maydeu-Olivares, A., Rodriguez-Fornells, A., Gomez-Benito, J., & D'Zurilla, T. J. 
(2000). Psychometric properties of the Spanish adaptation of the Social 
Problem-Solving Inventory-Revised (SPSI-R). Personality and Individual 
Differences, 29, 699-708. doi: 10.1016/S0191-8869(99)00226-3 
Maziade, M., Boudreault, M., Thiverge, J., Caperaa, P., & Cote, R. (1984). Infant 
temperament: SES and gender differences and reliability of measurement in a 
large Quebec sample.  Merrill-Palmer Quarterly Journal of Developmental 
Psychology, 30, 213-226. 
Mazur, J.E. (1987). An adjusting procedure for studying delayed reinforcement. In: 
M.L. Commons, J.E. Mazur, J.A. Nevin, & H. Rachlin (Eds) Quantitative 
analysis of behavior: Vol 5. The effect of delay and intervening events on 
reinforcement value (pp 55–73). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum,  
*McAlister, A.R., Pachana, N., & Jackson, C.J. (2005). Predictors of young dating 
adults’ inclination to engage in extradyadic sexual activities: A multi-

----- Page 107 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
107 
 
perspective study.  British Journal of Psychology, 96, 331-350. 
doi:10.1348/000712605X47936 
McClure, S.M., Laibson, D.I., Loewenstein, G. & Cohen, J.D. (2004). Separate 
neural systems value immediate and delayed monetary rewards. Science, 
306, (5695), 503-507. doi:10.1126/science.1100907 
*McCrae, R.R., & Costa, P.T. (1985). Comparison of EPI and psychoticism with 
measures of the five-factor model of personality. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 6, 587-597. doi:10.1016/0191-8869(85)90008-X 
McCrae, R.R., Terracciano, A., & 78 Members of the Personality Profiles of Cultures 
Project (2005). Universal features of personality traits from the observer’s 
perspective: Data from 50 cultures. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 88, 547–561. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.88.3.547 
*McDaniel, S.R., & Zuckerman, M. (2003). The relationship of impulsive sensation 
seeking and gender to interest and participation in gambling activities. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 35, 1385-1400. doi:10.1016/S0191-
8869(02)00357-4 
*McFatter, R.M. (1998). Emotional intensity: Some components and their relations to 
extraversion and neuroticism. Personality and Individual Differences, 24, 747-
758. doi: 10.1016/S0191-8869(97)00220-1 
McLean, C. P., & Anderson, E. R. (2009). Brave men and timid women? A review of 
the gender differences in fear and anxiety. Clinical Psychology Review, 29, 
496-505. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2009.05.003

----- Page 108 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
108 
 
*McLeish, K.N., & Oxoby, R.J. (2007).  Measuring impatience: Elicited discount rates 
and the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale. Personality and Individual Differences, 
43, 553-565. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2007.01.002 
 
*McMahon, S.D., & Washburn, J.J. (2003). Violence prevention: An evaluation of 
program effects with urban African American students. Journal of Primary 
Prevention, 24, 43-62. doi:10.1023/A:1025075617356 
 
*Meadows, William Robert (1995).  The role of individual difference variables in 
accounting for associations between alcohol consumption and sexual risk-
taking. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and 
Engineering, 56, (12-B), 7050.  
 
Meda, S.A., Stevens, M.C., Potenza, M.N., Pittman, B., Gueorguieva, R., Andrews, 
M.M., et al. (2009).  Investigating the behavioral and self-report constructs of 
impulsivity domains using principal component analysis.  Behavioral 
Pharmacology, 20, 390-399. doi:10.1097/FBP.0b013e32833113a3 
 
*Mehrabian, A. (2000). Beyond IQ: Broad-based measurement of individual success 
potential or "emotional intelligence". Genetic, Social, and General Psychology 
Monographs, 126, 133-239. 
*Mejia, R., Kliewer, W., & Williams, L. (2006). Domestic violence exposure in 
Columbian adolescents: Pathways to violent and prosocial behaviour. Journal 
of Traumatic Stress, 19, 257-267. doi:10.1002/jts.20116

----- Page 109 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
109 
 
Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Buckholtz, J.W., Kolachana, B.R., Hariri, A., Pezawas, L., 
Wabnitz, A., et al. (2006). Neural mechanisms of genetic risk for impulsivity 
and violence in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America, 103, 6269-6274. doi:10.1073/pnas.0511311103  
Miettunen, J., Veijola, J., Lauronen, E., Kantojarvi, L., & Joukamaa, M. (2007). Sex 
differences in Cloninger’s temperament dimensions: A meta-analysis. 
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 48, 161-169. 
doi:10.1016/j.comppsych.2006.10.007 
Milich, R., & Kramer, J. (1984). Reflections on impulsivity: An empirical investigation 
of impulsivity as a construct. In K. Gadow and I. Bialer (Eds.), Advances in 
learning and behavioral disabilities (Vol. 3, pp. 57-94). Greenwich, CT: JAI 
Press. 
 
Miller, E., Joseph, S., & Tudway, J. (2004). Assessing the component structure of 
four self-report measures of impulsivity. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 37, 349-358. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2003.09.008 
 
Mitchell, J.T., Kimbrel, N.A., Hundt, N.E., Cobb, A.R., Nelson-Gray, R.O., & Lootens, 
C.M. (2007). An analysis of Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory and the Five-
Factor model. European Journal of Personality, 21, 869–887.  
doi:10.1002/per.644 
Mitchell, S.H. (1999) Measures of impulsivity in cigarette smokers and non-smokers.  
Psychopharmacology, 146, 455-464.  doi:10.1007/PL00005491

----- Page 110 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
110 
 
Mobini, S., Grant, A., Kass, A.E., & Yeomans, M.R. (2007).  Relationships between 
functional and dysfunctional impulsivity, delay discounting and cognitive 
distortions.  Personality and Individual Differences, 43, 1517-1528. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2007.04.009 
Moffitt, T.E., Caspi, A., Rutter, M., & Silva, P.A. (2001). Sex differences in antisocial 
behaviour: Conduct disorder, delinquency and violence in the Dunedin 
longitudinal study. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511490057 
Mogg, K., Bradley, B. P., Dixon, C., Fisher, S., Twelftree, H., & McWilliams, A. 
(2000). Trait anxiety, defensiveness and selective processing of threat: An 
investigation using two measures of attentional bias. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 28, 1063−1077.  doi:10.1016/S0191-8869(99)00157-9 
*Molto, J., Segarra, P., & Avila, C. (1993). Impulsivity and total response speed to a 
personality questionnaire. Personality and Individual Differences, 15, 97-98. 
doi:10.1016/0191-8869(93)90047-7 
Muraven, M., & Baumeister, R.F. (2000). Self-regulation and depletion of limited 
resources: Does self-control resemble a muscle?  Psychological Bulletin, 126, 
247-259.  doi:10.1037/0033-2909.126.2.247 
Murray, K. T., & Kochanska, G. (2002). Effortful control: Factor structure and relation 
to externalizing and internalizing behaviors. Journal of Abnormal Child 
Psychology, 30(5), 503-514

----- Page 111 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
111 
 
*Nagoshi, C.T. (1999). Perceived control of drinking and other predictors of alcohol 
use and problems in a college student sample. Addiction Research, 7, 291-
306. doi:10.3109/16066359909004388 
*Nagoshi, C.T., Wood, M.D., Cote, C.C., & Abbit, S.M. (1994). College drinking 
game participation within the context of other predictors of alcohol use and 
problems. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 8, 203-213. doi:10.1037/0893-
164X.8.4.203 
Nakhaie, M. R., Silverman, R. A., & LaGrange, T. C. (2000). Self-control and social 
control: An examination of gender, ethnicity, class, and delinquency. 
Canadian Journal of Criminology, 25, 35-59. doi:10.2307/3341910 
*Neal, D.J., & Carey, K.B. (2007). Association between alcohol intoxication and 
alcohol-related problems:  An event-level analysis. Psychology of Addictive 
Behaviors, 21, 194-204. doi:10.1037/0893-164X.21.2.194 
*Neubauer, A.C. (1992). Psychometric comparison of two circadian rhythm 
questionnaires and their relationship with personality. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 13,125-131. doi:10.1016/0191-8869(92)90035-N 
Newman, J.P., MacCoon, D.G., Vaughn, L.J. & Sadeh, N. (2005). Validating a 
distinction between primary and secondary psychopathy with measures of 
Gray's BIS and BAS constructs.  Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 114, 319-
323.   doi:10.1037/0021-843X.114.2.319 
Newman, J. P., Widom, C. S., & Nathan, S. (1985). Passive-avoidance in syndromes 
of disinhibition: Psychopathy and extraversion. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 48, 1316-1327. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.48.5.1316

----- Page 112 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
112 
 
*Ng, H.S., Cooper, M., & Chandler, P. (1998).The Eysenckian personality structure: 
A "Giant Three" or "Big Five" model in Hong Kong? Personality and Individual 
Differences, 25, 1111-1131. doi:10.1016/S0191-8869(98)00106-8 
*Nietfeld, J., & Bosma, A. (2003). Examining the self-regulation of impulsive and 
reflective response styles on academic tasks. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 37, 118-140. doi:10.1016/S0092-6566(02)00564-0 
Nigg, J. T. (2001). Is ADHD a disinhibitory disorder? Psychological Bulletin, 127, 
571-598.10.1037//0033-2909.127.5.571 
*Nijs, I.M.T., Franken, I.H.A., & Smulders, F.T.Y. (2007).  BIS/BAS sensitivity and 
P300 event-related brain potential.  Journal of Psychophysiology, 21, 83-90. 
doi:10.1027/0269-8803.21.2.83  
Norris, F. H., Matthews, B. A., & Riad, J. K. (2000). Characterological, situational, 
and behavioral risk factors for motor vehicle accidents: A prospective 
examination. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 32, 505-515 
doi:10.1016/S0001-4575(99)00068-8 
*Nower, L., Derevensky, J.L., & Gupta, R. (2004). The relationship of impulsivity, 
sensation seeking, coping, and substance use in youth gamblers. Psychology 
of Addictive Behaviors, 18, 49-55. doi:10.1037/0893-164X.18.1.49  
*Oas, P. (1984). Validity of the Draw-a-Person and Bender Gestalt Tests as 
measures of impulsivity with adolescents. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 52, 1011-1019. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.52.6.1011

----- Page 113 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
113 
 
Offer, D., Ostrov, E., and Howard, K. I. (1982). The Offer Self-Image Questionnaire 
for Adolescents: A Manual. Chicago: Michael Reese Hospital. 
*Overman, W.H., Frassrand, K., Ansel, S., Trawalter, S., Bies, B., & Redmond, A. 
(2004).  Performance on the IOWA card task by adolescents and adults. 
Neuropsychologia, 42, 1838-1851. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2004.03.014 
*Owsley, C., McGwin, G., & McNeal, S.F. (2003). Impact of impulsiveness, 
venturesomeness, and empathy on driving by older adults. Journal of Safety 
Research, 34, 353-359. doi:10.1016/j.jsr.2003.09.013 
*Paaver, M., Nordquist, N., Parik, J., Harro, M., Oreland, L., & Harro, J. (2007). 
Platelet MAO activity and the 5-HTT gene promoter polymorphism are 
associated with impulsivity and cognitive style in visual information 
processing. Psychopharmacology, 194, 545–554. doi:10.1007/s00213-007-
0867-z 
Pampel, F. C. (2001). Gender equality and the sex differential in mortality from 
accidents in high income nations. Population Research and Policy Review, 
20, 397-421 
*Pang, J.S., & Schultheiss, O.C. (2005). Assessing implicit motives in U.S. college 
students: Effects of picture type and position, gender and ethnicity, and cross-
cultural comparisons. Journal of Personality Assessment, 85, 280-294. 
doi:10.1207/s15327752jpa8503_04

----- Page 114 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
114 
 
Parsey, R., Oquendo, M., Simpson, N., Ogden, R., Heertum, R.V., Arango, V., et al. 
(2002). Effects of sex, age and aggressive traits in man on brain serotonin 5-
HT1A receptor binding potential measured by PET using [C-11]WAY-100635. 
Brain Research, 954, 173-182. 
*Patock-Peckham, J.A., Hutchinson, G.T., Cheong, J., & Nagoshi, C.T. (1998). Effect 
of religion and religiosity on alcohol use in a college student sample. Drug and 
Alcohol Dependence, 49, 81-88. doi:10.1016/S0376-8716(97)00142-7 
*Patock-Peckham, J.A., & Morgan-Lopez, A.A. (2006). College drinking behaviors: 
Mediational links between parenting styles, impulse control, and alcohol-
related outcomes. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 20, 117-125. 
doi:10.1037/0893-164X.20.2.117 
Patterson, C.M., & Newman, J.P. (1993). Reflectivity and learning from aversive 
events: Toward a psychological mechanism for the syndromes of disinhibition.  
Psychological Review, 100, 716-736. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.100.4.716 
*Patton, J.H., Stanford, M.S., & Barratt, E.S. (1995). Factor structure of the Barratt 
Impulsiveness Scale. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 51, 768-719. 
doi:10.1002/1097-4679(199511)51:6<768::AID-JCLP2270510607>3.0.CO;2-1 
Paulsen, K., & Johnson, M. (1980). Impulsivity: A multidimensional concept with 
developmental aspects. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 8, 269-277. 
doi:10.1007/BF00919070 
*Pearson, P.R., Francis, L.J., & Lightbrown, T.J. (1986). Impulsivity and religiosity. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 7, 89-94. doi:10.1016/0191-
8869(86)90112-1

----- Page 115 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
115 
 
*Peluso, M.A.M., Hatch, J.P., Glahn, D.C., Monkul, E.S., Sanches, M., Najt, P., et al. 
(2007).  Trait impulsivity in patients with mood disorders. Journal of Affective 
Disorders, 100, 227-231. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2006.09.037 
*Penas-Lledo, E., de Dios Fernandez, J., & Waller, G. (2004). Association of anger 
with bulimic and other impulsive behaviours among non-clinical women and 
men.  European Eating Disorders Review, 12, 392-397. doi:10.1002/erv.588 
Penke, L., Denissen, J. J. A., & Miller, G. F. (2007). The evolutionary genetics of 
personality. European Journal of Personality, 21, 549-587.  10.1002/per.629. 
*Perez, J., & Torrubia, R. (1985). Sensation seeking and antisocial behaviour in a 
student sample. Personality and Individual Differences, 6,  401-403. 
doi:10.1016/0191-8869(85)90068-6 
Perkins, A., & Corr, P. J. (2006). Reactions to threat and personality: Psychometric 
differentiation of intensity and direction dimensions of human defensive 
behavior. Behavioral and Brain Research, 169, 21−28.  
doi:10.1016/j.bbr.2005.11.027 
*Petry, N.M., Kirby, K.N., & Kranzler, H.R. (2002). Effects of gender and family 
history of alcohol dependence on a behavioral task of impulsivity in healthy 
subjects. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 63, 83-90.   
*Pfefferbaum, B., & Wood, P.B. (1994). Self report study of impulsive and delinquent 
behavior in college students. Journal of Adolescent Health, 15, 295-302. 
doi:10.1016/1054-139X(94)90602-5

----- Page 116 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
116 
 
Piquero, A. R., & Rosay, A. B. (1998). The reliability and validity of Grasmick et al.'s 
self-control scale: A comment on Longshore et al. Criminology, 36, 157-174. 
doi:10.1111/j.1745-9125.1998.tb01244.x 
*Plastow, R.L. (2007). Lifestyle and chronic illness: Variables affecting risk 
perception. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and 
Engineering, 67, (7-B), 4093.   
Plavcan, J. M. (2001).  Sexual dimorphism in primate evolution.   Yearbook of 
Physical Anthropology, 44, 25-53. 
Plotkin, H. (1997). Darwin machines and the nature of knowledge.  Harvard, Mass: 
Harvard University Press.  
*Plouffe, L., & Gravelle, F. (1989). Age, sex and personality correlates of self 
actualization in elderly adults. Psychological Reports, 65, 643-647.  
*Pompili, M., Innamorati, M., Lester, D., Brunetti, S., Tatarelli, R., & Girardi, P. 
(2007).  Gender effects among undergraduates relating to suicide risk, 
impulsivity, aggression and self-efficacy. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 43, 2047-2056. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2007.06.019 
*Pontzer, D.P. (2007). Testing reintegrative shaming theory as an explanation for 
involvement in bullying among university students: Parenting, personality, and 
the dyadic relationship between bullies and their victims. Dissertation 
Abstracts International Section A: Humanities and Social Sciences, 68, (3-A), 
1171.

----- Page 117 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
117 
 
Porteus, S.D. (1950). The Porteus Maze Test and intelligence. Pacific Books, Palo 
Alto.  
Posner, M.I., & Rothbart, M.K. (2009). Toward a physical basis of attention and self-
regulation.  Physics of Life Reviews, 6, 103-120.  
doi:10.1016/j.plrev.2009.02.001 
Pratt, T. C., & Cullen, F. T. (2000). The empirical status of Gottfredson and Hirschi's 
general theory of crime: A meta-analysis. Criminology, 38, 931-964. 
doi:10.1111/j.1745-9125.2000.tb00911.x 
Quilty, L. C., & Oakman, J. M. (2004). The assessment of behavioural activation: 
The relationship between impulsivity and behavioural activation. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 37, 429–442. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2003.09.014 
*Quiroga, M.A., Hernandez, J.M., Rubio, V., Shih, P.C., Santacreu, J., & Howard, 
V.N. (2007). Influence of impulsivity-reflexivity when testing dynamic spatial 
ability: Sex and g differences. The Spanish Journal of Psychology, 10, 294-
302. 
*Ramadan, R., & McMurran, M. (2005). Alcohol and aggression: Gender differences 
in their relationships with impulsiveness, sensation seeking and social 
problem solving.  Journal of Substance Use, 10, 215-224. 
doi:10.1080/14657890412331319454 
*Rammsayer, T. H., & Rammstedt, B. (2000).  Sex-related differences in time 
estimation: The role of personality. Personality and Individual Differences, 29, 
301-312. doi:10.1016/S0191-8869(99)00194-4

----- Page 118 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
118 
 
*Rawlings, D. (1984). The correlation of EPQ Psychoticism with two behavioural 
measures of impulsivity. Personality and Individual Differences, 5, 591-594. 
doi:10.1016/0191-8869(84)90034-5 
*Reeve, C.L. (2007).  Functional impulsivity and speeded ability test performance.  
International Journal of Selection and Assessment, 15, 56-62. 
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2389.2007.00367.x 
Reitan R. M. (1958). Validity of the Trail Making test as an indicator of organic brain 
damage. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 8, 271-276. doi:10.2466/PMS.8.7.271-
276 
*Reto, C.S., Dalenberg, C.J., & Coe, M.T. (1993). Dissociation and physical abuse 
as predictors of bulimic symptomatology and impulse dysregulation. Eating 
Disorders: The Journal of Treatment and Prevention, 1, 229-239. 
doi:10.1080/10640269308251162 
*Reynolds, B. (2003). Impulsivity and friends who smoke as predictors of adolescent 
smoking. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and 
Engineering, 63, (12-B), 6122. 
*Reynolds, B., Ortengren, A., Richards, J.B., & de Wit, H. (2006). Dimensions of 
impulsive behaviour: Personality and behavioural measures. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 40, 305-315. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2005.03.024 
*Reynolds, B., Patak, M., Shroff, P., Penfold, R.B., Melanko, S., & Duhig, A.M. 
(2007).  Laboratory and self-report assessments of impulsive behaviour in

----- Page 119 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
119 
 
adolescent daily smokers and non smokers. Experimental and Clinical 
Psychopharmacology, 15, 264-271. doi: 10.1037/1064-1297.15.3.264 
Reynolds, B., Penfold, R.B., & Patak, M. (2008).  Dimensions of impulsive behavior 
in adolescents: Laboratory behavioral assessments. Experimental and Clinical 
Psychopharmacology, 16, 124–131.  doi: 10.1037/1064-1297.16.2.124 
*Reynolds, B., Richards, J.B., & de Wit, H. (2006). Acute-alcohol effects on the 
experiential discounting task (EDT) and a question-based measure of delay 
discounting. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 83, 194-202. 
doi:10.1016/j.pbb.2006.01.007 
*Reynolds, B., Richards, J.B., Horn, K., & Karraker, K. (2004). Delay discounting and 
probability discounting as related to cigarette smoking status in adults. 
Behavioural Processes, 65, 35-42. doi:10.1016/S0376-6357(03)00109-8 
*Rhyff, C.D.M., & Heincke, S.G. (1983). Subjective organization of personality in 
adulthood and aging. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44, 807-
816. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.44.4.807 
Richards, J. B., Zhang, L., Mitchell, S. H., & de Wit, H. (1999). Delay or probability 
discounting in a model of impulsive behavior: Effect of alcohol. Journal of the 
Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 71(2), 121-143.  
doi:10.1901/jeab.1999.71-121 
*Rigby, K., Mak, A.S., & Slee, P.T. (1989). Impulsiveness, orientation to institutional 
authority, and gender as factors in self reported delinquency among 
Australian adolescents. Personality and Individual Differences, 10, 689-692. 
doi:10.1016/0191-8869(89)90228-6

----- Page 120 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
120 
 
*Rigby, K., Slee, P., & Mak, A. (1992). Impulsiveness, attitude to authority, and 
gender. Psychological Reports, 71, 121-122. doi:10.2466/PR0.71.5.121-122  
*Rim, Y. (1994). Impulsivity, venturesomeness, empathy and schizotypy.  Personality 
and Individual Differences, 17, 853-854. doi:10.1016/0191-8869(94)90053-1 
Roberts, A.C., Robbins, T.W., & Everitt, B.J., (1988). The effects of intradimensional 
and extradimensional shifts on visual discrimination learning in humans and 
nonhuman primates. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section B, 
Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 40, 321–341. 
*Robinson, T.N. (1990). Eysenck personality measures and religious orientation. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 11, 915-921. doi:10.1016/0191-
8869(90)90272-S 
Robinson, V. (2008). Everyday masculinities and extreme sports: Male identity and 
rock climbing. Oxford: Berg. 
Rodriguez-Fornells, A., Lorenzo-Seva, U., & Andres-Pueyo, A. (2002). Are high-
impulsive and high risk-taking people more motor disinhibited in the presence 
of incentive? Personality and Individual Differences, 32, 661-683. 
Rolls, E. T. (2000). The orbitofrontal cortex and reward. Cerebral Cortex, 10, 284–
294. 
*Romero, E., Luengo, M.A., & Sobral, J. (2001). Personality and antisocial 
behaviour: Study of temperamental dimensions. Personality and Individual 
Differences. 31, 329-348. doi:10.1016/S0191-8869(00)00139-2

----- Page 121 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
121 
 
Rood, L., Roelofs, J., Bogels, S., Nolen-Hoeksema, S. & Schouten, E. (2009).  The 
influence of emotion-focused rumination and distraction on depressive 
symptoms in non-clinical youth: A meta-analytic review.  Clinical Psychology 
Review, 29, 607–616.  doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2009.07.001 
*Rose, P. (2007). Mediators of the association between narcissism and compulsive 
buying:  The roles of materialism and impulse control. Psychology of Addictive 
Behaviors, 21, 576-581. doi:10.1037/0893-164X.21.4.576 
Ross, S.R., Molto, J., Poy, R., Segarra, P. Pastor, M.C. & Montanes, S. (2007). 
Gray's model and psychopathy: BIS but not BAS differentiates primary from 
secondary psychopathy in noninstitutionalized young adults.  Personality and 
Individual Differences, 43, 1644-1655.  doi:10.1016/j.paid.2007.04.020 
*Roth, M., Hammelstein, P., & Brahler, E. (2007). Beyond a youthful behavior style: 
Age and sex differences in sensation seeking based on need theory. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 43, 1839-1850. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2007.06.004 
Rothbart, M.K. (2007). Temperament, development and personality. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 207-212.  doi:10.1111/j.1467-
8721.2007.00505.x 
Rothbart, M.K., Ahadi, S.A., & Evans, D.E. (2000). Temperament and personality: 
Origins and outcomes.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 
122-135.  doi:10.1037/0022-3514.78.1.122

----- Page 122 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
122 
 
Rothbart, M.K., & Bates, J.E. (2006). Temperament. In W. Damon, R. Lerner, & N. 
Eisenberg (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, 
and personality development (6th ed., pp. 99–166). New York: Wiley. 
Rothbart, M.K., & Derryberry, D. (1981). Development of individual differences in 
temperament. In M.E. Lamb & A. Brown (Eds.), Advances in developmental 
psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 37–86). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Rothbart, M.K., & Posner, M.I. (2006). Temperament, attention, and developmental 
psychopathology. In D. Cicchetti & D. Cohen (Eds.), Developmental 
psychopathology: Vol. 2. Developmental Neuroscience (2nd ed., pp. 465–
501). New York: Wiley.  
*Rowe, D.C., Vazsonyi, A.T., & Flannery, D.J. (1995). Sex differences in crime: Do 
means and within-sex variation have similar causes? Journal of Research in 
Crime and Delinquency, 32, 84-100. doi:10.1177/0022427895032001004  
*Sahoo, M.K. (1985). Prediction of personality dimensions and risk taking behavior. 
Perspectives in Psychological Research, 8, 57-62.  
*Saklofske, D.H., & Eysenck, S.B.G. (1983). Impulsiveness and venturesomeness in 
Canadian children. Psychological Reports, 52, 147-152. 
*Sasaki, H., & Kanachi, M. (2005). The effects of trial repetition and individual 
characteristics on decision making under uncertainty. Journal of Psychology: 
Interdisciplinary and Applied, 139, 233-246. doi:10.3200/JRLP.139.3.233-246 
Schalling, D. (1978). Psychopathy-related personality variables and the 
psychophysiology of socialization.  In R.D. Hare & D. Schalling (Eds.)

----- Page 123 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
123 
 
Psychopathic behaviour: Approaches to research, pp. 85-106. Chichester: 
John Wiley and Sons.  
*Schaughency, E., McGee, R., Shyamala, N., Feehan, M., & Silva, P.A. (1994). Self 
reported inattention, impulsivity and hyperactivity at ages 15 and 18 in the 
general population. Journal of the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 33, 173-184. doi:10.1097/00004583-199402000-
00004 
Schmitt, D.P., Realo, A., Voracek, M., & Allik, J. (2008). Why can’t a man be more 
like a woman? Sex differences in Big Five personality traits across 55 
cultures. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 168–182. doi: 
10.1037/a0014651 
Schulze, R. (2004). Meta-analysis: A comparison of approaches. Lower Saxony, 
Germany: Hogrege & Huber.  
*Schwartz, S.J. (2007). The structure of identity consolidation:  Multiple correlated 
constructs of one superordinate construct? Identity, 7, 27-49. 
*Schweizer, K. (2002). Does impulsivity influence performance in reasoning? 
Personality and Individual Differences, 33, 1031-1043. doi:10.1016/S0191-
8869(01)00209-4 
*Segarra, P., Ross, S.R., Pastor, M.C., Montanes, S., Poy, R., & Molto, J. (2007). 
MMPI-2 predictors of Gray’s two-factor reinforcement sensitivity theory. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 43, 437-448. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2006.12.013

----- Page 124 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
124 
 
Shallice, T. (1982). Specific impairments of planning. Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society of London Series B-Biological Sciences, 298, 199-209. 
doi:10.1098/rstb.1982.0082 
Shepherd, J. (1990). Violent crime in Bristol - an Accident and Emergency 
Department perspective. British Journal of Criminology, 30, 289-305 
*Sigurdsson, J.F., Gudjonsson, G.H., Bragason, A.V., Kristjansdottir, E., & 
Sigfusdottir, I.D. (2006). The role of violent cognition in the relationship 
between personality and the involvement in violent films and computer 
games. Personality and Individual Differences, 41, 381-392. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2006.02.006 
*Simo, S., Santana, G., & Perez, J. (1991). A French Junior Sensation Seeking 
Scale (J-SSS). Personality and Individual Differences, 12, 669-670. 
doi:10.1016/0191-8869(91)90221-V 
*Simons, J.S. (2003). Differential prediction of alcohol use and problems: The role of 
biopsychological and social-environmental variables. American Journal of 
Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 29, 861-879. doi:10.1081/ADA-120026265 
*Simons, J.S., & Carey, K.B. (2006). An affective and cognitive model of marijuana 
and alcohol problems. Addictive Behaviors, 31, 1578-1592. 
doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2005.12.004 
*Simons, J.S., Carey, K.B., & Gaher, R.M. (2004). Lability and impulsivity 
synergistically increase risk for alcohol-related problems. American Journal of 
Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 30, 685-694. doi:10.1081/ADA-200032338

----- Page 125 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
125 
 
*Simons, J.S., Gaher, R.M., Correia, C.J., Hansen, C.L., & Christopher, M.S. (2005).  
An affective-motivational model of marijuana and alcohol problems among 
college students.  Psychology of Addictive Behaviours, 19, 326-334. 
doi:10.1037/0893-164X.19.3.326 
Smillie, L.D. (2008). What is reinforcement sensitivity? Neuroscience paradigms for 
approach-avoidance process theories of personality.  European Journal of 
Personality, 22, 359-384.  doi:10.1002/per.674 
*Smillie, L.D., Jackson, C.J., & Dalgleish, L.I. (2006). Conceptual distinctions among 
Carver and White’s (1994) BAS scales: A reward-reactivity versus trait 
impulsivity perspective. Personality and Individual Differences, 40, 1039-1050. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2005.10.012 
Smith, G. T., Fischer, S., Cyders, M. A., Annus, A. M., Spillane, N. S., & McCarthy, 
D.M. (2007). On the validity and utility of discriminating among impulsivity-like 
traits.   Assessment, 14, 155-170. doi:10.1177/1073191106295527 
Smith, C. L., & Hantula, D. A. (2008). Methodological considerations in the study of 
delay discounting in intertemporal choice: A comparison of tasks and modes. 
Behavior Research Methods, 40, 940-953.  10.3758/brm.40.4.940 
*Smith, P., Waterman, M., & Ward, N. (2006). Driving aggression in forensic and 
non-forensic populations: Relationships to self-reported levels of aggression, 
anger and impulsivity. British Journal of Psychology, 97, 387-403. 
doi:10.1348/000712605X79111

----- Page 126 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
126 
 
*Soloff, P.H., Kelly, T.M., Strotmeyer, S.J., Malone, K.M., & Mann, J.J. (2003). 
Impulsivity, gender, and response to fenfluramine challenge in borderline 
personality disorder. Psychiatry Research, 119, 11-24. doi:10.1016/S0165-
1781(03)00100-8   
*Spence, J.T., Losoff, M., & Robbins, A.S. (1991). Sexually aggressive tactics in 
dating relationships: Personality and attitudinal correlates. Journal of Social 
and Clinical Psychology, 10, 289-304. 
*Spillane, N.S., & Smith, G.T. (2006a). Empirical support for a multifaceted model of 
American Indian drinking. Paper presented at the annual international meeting 
of the Research Society on Alcoholism, Baltimore, MD. 
*Spillane, N.S., & Smith, G.T. (2006b). Personality risk for smoking behavior.  
Unpublished manuscript.  
*Spinella, M. (2005). Prefrontal substrates of empathy: Psychometric evidence in a 
community sample. Biological Psychology, 70, 175-181. 
doi:10.1016/j.biopsycho.2004.01.005 
*Stanford, M.S., Greve, K.W., Boudreaux, J.K, Mathias, C.W., & Brumbelow, J.L. 
(1996). Impulsiveness and risk taking behavior: Comparison of high school 
and college students using the Barrett Impulsiveness Scale. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 21, 1073-1075. doi:10.1016/S0191-8869(96)00151-1 
* Stanford, M.S., Greve, K.W., & Dickens, T.J. (1995). Irritability and impulsiveness: 
Relationship to self reported impulsive aggression. Personality and Individual 
Differences,19, 757-760. doi:10.1016/0191-8869(95)00144-U

----- Page 127 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
127 
 
Stanford, M.S., Mathias, C.W., Dougherty, D.M., Lake, S.L., Anderson, N.E.,  & 
Patton, J.H. (2009). Fifty years of the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale: An update 
and review. Personality and Individual Differences, 47, 385-393. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2009.04.008 
*Starrett, R.H. (1983). The conceptual commonality between impulsiveness as a 
personality trait and as an ego development stage. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 4, 265-274. doi:10.1016/0191-8869(83)90148-4 
Sternberg, L. (2007). Risk taking in adolescence: New perspectives from brain and 
behavioral science. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 55-59.  
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8721.2007.00475.x 
*Stewart, M.E., Ebmeier, K.P., & Deary, I.J. (2004).  The structure of Cloninger’s 
tridimensional personality questionnaire in a British sample. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 36, 1403-1418. doi:10.1016/S0191-8869(03)00237-X 
*Stoltenberg, S.F., Batien, B.D., & Birgenheir, D.G. (2008). Does gender moderate 
associations among impulsivity and health-risk behaviors? Addictive 
Behaviors, 33, 252-265. doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2007.09.004 
*Stoltenberg, S.F., Glass, J.M., Chermack, S.T., Flynn, H.A., Li, S., & Weston, M.E., 
et al. (2006). Possible association between response inhibition and a variant 
in the brain-expressed tryptophan hydroxylase-2 gene. Psychiatric Genetics, 
16, 35-38. doi:10.1097/01.ypg.0000176528.30362.34 
Stroop, J.P. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 18, 643-662.

----- Page 128 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
128 
 
Su, R., Rounds, J., & Armstrong, P.I. (2009). Men and things, women and people: A 
meta-analysis of sex differences in interests. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 859-
884. doi:10.1037/a0017364 
*Sullivan, K.T. (1997). Contributions of personality and behavior to change in marital 
satisfaction. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and 
Engineering, 58, (6-B), 3328. 
Swann, A.C., Bjork, J.M., Moeller, F.G., & Dougherty, D.M. (2002). Two models of 
impulsivity: Relationship to personality traits and psychopathology.  Biological 
Psychiatry, 51, 988-994.  doi:10.1016/S0006-3223(01)01357-9 
Swanson, M.C.J., Bland, R.C., & Newman, S.C. (1994). Antisocial personality 
disorders.  Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 89, 63-70. doi:10.1111/j.1600-
0447.1994.tb05792.x 
Tangney, J.P., Baumeister, R.F., & Boone, A.L. (2004). High self-control predicts 
good adjustment, less pathology, better grades, and interpersonal success.  
Journal of Personality, 72, 271-324.  doi:10.1111/j.0022-3506.2004.00263.x 
*Taylor, J. (2005). Substance use disorders and cluster B personality disorders: 
Physiological, cognitive, and environmental correlates in a college sample. 
American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 31, 515-535.10.1081/ada-
200068107. 
Taylor, S. E., Klein, L. C., Lewis, B. P., Gruenewald, T. L., Gurung, R. A. R., & 
Updegraff, J. A. (2000). Biobehavioral responses to stress in females: Tend-
and-befriend, not fight-or-flight. Psychological Review, 107, 411-429. 
doi:10.1037/0033-295X.107.3.411

----- Page 129 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
129 
 
Tellegen, A. (1982). Brief manual for the Differential Personality Questionnaire. 
University of Minnesota Press.  
*Thompson, M.P., Ho, C-H., & Kingree, J.B. (2007). Prospective associations 
between delinquency and suicidal behaviors in a nationally representative 
sample. Journal of Adolescent Health, 40, 232-237. 
doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2006.10.016 
*Tinius, T.P. (2003). The Intermediate Visual and Auditory Continuous Performance 
Test as a neuropsychological measure. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 
18, 199-214. doi:10.1093/arclin/18.2.199 
Tittle, C. R., Ward, D. A., & Grasmick, H. G. (2003). Gender, age, and 
crime/deviance: A challenge to self-control theory. Journal of Research in 
Crime and Delinquency, 40, 426–453.  doi:10.1177/0022427803256074 
*Torrubia, R., Avila, C., Molto, J., & Caseras, X. (2001). The Sensitivity to 
Punishment and Sensitivity to Reward Questionnaire (SPSRQ) as a measure 
of Gray's anxiety and impulsivity dimensions. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 31, 837-862. doi:10.1016/S0191-8869(00)00183-5 
*Toyer, E.A. (1999). Development and validation of the A-ADHD: An MMPI-A scale 
to assess Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in adolescents. Dissertation 
Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 60, (3-B), 
1319. 
U.S. Department of Justice (n.d.). Crime in the United States, 2008.  Retrieved 
March 15, 2010, from http://www.fbi.gov/ucr/cius2008/data/table_42.html

----- Page 130 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
130 
 
*Uzieblo, K., Verschuere, B., & Crombez, G. (2007).  The Psychopathic Personality 
Inventory:  Construct validity of the two-factor structure.  Personality and 
Individual Differences, 43, 657-667. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2007.01.008 
*van den Bree, M.B.M., Przybeck, T.R., & Cloninger, C.R. (2006). Diet and 
personality:  Associations in a population-based sample. Appetite, 46, 177-
188. doi:10.1016/j.appet.2005.12.004 
*van den Broek, M.D., Bradshaw, C.M., & Szabadi, E. (1992). The relationship 
between ‘impulsiveness’ and hemispheric functional asymmetry, investigated 
with a divided visual field word recognition task. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 13, (3), 355-360. doi: 10.1016/0191-8869(92)90114-5 
*Van der Linden, M., d’Acremont, M., Zermatten, A., Jermann, F., Laroi, F., & 
Willems, S. et al. (2006). A French adaptation of the UPPS impulsive 
behaviour scale: Confirmatory factor analysis in a sample of undergraduate 
students. European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 22, 38-42. doi: 
10.1027/1015-5759.22.1.38 
*Vazsonyi, A.T., Cleveland, H.H., & Wiebe, R.P. (2006).  Does the effect of 
impulsivity on delinquency vary by level of neighbourhood disadvantage? 
Criminal Justice and Behavior, 33, 511-541. doi:10.1177/0093854806287318 
*Verdejo-Garcia, A., Bechara, A., Recknor, E.C., & Perez-Garcia, M. (2007). 
Negative emotion-driven impulsivity predicts substance dependence 
problems. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 91, 213-219. 
doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2007.05.025

----- Page 131 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
131 
 
*Vigil-Colet, A. (2007). Impulsivity and decision making in the balloon analogue risk-
taking task. Personality and Individual Differences, 43, 37-45. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2006.11.005 
*Vigil-Colet, A., & Codorniu-Raga, M.J. (2004). Aggression and inhibition deficits, the 
role of functional and dysfunctional impulsivity. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 37, 1431-1440. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2004.01.013 
*Vigil-Colet, A., Morales-Vives, F., & Tous, J. (2008). The relationships between 
functional and dysfunctional impulsivity and aggression across different 
samples.  The Spanish Journal of Psychology,11, 480-487.  
*Vigil-Colet, A., & Morales-Vives, F. (2005). How impulsivity is related to intelligence 
and academic achievement. The Spanish Journal of Psychology, 8, 199-204. 
*von Knorring, L., Almay, B.G., & Johansson, F. (1987). Personality traits in patients 
with Idiopathic Pain Disorder. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavia, 76, 490-498. 
doi:10.1111/j.1600-0447.1987.tb02909.x 
Voyer, D., Voyer, S., & Bryden, M. P. (1995). Magnitude of sex-differences in spatial 
abilities: A meta-analysis and consideration of critical variables. Psychological 
Bulletin, 117, 250-270. 
*Walderhaug, E., Magnusson, A., Neumeister, A., Lappalainen, J., Lunde, H., 
Refsum, H., et al., (2007). Interactive effects of sex and 5-HTTLPR on mood 
and impulsivity during tryptophan depletion in healthy people. Biological 
Psychiatry, 62, 593-599.  doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.02.012

----- Page 132 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
132 
 
Wallace, J.F., Malterer, M.B., & Newman, J.P. (2009). Mapping Gray's BIS and BAS 
constructs onto Factor 1 and Factor 2 of Hare's Psychopathy Checklist - 
Revised.  Personality and Individual Differences, 47, 812-816.  
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2009.06.019 
*Weller, L.A. (2001). Cognitive inhibition and impulsivity in adult children of alcoholics 
and controls. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences 
and Engineering, 61, (11-B), 6154.   
*Weyers, P., Krebs, H., & Janke, W. (1995). Reliability and construct validity of the 
German versions of Cloninger’s Tridimensional Personality Questionnaire. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 19, 853-861. doi:10.1016/S0191-
8869(95)00128-X 
White, J.L., Moffitt, T.E., Caspi, A., Bartusch, D.J., Needles, D.J., & Stouthamer-
Loeber, M. (1994). Measuring impulsivity and examining its relationship to 
delinquency. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103, 192-205. 
doi:10.1037/0021-843X.103.2.192 
*White, T.L., Lejuez, C.W., & de Wit, H. (2007). Personality and gender differences 
in effects of d-amphetamine on risk taking. Experimental and Clinical 
Psychopharmacology, 15, 599-609. doi:10.1037/1064-1297.15.6.599 
  Whiteside, S.P., & Lynam, D.R. (2001). The Five Factor model and impulsivity: 
Using a structural model of personality to understand impulsivity. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 30, 669-689. doi:10.1016/S0191-8869(00)00064-7 
Wilding, J., Pankhania, P., & Williams, A. (2007). Effects of speed and accuracy 
instructions on performance in a visual search task by children with good or

----- Page 133 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
133 
 
poor attention.  British Journal of Psychology, 98, 127-139.  
doi:10.1348/000712606X109666 
Wilson, M., & Daly, M. (1985). Competitiveness, risk taking and violence: The young 
male syndrome. Ethology and Sociobiology, 6, 59-73. doi:10.1016/0162-
3095(85)90041-X 
Wilson, M. & Daly. M. (1997). Life expectancy, economic hardship, homicide and 
reproductive timing in Chicago neighbourhoods. British Medical Journal, 314, 
1271-1274.   
* Wilson, M., & Daly, M. (2006). Are juvenile offenders extreme future discounters? 
Psychological Science, 17, 989-994. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01817.x 
*Wingo, M.K. (2002). The adolescent stress response to a naturalistic driving 
stressor. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and 
Engineering, 63, (2-B), 1082. 
Wood, J.L., Heitmiller, D., Andreason, N.C., & Nopoulos, P. (2008). Morphology of 
the ventral frontal cortex: Relationship to femininity and social cognition. 
Cerebral Cortex, 18, 534-540. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhm079 
Wood, P. B., Pfefferbaum, B., & Arneklev, B. J. (1993). Risk-taking and self-control: 
Social psychological correlates of delinquency. Journal of Crime and Justice, 
16, 111– 130. 
*Yang, H. (2002). Examination of perceptions of leisure boredom, personal 
characteristics, and family functions as predictors of aggressive behavioral 
tendencies of university students. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section 
B: The Sciences and Engineering, 63, (5-B), 2570.

----- Page 134 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
134 
 
*Zaleskiewicz, T. (2001). Beyond risk seeking and risk aversion: Personality and the 
dual nature of economic risk taking. European Journal of Personality, 15, 105-
122. doi:10.1002/per.426 
*Zawacki, T.M. (2002). Alcohol's role in decisions to drive after drinking. Dissertation 
Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 63, (3-B), 
1613. 
Zelenski, J.M., & Larsen, R.J. (1999). Susceptibility to affect: A comparison of three 
personality inventories. Journal of Personality, 67, 761-791. doi: 
10.1111/1467-6494.00072 
*Zimmerman, G., Rossier, J., & Meyer de Stadelhofen, F. (2004). Validation of the 
French version of the Eysenck’s impulsiveness questionnaire (I7): Influence of 
personality, gender and religion. Annales Médico Psycholgiques, 162, 116-
121. doi: 10.1016/j.amp.2003.02.001 
*Zimmerman, G., Rossier, J., Meyer de Stadelhofen, F., & Gaillard, F. (2005). 
Alexithymia assessment and relations with dimensions of personality. 
European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 21, 23-33. doi:10.1027/1015-
5759.21.1.23 
Zuckerman, M. (1971). Dimensions of sensation seeking. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 36(1), 45-52.  doi:10.1037/h0030478 
Zuckerman, M. (1989). Personality in the third dimension: A psychobiological 
approach.  Personality and Individual Differences, 10, 391-418.  
doi:10.1016/0191-8869(89)90004-4

----- Page 135 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
135 
 
Zuckerman, M. (1994). Behavioral expressions and biosocial bases of sensation 
seeking. New York: Cambridge University Press.  doi:10.1016/B0-08-043076-
7/01772-1 
Zuckerman, M. (2006). Sensation seeking and risky behavior. Washington DC: 
American Psychological Association.  doi:10.1037/11555-000 
Zuckerman, M., & Cloninger, C. R. (1996). Relationships between Cloninger’s, 
Zuckerman’s, and Eysenck’s dimensions of personality. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 21, 283–285.  doi:10.1016/0191-8869(96)00042-6 
*Zuckerman, M., Eysenck, S., & Eysenck, H.J. (1978). Sensation seeking in England 
and America: Cross-cultural, age and sex comparisons. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 46, 139-149. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.46.1.139 
Zuckerman, M., & Kuhlman, D.M. (n.d.). Norms for the Zuckerman-Kuhlman 
Personality Questionnaire (ZKPQ). Newark, Delaware: University of 
Delaware.  
Zuckerman, M., & Kuhlman, D.M. (2000). Personality and risk-taking: Common 
biosocial factors. Journal of Personality 68, 999-1029.   doi:10.1111/1467-
6494.00124 
*Zuckerman, M., Kuhlman, D.M., & Carmac, C., (1988). What lies beyond E and N? 
Factor analyses of scales believed to measure basic dimensions of 
personality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 96-107. 
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.54.1.96 
Zuckerman, M., Kuhlman, D.M., Joireman, J., Teta, P., & Kraft, M. (1993). A 
comparison of three structural models for personality: The Big Three, the Big

----- Page 136 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
136 
 
Five and the Alternative Five. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
65, 757-768. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.65.4.757

----- Page 137 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
137 
 
Table 1:  
Summary of measurement categories by domain 
Category 
Measure(s) 
Reward Sensitivity 
SPSRQ/GRAPES 
Sensitivity to Reward and Sensitivity to Punishment  
Questionnaire (Torrubia, Avila, Molto & Caseras, 
2001): Reward scale 
Generalized Reward and Punishment Expectancy 
Scales (Ball & Zuckerman, 1990): Reward scale 
TPQ/TCI Reward 
Dependence 
Tridimensional Personality Questionnaire (Cloninger, 
1986): Reward scale.   
Temperament and Character Inventory (Center for 
Wellbeing, n.d.): Reward scale 
BAS Total 
Behavioral Activation Scale (Carver & White, 1994): 
Total score 
BAS Drive 
Behavioral Activation Scale (Carver & White, 1994): 
Drive scale 
BAS Fun 
Behavioral Activation Scale (Carver & White, 1994): 
Fun Seeking scale 
BAS Reward 
Behavioral Activation Scale (Carver & White, 1994): 
Reward scale 
Punishment Sensitivity 
SPSRQ/GRAPES 
Sensitivity to Reward and Sensitivity to Punishment  
Questionnaire (Torrubia, Avila, Molto & Caseras,

----- Page 138 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
138 
 
2001): Punishment  scale 
Generalized Reward and Punishment Expectancy 
Scales (Ball & Zuckerman, 1990): Punishment  scale 
TPQ/TCI Harm Avoidance 
Tridimensional Personality Questionnaire (Cloninger, 
1986): Harm Avoidance scale  
Temperament and Character Inventory (Center for 
Wellbeing, n.d.): Harm Avoidance scale  
BIS (BIS/BAS) 
Behavioral Inhibition Scale (Carver & White, 1994) 
Sensation Seeking and Risk Taking 
Venturesomeness 
I5 (Eysenck & Eysenck, 1978), or I6/I7 (Eysenck, 
Pearson, Easting, & Allsopp, 1985): Venturesomeness 
Scale 
Sensation Seeking Scale 
(SSS) Total 
Sensation Seeking Scale Form II (Zuckerman, Kolin, 
Price, & Zoob, 1964), IV (Zuckerman, 1971), or V 
(Zuckerman, Eysenck, & Eysenck, 1978):  Total score 
SSS – Thrill & Adventure 
Seeking 
Sensation Seeking Scale Form IV (Zuckerman, 1971), 
V (Zuckerman, Eysenck, & Eysenck, 1978), or VI 
(Zuckerman, 1984):  Thrill and Adventure Seeking 
Subscale  
SSS – Experience Seeking 
Sensation Seeking Scale Form IV (Zuckerman, 1971)  
or V (Zuckerman, Eysenck, & Eysenck, 1978):  
Experience Seeking Subscale  
SSS - Disinhibition 
Sensation Seeking Scale Form IV (Zuckerman, 1971), 
V (Zuckerman, Eysenck, & Eysenck, 1978), or VI 
(Zuckerman, 1984):  Disinhibition Subscale

----- Page 139 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
139 
 
SSS – Boredom 
Susceptibility 
Sensation Seeking Scale Form IV (Zuckerman, 1971)  
or V (Zuckerman, Eysenck, & Eysenck, 1978):  
Boredom Susceptibility Subscale 
UPPS Sensation Seeking 
UPPS Impulsive Behavior Scale (Whiteside & Lynam, 
2001): Sensation Seeking scale  
Dickman Functional 
Impulsivity  
Dickman Impulsivity Inventory (Dickman, 1990): 
Functional Impulsivity scale  
Risk Taking 
All measures of risk taking including: The Jackson 
Personality Inventory (Jackson, 1994): Risk-Taking 
scale; Risky Impulsivity (Campbell & Muncer, 2009); 
and any  measures developed for specific studies 
ZKPQ Impulsive Sensation 
Seeking 
Zuckerman-Kuhlman Personality Questionnaire 
(ZKPQ; Zuckerman & Kuhlman, n.d.): Impulsive 
Sensation Seeking scale  
KSP Monotony Avoidance 
Karolinska Scales of Personality (KSP Schalling, 
1978): Monotony Avoidance scale  
MPQ/PRF Harm Avoidance 
Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire (MPQ; 
Tellegen, 1982), or Personality Research Form (PRF; 
Jackson, 1994): Harm Avoidance scale 
Sensation Seeking (Other 
measures)  
Any measure of sensation seeking not specified 
elsewhere, including: the Tridimensional Personality 
Questionnaire (Cloninger, 1986): Novelty Seeking 
scale, the Arnett Inventory of Sensation Seeking 
(Arnett, 1994), and any measures developed for 
specific studies

----- Page 140 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
140 
 
Effortful Control: General Measures of impulsivity 
Eysenck measures of 
impulsiveness  
I5 (Eysenck & Eysenck, 1978), or I6/I7 (Eysenck, 
Pearson, Easting, & Allsopp, 1985;), Eysenck 
Personality Inventory (EPI; Eysenck & Eysenck, 
1968): Impulsiveness scale  
BIS Total 
Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS-10; Barratt, 1985; 
BIS -11; Patton, Stanford, & Barratt, 1995)a: Total 
score 
KSP Impulsivity 
Karolinska Scales of Personality (KSP; Schalling, 
1978): Impulsivity scale 
Other measures 
Any measure of impulsivity not specified elsewhere, 
including: Personality Research Form (PRF; Jackson, 
1994): Impulsivity scale, Revised NEO Personality 
Inventory (NEO PI-R; Costa & McCrae, 1992): 
Impulsivity facet, Self-discipline and Deliberation 
scales,  and any measures developed for specific 
studies in the review 
Effortful Control: Specific forms of impulsivity 
BIS Cognitive 
Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS-10; Barratt, 1985; 
BIS -11; Patton, Stanford, & Barratt, 1995)a: 
Cognitive/Attentional Impulsiveness scale 
BIS Motor 
Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS-10; Barratt, 1985; 
BIS -11; Patton, Stanford, & Barratt, 1995)a: Motor 
Impulsiveness scale

----- Page 141 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
141 
 
BIS Non-planning 
Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS-10; Barratt, 1985; 
BIS -11; Patton, Stanford, & Barratt, 1995)a: Non-
Planning Impulsiveness scale 
UPPS Perseverance  
UPPS Impulsive Behavior Scale (Whiteside & Lynam, 
2001): Lack of Perseverance scale  
UPPS Premeditation 
UPPS Impulsive Behavior Scale (Whiteside & Lynam, 
2001): Lack of Premeditation scale  
UPPS Urgency 
UPPS Impulsive Behavior Scale (Whiteside & Lynam, 
2001): Urgency scale  
Dickman Dysfunctional 
Impulsivity 
Dickman Impulsivity Inventory (Dickman, 1990): 
Dysfunctional Impulsivity scale  
Impulse Control 
Any measure of impulse control, including: the Offer 
Self-Image Questionnaire (Offer, Ostrov, & Howard, 
1982): Impulse Control subscale, Multidimensional 
Personality Questionnaire (MPQ; Tellegen, 1982) 
Control scale, and any measures developed for 
specific studies in the review 
Social Problem Solving 
Inventory 
Social Problem-Solving Inventory-Revised (SPSI-R; 
D'Zurilla, Nezu, & Maydeu-Olivares, 1996)a: 
Impulsive/Careless style scale 
Effortful Control: Behavioral Measures 
BART 
Balloon Analogue Risk-Taking Task (BART; Lejuez et 
al., 2002) 
Delay Discounting 
Any delay discounting task (see, e.g. Mazur, 1987, 
Richards, Zhang, Mitchell, & de Wit, 1999) using real

----- Page 142 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
142 
 
or hypothetical rewards including money, sweets, and 
cigarettes. 
Executive Response 
Inhibition 
The Stop Task (Logan, Schachar, & Tannock,1997), 
the Go/No-Go task (Newman, 
Widom, & Nathan, 1985), any Stroop-based task 
(Stroop, 1935), the Continuous Performance Test 
(Conners, 2000), and the Inhibitory Reach task 
(Enticott, Ogloff, & Bradshaw, 2006) 
Iowa Gambling Task 
The Iowa Gambling Task (IGT, Bechara, 1994) 
Visual-cognitive Tasks 
Matching Familiar Figures Test (MFFT, Kagan, 
Rosman, Day, Albert, & Phillips, 1964), 
Intradimensional/Extradimensional learning task 
(IDED; Roberts, Robbins,& Everitt, 1988), Tower of 
London Task (ToL; Shallice, 1982), Porteus Maze 
(Porteus, 1950), Trail-Making Test (Reitan, 1958), 
Visual Comparison Task (VCT; Dickman & Meyer, 
1988), and Spatial Orientation Dynamic Test-Revised 
(SODT-R, Colom, Contreras, Shih, & Santacreu, 
2003) 
a Includes versions translated into other languages

----- Page 143 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
143 
 
Table2. Summary of behavioural tasks of impulsivity. 
 
 
Executive response inhibition tasks 
 
Go/No-go 
Two randomly alternating stimuli are presented (e.g. a car and a house). The respondent is instructed to 
respond selectively to one but not the other by pressing a button. One stimulus is presented more 
frequently to establish a prepotent response. Commission errors index impulsivity.  
Stop signal 
Similar to the Go/No-Go task but on some trials a signal (usually auditory) is given immediately after the 
critical target stimulus. On these trials, the respondent must inhibit their response. The delay between the 
onset of the stimulus and the onset of the signal to stop is varied until participants successfully inhibit their 
go responses on 50% of trials. At this point, stop-signal reaction time (SSRT) is estimated as the difference 
between the stop-signal delay and the mean go reaction time.Longer SSRTs index higher impulsivity. 
Continuous 
performance task 
Letters appear one at a time on a screen. The respondent must press a button when a particular sequential 
configuration (e.g. C followed by A) is shown.  Commission errors index impulsivity. 
Stroop 
In the control condition, the respondent names aloud the ink colour of a row of XXXX as quickly as possible.

----- Page 144 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
144 
 
In the interference condition which follows, the respondent must name aloud the ink colour in which a series 
of words is written: Each word is a colour name (e.g. red) that is different from the ink colour (e.g. blue) 
used to print it. The two conditions are compared and the disparity between them is a measure of the time 
taken to resolve the conflict between an automatic, non-desired response (word reading) and a non-
automatic, desired response (colour naming). Hence, a larger value indexes lower effortful control. Some 
researchers also use errors or time taken in the interference condition. 
 
Visual cognitive tasks 
 
Matching familiar 
figures task 
(MFFT) 
A target design is presented together with a number of similar designs. The task is to match the target with 
its identical version.  Speed and errors reflect impulsivity.      
 
Visual 
comparison task 
Similar to MFFT but the respondent is presented with two very similar figures and makes a ‘same’ or 
‘different’ decision.  
Trailmaking 
The respondent draws lines joining 25 circles distributed over a sheet of paper.  In Part A,   the circles are 
numbered 1 – 25, and the respondent connects the numbers in ascending order. In Part B, the circles

----- Page 145 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
145 
 
include both numbers (1 – 13) and letters (A – L). The respondent is asked to alternate between numbers 
and letters (i.e., 1-A-2-B-3-C, etc.).  The respondent is instructed to work quickly and not to lift the pen from 
the paper. Errors are pointed out to the respondent and correction is allowed. Errors affect the score by 
increasing the time taken to complete the task.  The time taken for Part A is subtracted from the time taken 
for Part B. A smaller value reflects impulsivity.    
Porteus maze 
This is a graded set of paper forms on which the respondent traces the way from a starting point to an exit, 
avoiding blind alleys. There are no time limits. The mazes vary in complexity from simple diamond shapes 
to intricate labyrinths.  The Q score, used to index impulsivity, is obtained by measuring the number of 
times the pencil is lifted, touches the boundary, etc.  
Circle tracing 
Respondents are asked to trace over a 9 inch circle as slowly as they can. The start and 
stop position are clearly marked on the circle in bright letters.   Impulsivity is indexed by time taken to 
perform the task on the second trial. 
Spatial 
orientation 
dynamic task (R) 
A computerised task in which participants move a red and a blue dot toward a specific destination. The 
program sets a course for the two dots that can be modified by pressing arrow buttons for each of the dots.  
The dependent measure is the mean deviation (in degrees) between the course of each of the 
moving dots at the end of the trial and the course it should have taken to reach its destination.  Impulsivity is

----- Page 146 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
146 
 
indexed as a high mean deviation. 
Tower of London 
A board presents coloured discs or beads arranged on three vertical pegs. These form a target array which 
the participant must try to replicate on their own board where the discs or beads are arrayed differently 
across the three pegs.  Measures include preplanning time (time between seeing the discs and making the 
first move), errors on the first move, average move time (time spent on executing the plan), trials solved in 
the minimum number of possible moves or within a specified time limit, and excess moves (number of 
moves in excess of the minimum necessary to complete the task).  
Intradimensional 
extradimensional 
shift  
Two dimensions (colour filled shapes and white lines) are used. Simple stimuli use only one of these 
dimensions, whereas compound stimuli are made up of both (e.g. white lines overlaying colour-filled 
shapes). The subject starts by seeing two simple colour-filled shapes, and must learn which one is correct 
by touching it. Through feedback, the respondent learns which stimulus is correct. After six correct 
responses, the stimuli and/or rules are changed. These shifts are initially intra-dimensional (e.g. colour-filled 
shapes remain the only relevant dimension), then extra-dimensional (white lines become the only relevant 
dimension).  The test has a number of outcome measures (including errors, and numbers of trials and 
stages completed) which index impulsivity.

----- Page 147 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
147 
 
Delay discounting  
The participant makes a series of dichotomous choices between a ‘standard’ (e.g. $10 available after one of six delays: 0, 7, 30, 
90, 180, 365 days) and an ‘alternative’ sum of money available immediately (e.g. 23 values between $0.01 and $10.50), 
resulting, in this case, in 137 choices.   The choices are presented in random order.  The indifference point or switch point (the 
point at which the participant prefers the immediate to the delayed reward) is determined for each level of the standards.  This 
can be used to calculate k, the rate at which the standard of $10 is discounted as a function of delay.  Impulsive individuals 
show lower switch points and a higher value of k (a steeper rate of discounting) than less impulsive individuals. Variations on 
this task include probability discounting task (which uses probabilistic rather than delayed rewards) and the experiential delay 
task (in which participants choose between a probabilistic delayed sum and a smaller sum that is immediate and certain). 
 
The Iowa Gambling Task 
 
The participant is shown four decks of cards.  Each card informs them of a win, or a simultaneous win and loss of money.  Two 
‘disadvantageous’ card decks (A and B) yield high monetary rewards but higher occasional losses.  Two ‘advantageous’ decks 
(C and D) yield low rewards but lower occasional penalties.  Impulsive individuals continue to choose from the disadvantageous 
decks despite the long-term loss to which this strategy leads.  The outcome measure is normally the number of draws from

----- Page 148 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
148 
 
disadvantageous packs (A and B) subtracted from advantageous packs (C and D).  This is taken as a measure of impulsivity 
manifest in a preference for short–term gains in spite of long-term losses.  
 
The Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) 
 
A computer screen shows a balloon and pump.  Each click on the pump inflates the balloon and, with each pump, 5 cents are 
earned in an invisible temporary reserve.   Participants are told that at some point each balloon will explode.  When a balloon is 
pumped past its explosion point, an audible “pop” signals that all the money in the temporary reserve is lost.  At any point during 
a trial, the participant can stop pumping the balloon and transfer the money in the reserve to the permanent bank.  After each 
balloon explosion or money transfer, a new balloon appears.  The dependent measure is normally the average number of 
pumps excluding balloons that exploded (i.e., the average number of pumps on each balloon prior to money collection).  This 
reflects a tendency to continue with balloon inflation despite the risk of losing the money already won on that trial.

----- Page 149 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
149 
 
Table 3 
Summary statistics for all samples included in the analysis 
Category 
k 
Male N 
Female N 
Age 
 
 
 
   11-15 
34 
13215 
14032 
   15-18 
42 
21395 
22333 
   18-21 
84 
12492 
18856 
   21-30 
76 
8964 
11516 
   30-40 
29 
5239 
7489 
   40 + 
19 
3605 
4050 
    Age not specified/wide age range 
26 
2911 
3400 
Geographical area 
 
 
 
   US, Canada, & Central America 
184 
41467 
46807 
   UK, Europe, Australia & New Zealand 
115 
23525 
31838 
   Asia, Africa, & Middle East 
11 
2830 
3030 
Population 
 
 
 
   Schools (up to age 18) 
51 
29264 
30019 
   University/College students 
147 
17203 
27107 
   Community 
89 
16073 
18388 
   Mixed/not specified 
23 
5282 
6162 
Publication status 
 
 
 
   Published 
275 
61220 
74898 
   Unpublished 
35 
6601 
6777 
Domain 
 
 
 
   General measures of impulsivity 
206 
50805 
62428

----- Page 150 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
150 
 
Category 
k 
Male N 
Female N 
   Specific measures of impulsivity 
62 
7873 
10891 
   Sensation seeking and risk taking 
130 
23402 
28914 
   Reward sensitivity 
18 
2380 
3598 
   Punishment sensitivity 
19 
2698 
4212 
   Behavioural measures 
50 
3746 
3753 
Grand total 
310 
67821 
81675 
Note: k = number of samples

----- Page 151 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
151 
 
Table 4  
Sex differences (d) in measures of reward sensitivity 
Measure 
d 
95% CI 
k 
N 
men 
N 
women 
Q 
VR (k) 
SPSRQ/GRAPES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.42 
.33/.52 
9 
1091 
2443 
13.57 
1.05 (9) 
   Computed onlya 
 .44 
.36/.53 
8 
1068 
2358 
9.83 
 
TPQ/TCI Reward Dependence 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
-.56 
-.68/-.44 
4 
 437 
841 
2.22 
1.08 (4) 
BAS Total 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
-.13 
-.38/.12 
4 
420 
537 
9.13* 
0.80 (4) 
BAS Drive 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.06 
-.04/.15 
9 
1201 
1372 
 9.19 
0.96 (9) 
BAS Fun 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.08 
-.01/.17 
9 
1201 
1372 
8.71 
1.08 (9) 
BAS Reward 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
-.27 
-.41/-.13 
9 
1201 
1372 
19.35* 
0.95 (9) 
Total of reward sensitivity measures 
 
 
 
 
All studies 
.01 
-.17/.19 
18 
2380 
3598 
340.90*** 
 
Computed onlya 
.01 
-.18/.20 
17 
2357 
3513 
340.86*** 
1.03 (44) 
Note: Effect sizes are in the male direction if positive and in the female direction if negative. 
aRemoved: Avila & Parcet (2000) 
* p < .05.  ** p < .01. ***p < .001

----- Page 152 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
152 
 
d = mean effect size weighted by sample size; CI = confidence interval; k = number of 
samples; Q = homogeneity statistic; VR (k) = mean variance ratio (number of sample sizes 
from which variance ratios could be calculated)

----- Page 153 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
153 
 
Table 5  
Sex differences (d) in measures of punishment sensitivity 
Category 
d 
CI 
k 
N 
men 
N 
women 
Q 
VR (k) 
SPSRQ/GRAPES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
-.11 
-.23/.00 
9 
1136 
2563 
18.50* 
0.97 (9) 
   Computed onlya 
-.12 
-.24/.01 
8 
1113 
2478 
18.31* 
 
TPQ/TCI Harm avoidance 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
-.43 
-.52/-.33 
5 
784 
1391 
4.43 
1.08 (4) 
BIS of BIS/BAS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
-.63  
-.74/-.52 
8 
1026 
1197 
8.65 
1.14 (8) 
Total of punishment sensitivity measures 
 
 
 
 
All studies 
-.32 
-.45/-.19 
18 2598 
4091 
119.46*** 
1.05 (21) 
Computed onlya 
-.33 
-.47/-.20 
17 2575 
4006 
117.63*** 
 
Note: Effect sizes are in the male direction if positive and in the female direction if negative. 
aRemoved: Avila & Parcet (2000) 
* p < .05.  ** p < .01. ***p < .001 
d = mean effect size weighted by sample size; CI = confidence interval; k = number of 
samples; Q = homogeneity statistic; VR (k) = mean variance ratio (number of sample sizes 
from which variance ratios could be calculated)

----- Page 154 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
154 
 
Table 6  
Sex differences (d) in measures of sensation seeking and risk-taking 
Measure 
d 
95% CI 
K 
N men 
N 
women 
Q 
VR (k) 
Eysenck Venturesomeness 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
 .49 
.43/.56 
49 
7443 
10553 
160.99 *** 
0.91*  (41) 
   Computed onlya 
.51 
.44/.57 
47 
7349 
10395 
146.80 *** 
0.91*  (41) 
 Outliers removedb 
.53 
.47/.59 
45 
7267 
10232 
118.02*** 
0.91* (39) 
SSS Total 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.48 
.41/.56 
22 
2563 
3072 
31.56 
0.95 (17) 
   Computed onlyc 
.50 
.43/.56 
21 
2541 
2992 
27.36 
0.95 (17) 
SSS Thrill & Adventure Seeking 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.41 
.29/.54 
16 
2761 
3498 
69.39 *** 
0.85 (14) 
SSS Experience Seeking 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.01 
-.11/.12 
10 
1406 
2021 
18.27* 
1.04(8) 
   Computed onlyd 
.01 
-.11/.12 
9 
1385 
1998 
18.27* 
1.04(8) 
SSS Disinhibition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.52 
.40/.65 
15 
2286 
3007 
52.02*** 
1.26 (13) 
   Computed onlyd 
.54 
.42/.66 
14 
2265 
2984 
 48.73 *** 
1.26 (13) 
 Outliers removede 
.57 
.46/.69 
13 
2204 
2965 
38.93 *** 
1.37** (12) 
SSS Boredom Susceptibility 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.20 
.09/.31 
14 
1922 
2764 
36.58*** 
1.07 (11) 
UPPS Sensation Seeking 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.48 
.33/.63 
15 
1566  
2284 
62.44 *** 
0.95 (11) 
   Computed onlyf 
.49 
.34/.65 
14 
1552 
2262 
60.39 ***

----- Page 155 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
155 
 
Dickman Functional Impulsivity 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.24 
.08/.39 
11 
935 
1346 
27.59 ** 
1.04 (9) 
ZKPQ Impulsive Sensation Seeking 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.19 
-.22/.60 
4 
623 
706 
58.30 *** 
1.21(4) 
KSP Monotony Avoidance 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.15 
-.00/.29 
4 
269 
510 
 0.27 
0.85 (4) 
MPQ/PRF Harm Avoidance 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
-.78 
-.92/-.64 
3 
334 
528 
0.11 
0.91 (3) 
Risk Taking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.36 
.29/.44 
11 
3739 
3330 
25.66* 
 
   Computed onlyg 
.38 
.31/.44 
10 
3659 
3250 
20.00 
1.10* (7) 
Sensation Seeking Other Measures 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.21 
.11/.30 
24 
5694 
6748 
236.92*** 
1.08 (23) 
   Computed onlyh 
.22 
.13/.32 
22 
5432 
6428 
229.67*** 
 
Total of sensation seeking measuresi 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.39 
.35/.43 
130 
23402 
28914 
578.23*** 
0.99 (169) 
   Computed onlyj 
.41 
.37/.45 
125 
22952 
28334 
607.19*** 
 
 Outliers removedk 
.41 
.37/.45 
123 
22815 
28154 
274.42*** 
1.00 (164) 
Note: Effect sizes are in the male direction if positive and in the female direction if negative. 
aRemoved: Leshem & Glicksohn (2007); Reynolds et al. (2006a). 
bRemoved (in order): Clarke (2004); Rim (1994).  
cRemoved: Lennings (1991) 
dRemoved:  Lundahl (1995) 
eRemoved:  Curran (2006)

----- Page 156 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
156 
 
fRemoved:  Verdejo-Garcia et al. (2007) 
gRemoved: Sahoo (1985) 
hRemoved: Lennings (1991); Overman et al. (2004)       
iIncludes MPQ/PRF Harm Avoidance, reverse scored 
jRemoved: Lennings (1991); Leshem & Glicksohn (2007); Lundahl (1995); Overman et al. 
(2004); Reynolds et al (2006a); Sahoo (1985); Verdejo-Garcia et al. (2007).                        
kRemoved (in order):  Copping (2007); Curran (2006: Sensation Seeking Scale - 
Experience Seeking and Boredom Susceptibility; ZKPQ Impulsive Sensation Seeking); 
Lundahl (1995: Sensation Seeking Scale – Thrill and Adventure Seeking); McAllister et al. 
(2005); Weyers et al. (1995: age 27: TPQ Novelty Seeking).  
* p < .05.  ** p < .01. ***p < .001 
d = mean effect size weighted by sample size; CI = confidence interval; k = number of 
samples; Q = homogeneity statistic; VR (k′) = mean variance ratio (number of effects from 
which variance ratios could be calculated).

----- Page 157 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
157 
 
Table 7  
Sex differences (d) in general measures of impulsivity 
Measure 
d 
95% CI 
K 
N men 
N 
women 
Q 
VR (k) 
Eysenck Impulsiveness 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.03 
-.00/.07 
100 
14425 
19680 
222.72*** 
1.00 (74) 
   Computed onlya 
.04 
-.00/.08 
88 
13603 
18768 
222.27*** 
1.00 (74) 
Outliers removedb 
.03 
-.01/.07 
82 
13427 
18584 
183.63*** 
0.97 (68) 
BIS Total 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.11 
.05/.16 
58 
6296 
8452 
115.14*** 
0.99 (42) 
   Computed onlyc 
.12 
.06/.19 
48 
5729 
7561 
110.68*** 
0.99 (42) 
Outliers removedd 
.12 
.06/.18 
47 
5702 
7548 
105.88*** 
1.01 (41) 
KSP Impulsivity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
-.06 -.19/.07 
7 
826 
4452 
8.83 
0.79* (5) 
   Computed onlye 
-.06 -.21/.10 
5 
789 
4318 
8.38 
0.79* (5) 
Impulsivity Other Measures 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.12 
.07/.17 
54 
30040 
31403 
345.60*** 
1.02 (38) 
   Computed onlyf 
.13 
.08/.19 
47 
29379 
30575 
344.99*** 
1.02 (38) 
Outliers removedg 
.14 
.08/.19 
46 
29354 
30535 
338.78*** 
1.02 (38) 
Total of general impulsivity measures 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.07 
.05/.10 
206 
50805 
62428 
244.52*** 
1.00 (159) 
   Computed onlyh 
.08 
05/.11 
180 
48862 
59859 
359.28*** 
 
Outliers removedi 
.08 
.05/.11 
173 
48688 
59683 
131.42* 
0.98 (153) 
Note: Effect sizes are in the male direction if positive and in the female direction if negative.

----- Page 158 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
158 
 
aRemoved: Allen et al. (1998); Brown et al. (2006); Deffenbacher et al. (2003); Doran et al. 
(2007a); Keilp et al. (2005); Ketzenberger & Forrest (2000); Leshem & Glicksohn (2007); 
Reynolds et al. (2006a); Reynolds et al. (2007); Van den Broek et al. (1992). 
bRemoved (in order): Weyers et al. (1995: age 50); Saklofske & Eysenck (1983: age 15); 
Weller (2001); Starrett (1983: Senior high); Corr et al. (1995); Lopez Viets (2001). 
cRemoved: Allen et al. (1998); Chung & Martin (2002); Dinn et al. (2002);  Hulsey (2000); 
Jack & Ronan (1998); Leshem & Glicksohn (2007); Nagoshi et al. (1994); Neubauer (1992); 
Patock-Peckham et al. (1998); Reynolds et al. (2006a); Rigby et al. (1992); Van den Broek 
et al. (1992).             
dRemoved: Clark et al. (2005).    
eRemoved: Lennings (1991); Lennngs & Burns (1998). 
fRemoved: Allen et al. (1998); Bembenutty & Karabenick (1998); McMahon & Washburn 
(2003); Overman et al. (2004); Plouffe & Grawelle (1989); Rhyff et al. (1983); Schweizer 
(2002).       
gRemoved: Malle & Neubauer (1991). 
hRemoved: Allen et al. (1998); Bembenutty & Karabenick (1998); Brown et al. (2006); 
Chung & Martin (2002); Deffenbacher et al (2003); Dinn et al. (2002); Doran et al. (2007a); 
Hulsey (2000); Jack & Ronan (1998); Keilp et al. (2005); Ketzenberger & Forrest (2000); 
Lennings (1991); Lennngs & Burns (1998); Leshem & Glicksohn (2007); McMahon & 
Washburn (2003); Nagoshi et al. (1994); Neubauer (1992); Overman et al. (2004); Patock-
Peckham et al. (1998); Plouffe & Grawelle (1989); Reynolds et al. (2006a); Reynolds et al. 
(2007); Rhyff et al. (1983); Rigby et al. (1992); Schweizer (2002); Van den Broek et al. 
(1992).

----- Page 159 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
159 
 
iRemoved (in order): Weyers et al. (1995; 50-year olds); Clark et al. (2005); Saklofske & 
Eysenck (1983: 15-year olds); Malle & Neubauer (1991); Weller (2001); Starrett (1983: 
Senior High sample); Corr et al. (1995).                      
* p < .05.  ** p < .01. ***p < .001 
d = mean effect size weighted by sample size; CI = confidence interval; k = number of 
samples; Q = homogeneity statistic; VR (k′) = mean variance ratio (number of effects from 
which variance ratios could be calculated).

----- Page 160 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
160 
 
Table 8  
Sex differences (d) in measures of specific forms of impulsivity 
Category 
d 
95% CI 
k 
N 
men 
N 
women 
Q 
VR (k) 
BIS Cognitive 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
 .13 
.00/.26 
18 1776 
2372 
56.79*** 
0.92 (16) 
BIS Motor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
 .08 
-.00/.17 
19 2990 
3620 
34.09* 
1.04 (13) 
BIS Non-planning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.15 
.06/.24 
20 3187 
3839 
43.31 ** 
0.96 (17) 
UPPS Perseverance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.05 
-.07/.17 
14 1449 
2111 
34.27** 
0.93 (12) 
   Computed onlya 
.05 
-.08/.17 
13 1435 
2089 
34.26*** 
 
UPPS Premeditation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
-.01 
-.08/.06 
14 1449 
2111 
7.77 
1.06 (12) 
   Computed onlya 
-.01 
-.08/.06 
13 1435 
2089 
7.77 
 
     Outliers removedb 
-.00 
-.07/.07 
12 1423 
2031 
3.40 
1.00 (11) 
UPPS Urgency 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
-.10 
-.19/-.01 
14 1449 
2111 
19.15 
.94 (12) 
   Computed onlya 
-.10 
-.19/-.01 
13 1435 
2089 
19.06 
 
Dickman Dysfunctional Impulsivity 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.12 
.02/.23 
12 1107 
1518 
16.58 
.91 (10) 
Impulse Control 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.02 
-.22/.25 
11 1303 
1767 
92.15*** 
0.85 (9) 
   Computed onlyc 
 .02 
-.23/.26 
10 1277 
1743 
92.09***

----- Page 161 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
161 
 
Category 
d 
95% CI 
k 
N 
men 
N 
women 
Q 
VR (k) 
Social Problem Solving Inventory (SPSI) 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.23 
.09/.37 
6 
990 
1850 
 11.37* 
1.05 (5) 
   Computed onlyd 
.32 
.23/.41 
5 
869 
1199 
2.80 
 
Note: Effect sizes are in the male direction if positive and in the female direction if negative. 
aRemoved: Verdejo-Garcia et al. (2007).   
bRemoved: Anestis et al. (2007).   
cRemoved:  Fox et al. (2007).    
dRemoved: Maydeu-Olivares et al. (2000) 
* p < .05.  ** p < .01. ***p < .001 
d = mean effect size weighted by sample size; CI = confidence interval; k = number of 
samples; Q = homogeneity statistic; VR (k) = mean variance ratio (number of sample sizes 
from which variance ratios could be calculated)

----- Page 162 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
162 
 
Table 9  
Sex differences (d) in behavioural measures of impulsivity 
Category 
d 
95% CI 
k 
N 
men 
N 
women 
Q 
VR (k′) 
Executive response inhibition 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.13 
-.04/.30 
19 863 
974 
84.54*** 
0.94 (19) 
  Computed values onlya 
.21 
-.06/.48 
10 592 
647 
83.21*** 
0.94 (19) 
Visual-cognitive tasks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
-.20 
-.37/-.04 
7 
1558 
1408 
172.46*** 
0.92 (8) 
  Computed values onlyb 
-.26 
-.43/-.08 
6 
1499 
1285 
156.43*** 
0.92 (8) 
Iowa Gambling Task 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
-.19 
-.35/-.03 
7 
 602 
725 
15.56* 
- 
  Computed values onlyc 
-.34 
-.48/-.20 
4 
380 
420 
4.31 
- 
Delay Discounting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
-.08 
-.19/.02 
21 905 
882 
40.52 
0.95 (17) 
  Computed values onlyd 
-.07 
-.22/.07 
15 783 
751 
39.70* 
0.95 (17) 
BART 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   All studies 
.30 
.11/.49 
10 265 
311 
21.12* 
1.37 (3) 
  Computed values onlye 
.36 
.16/.57 
8 
220 
266 
18.93* 
1.37 (3) 
Note: Effect sizes are in the male direction if positive and in the female direction if negative. 
aRemoved: Acheson et al. (2007); Brown et al. (2006); de Wit et al. (2002); Feldman 
(1999); Keilp et al. (2005); Marczinski et al. (2007); Reynolds et al. (2006a); Tinius (2003); 
Walderhaug (2007).                      
bRemoved: Leshem & Glicksohn (2007).  
cRemoved: Davis et al. (2007); Goudriaan et al. (2007); Jollant et al. (2005).

----- Page 163 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
163 
 
dRemoved: Acheson et al (2007); Allen et al. (1998); de Wit et al. (2002); Kollins (2003). 
eRemoved: Acheson et al (2007); Reynolds (2003); Reynolds et al. (2004); Reynolds et al. 
(2006a). 
* p < .05.  ** p < .01. ***p < .001 
d = mean effect size weighted by sample size; CI = confidence interval; k = number of 
samples; Q = homogeneity statistic; VR (k′) = mean variance ratio (number of effects from 
which variance ratios could be calculated).

----- Page 164 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
164 
 
Table 10 
Categorical analysis of all measures, grouped by domain 
Measure and category 
d (95% CI) 
Qw 
k 
QB 
General Impulsivity Measures 
Eysenck Impulsiveness 
 
 
 
 
Age 
 
 
 
12.77* 
   10-15 years 
.07 (-.01/.15) 
13.88 
12 
 
   15-18 years 
.06 (-.09/.20) 
40.90 *** 
11 
 
   18-21 years 
.03 (-.02/.09) 
45.51* 
27 
 
   21-30 years 
.09 (.02/.16) 
37.52* 
23 
 
   30-40 years 
-.06 (-.34/.23) 
14.14 ** 
5 
 
   40+ years 
-.21 (-.37/-.05) 
7.79 
5 
 
BIS Total 
 
 
 
 
   Geographical Area 
 
 
 
6.71* 
   US, Canada & Central America 
.18 (.09/.26) 
68.46 *** 
32 
 
   UK, Europe & Aus/NZ 
.05 (-.04/.13) 
17.01 
13 
 
   Asia, Africa, Middle East 
.04 (-.03/.11) 
0.64 
3 
 
KSP Impulsivity 
 
 
 
 
   Population 
 
 
 
7.26 ** 
   University Students 
.07 (-.09/.23) 
0.86 
4 
 
   Community 
 -.18 (-.27/-.09) 
0.69 
2 
 
Geographical area 
 
 
 
6.56* 
   US, Canada & Central America 
.09 (-.09/.26) 
0.69 
2 
 
   UK, Europe & Aus/NZ 
 -.17 (-.25/-.08) 
1.59 
5

----- Page 165 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
165 
 
Measure and category 
d (95% CI) 
Qw 
k 
QB 
Specific Measures of Impulsivity  
BIS Non-planning 
 
 
 
 
Geographical Area 
 
 
 
17.26 *** 
   US, Canada & Central America 
 .30 (.20/.40) 
11.11 
11 
 
   UK, Europe & Aus/NZ 
.02 (-.07/.11) 
7.80 
8 
 
UPPS Perseverence 
 
 
 
 
Age 
  
 
 
13.99 ** 
   15-18 years 
-.03 (-.16/.11) 
0.48 
2 
 
   18-21 years 
 -.01 (-.18/.15) 
15.12* 
7 
 
UPPS Urgency 
 
 
 
 
Population 
 
 
 
6.85** 
   University Students 
-.03 (-.14/.07) 
10.38 
9 
 
   Schools (up to age 18) 
-.26 (-.14/.07) 
0.18 
2 
 
 Age 
 
 
 
15.62 *** 
   15-18 years 
-.31 (-.45/-.17) 
0.56 
2 
 
   18-21 years 
 .02 (-.07/.12) 
1.88 
7 
 
   21-30 years 
-.14 (-.32/.04) 
0.41 
3 
 
Geographical area 
 
 
 
6.66* 
   US, Canada & Central America 
-.04 (-.14/.07) 
 10.42 
9 
 
   UK, Europe & Aus/NZ 
 -.24 (-.36/-.12) 
0.85 
4 
 
Sex of first author 
 
 
 
5.93* 
   Female 
-.02 (-.14/.10) 
9.55 
7 
 
   Male 
-.22 (-.33/-.11) 
1.71 
6

----- Page 166 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
166 
 
Measure and category 
d (95% CI) 
Qw 
k 
QB 
Impulse control 
 
 
 
 
Age 
 
 
 
21.98 *** 
   15-18 years 
.00 (-.74/.74) 
26.33 *** 
2 
 
   18-21 years 
 .40 (.27/.54) 
2.43 
3 
 
   21-30 years 
-.17 (-.36/.03) 
0.36 
2 
 
Geographical Area 
 
 
 
9.18 ** 
   US, Canada & Central America 
.17 (-.02/.35) 
32.40 *** 
8 
 
   UK, Europe & Aus/NZ 
 -.55 (-.98/-.13) 
 4.19* 
2 
 
Sensation Seeking and Risk-taking  
I7 Venturesomeness 
 
 
 
 
Age 
 
 
 
26.12 *** 
   10-15 years 
.46 (.35/.58) 
18.84* 
9 
 
   15-18 years 
 .63 (.44/.81) 
0.82 
3 
 
   18-21 years 
.54 (.43/.65) 
27.99 ** 
11 
 
   21-30 years 
.46 (.33/.58) 
51.37 *** 
60 
 
   30-40 years 
.84 (.70/.98) 
1.33 
3 
 
   40+ 
.37 (.21/.53) 
4.29 
4 
 
Reward and Punishment Sensitivity  
BAS Reward 
 
 
 
 
Age 
 
 
 
9.75** 
   18-21 years 
-.16 (-.29/-.04) 
6.35 
5 
 
   21-30 years 
-.54 (-.73/-.34) 
0.02 
2

----- Page 167 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
167 
 
Measure and category 
d (95% CI) 
Qw 
k 
QB 
Behavioural Measures of Impulsivity  
BART 
 
 
 
 
Age 
 
 
 
6.65* 
   10-15 years 
.43 (.02/.85) 
1.15 
2 
 
   18-21 years 
 .57 (.30/.85) 
0.12 
3 
 
   21-30 years 
.02 (-.30/.34) 
0.65 
3 
 
Executive Response Inhibition 
 
 
 
 
Population 
 
 
 
17.37 *** 
   Community 
-.17 (-.40/.06) 
0.82 
4 
 
   Schools (up to age 18) 
 .62 (.46/.78) 
7.58 
4 
 
   University Students 
.05 (-.18/.28) 
0.35 
2 
 
Age 
 
 
 
30.69 *** 
   10-15 years 
.71  (.51/.92) 
0.22 
2 
 
   15-18 years 
 .32 (-.36/1.01) 
5.34* 
2 
 
   21-30 years 
-.19 (-.44/.05) 
0.47 
3 
 
 
Note: Only significant moderators are shown. 
* p < .05.  ** p < .01. ***p < .001 
QW  = total within-group variance.  QB = variance between contrasted categories.

----- Page 168 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
168 
 
Table 11 
Evaluation of evidence for publication bias using moderator analysis by publication status and rank correlation between standard 
error and effect size. 
Domain/measure 
Effect size (95% CI) by publication status 
Rank Correlationa  k 
Evidence for  
publication bias 
Published 
K 
unpublished 
k 
QB 
 
General impulsivity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Whole domain 
.07 (.04/.10) 
159 .14 (.04/.25) 
21 1.61  0.01 ( p = .45) 
180 None 
   I7 Impulsiveness 
.03 (-.01/.08) 80 
.11 (-.04/.26) 
8 
0.92 0.02 (p = .39) 
88 
None 
   BIS Total 
.12 (.06/.19) 
44 
.06 (-.13/.25) 
4 
0.43 0.10 (p = .16) 
48 
None 
   Impulsivity Other Measures 
.12 (.06/.18) 
38 
.19 (.04/.34) 
9 
0.67 -0.01 (p = .44) 
47 
None 
Specific measures of Impulsivity 
 
 
 
 
 
  BIS Non-planning 
Insufficient studies for analysis by group 
0.06 (p = .36) 
20 
None 
 Sensation Seeking and Risk-Taking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Whole domain 
.39 (.34/.44) 
107 .37 (.22/.53) 
17 0.05 -0.05 (p = .20) 
127 None 
   I7 Venturesomeness 
 .51 (.44/.57) 44 
.58 (.03/1.13) 3 
0.07 -0.01 (p = .45) 
49 
None 
   SSS Total 
.52 (.44/.60) 
16 
.45 (.31/.60) 
4 
0.64 -0.09 (p = .29) 
20 
None 
   Sensation Seeking Other Measures Insufficient studies for analysis  
-0.09 (p = .26) 
23 
None

----- Page 169 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
169 
 
Domain/measure 
Effect size (95% CI) by publication status 
Rank Correlationa  k 
Evidence for  
publication bias 
Published 
K 
unpublished 
k 
QB 
 
Reward Sensitivity 
Categories too small to evaluate 
Punishment Sensitivity 
Categories too small to evaluate 
Behavioural Measures 
Categories too small to evaluate 
aGives the rank order correlation between standard error and effect size. All p values are one-tailed.

----- Page 170 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
170 
 
 
Appendix 1:  
List of all effect sizes included in the analysis by study, category and domain. 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Acheson et al 
(2007)                  
B 
0a 
 
10 
10 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
3 
Acheson et al 
(2007)                  
B 
0a 
 
10 
10 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Acheson et al 
(2007)                  
B 
0a 
 
10 
10 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
39 
Aklin et al (2005)    B 
0.22 
 
26 
25 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
3 
Aklin et al (2005)    B 
0.20 
 
26 
25 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
27 
Allen et al (1998)    B 
0a 
 
16 
10 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Baker et al (2003)   B 
-0.31 
 
51 
39 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Bare (2006)             B 
-0.41 
 
41 
51 
4 
1 
0 
0 
0 
3 
Bare (2006)             B 
0.24 
 
41 
51 
4 
1 
0 
0 
0 
3 
Berlin et al (2005)   B 
0.61 2.21 
10 
29 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
38

----- Page 171 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
171 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Berlin et al (2005)   B 
0.03 1.51 
10 
29 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
38 
Berlin et al (2005)   B 
-0.34 0.60 
10 
29 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
38 
Berlin et al (2005)   B 
-0.11 0.47 
10 
29 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
38 
Bjork et al (2004)    B 
0.32 
 
27 
14 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Brown et al 
(2006)                     B 
0a 
 
21 
37 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
39 
Casillas (2006)       B 
0.26 
 
84 
125 
4 
1 
0 
1 
0 
27 
Casillas (2006)       B 
-0.35 
 
84 
125 
4 
1 
0 
1 
0 
38 
Casillas (2006)       B 
-0.47 
 
84 
125 
4 
1 
0 
1 
0 
39 
Casillas (2006)       B 
-0.04 
 
84 
125 
4 
1 
0 
1 
0 
39 
Casillas (2006)       B 
-0.24 
 
84 
125 
4 
1 
0 
1 
0 
39 
Clark et al (2005)    B 
-0.20 2.97 
27 
13 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
39 
Clark et al (2005)    B 
-0.16 0.12 
27 
13 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
39 
Davis et al (2007)   B 
0a 
 
81 
164 
5 
0 
0 
1 
1 
27 
de Wit et al 
(2007)                  
B 
-0.21 1.41 
303 
303 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
15

----- Page 172 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
172 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
de Wit et al 
(2002)                  
B 
0a 
 
18 
18 
4 
0 
0 
2 
1 
15 
de Wit et al 
(2002)                  
B 
0a 
 
18 
18 
4 
0 
0 
2 
1 
15 
de Wit et al 
(2002)                  
B 
0a 
 
18 
18 
4 
0 
0 
2 
1 
39 
de Wit et al 
(2002)                  
B 
0a 
 
18 
18 
4 
0 
0 
2 
1 
39 
Enticott et al 
(2006)                     B 
0.56 2.82 
14 
17 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
39 
Enticott et al 
(2006)                     B 
-0.36 0.67 
14 
17 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
39 
Enticott et al 
(2006)                     B 
-0.17 0.62 
14 
17 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
39 
Enticott et al 
(2006)                     B 
0.24 1.89 
14 
17 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
39

----- Page 173 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
173 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Enticott et al 
(2006)                     B 
-0.11 1.00 
14 
17 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
39 
Epstein, Erkanli, 
et al (2003)             B 
0.66 0.97 
84 
94 
1 
1 
0 
3 
1 
39 
Epstein, Erkanli, 
et al (2003)             
B 
0.64 0.72 
98 
97 
2 
1 
0 
3 
1 
39 
Epstein, Erkanli, 
et al (2003)             
B 
0.76 0.67 
115 
89 
1 
1 
0 
3 
1 
39 
Epstein, Richards, 
et al (2003)             B 
0.11 
 
32 
46 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Epstein, Richards, 
et al (2003)             B 
0.31 
 
32 
46 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Feldman (1999)      B 
-0.47 
 
92 
108 
3 
1 
0 
0 
0 
38 
Feldman (1999)      B 
-0.44 
 
92 
108 
3 
1 
0 
0 
0 
38 
Feldman (1999)      B 
0 
 
92 
108 
3 
1 
0 
0 
0 
38

----- Page 174 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
174 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Feldman (1999)      B 
0 
 
92 
108 
3 
1 
0 
0 
0 
39 
Gargallo (1993)      B 
0.06 1.07 
107 
94 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
38 
Gargallo (1993)      B 
0 0.82 
107 
94 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
38 
Goudriaan et al 
(2007)                     B 
0a 
 
100 
100 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
27 
Heerey et al 
(2007)                   
B 
-0.60 0.69 
12 
17 
6 
0 
1 
1 
1 
15 
Herba et al (2006)  B 
-0.47 1.32 
29 
28 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
39 
Herba et al (2006)  B 
0.07 0.66 
29 
28 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
39 
Herba et al (2006)  B 
-0.08 0.39 
29 
28 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
39 
Herba et al (2006)  B 
-0.06 1.78 
28 
28 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
39 
Herba et al (2006)  B 
0.22 1.42 
28 
28 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
39 
Hunt et al (2005)     B 
0.52 1.23 
22 
58 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
3 
Johnson et al 
(2007)                  
B 
-0.10 1.65 
17 
13 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Johnson et al 
B 
0.66 1.63 
17 
13 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15

----- Page 175 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
175 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2007)                  
Johnson et al 
(2007)                  
B 
-0.04 1.28 
17 
13 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Johnson et al 
(2007)                  
B 
0.71 1.19 
17 
13 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Johnson et al 
(2007)                  
B 
0.41 1.07 
17 
13 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Johnson et al 
(2007)                  
B 
0.24 0.98 
17 
13 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Johnson et al 
(2007)                  
B 
-0.23 0.81 
17 
13 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Johnson et al 
(2007)                  
B 
-0.14 0.38 
17 
13 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Johnson et al 
(2007)                  
B 
-0.37 0.29 
17 
13 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Jollant et al 
B 
0a 
 
41 
41 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
27

----- Page 176 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
176 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2005)                  
Keilp et al (2005)    B 
0a 
 
21 
37 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
39 
Kirby & Petry 
(2004)                     B 
0.02 1.27 
33 
27 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Kirby et al (2002)    B 
-0.23 
 
72.5 
72.5 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Kirby et al (2002)    B 
-0.16 
 
72.5 
72.5 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Kirby et al (2002)    B 
-0.17 
 
73 
81 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
15 
Kollins (2003)         B 
0a 
 
14 
28 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
15 
Lejuez et al 
(2002)                     B 
0.63 
 
43 
43 
3 
1 
0 
1 
1 
3 
Lejuez et al 
(2003)                   
B 
0.47 
 
30 
30 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
3 
Lejuez et al 
(2003)                   
B 
0.49 
 
30 
30 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
3 
Lejuez et al 
(2003)                   
B 
0.68 
 
30 
30 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
3

----- Page 177 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
177 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Lejuez et al 
(2003)                   
B 
-0.72 
 
30 
30 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
27 
Lejuez et al 
(2003)                   
B 
-0.68 
 
30 
30 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
27 
Lejuez et al 
(2003)                   
B 
-0.49 
 
30 
30 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
27 
Leshem & 
Glicksohn (2007)    B 
0a 
 
59 
123 
0 
1 
2 
3 
1 
38 
Leshem & 
Glicksohn (2007)    B 
0a 
 
59 
123 
0 
1 
2 
3 
1 
38 
Leshem & 
Glicksohn (2007)    B 
0a 
 
59 
123 
0 
1 
2 
3 
1 
38 
Leshem & 
Glicksohn (2007)    B 
0a 
 
59 
123 
0 
1 
2 
3 
1 
38 
Maras et al (2006)  B 
0.64 
 
29 
27 
1 
0 
1 
3 
1 
3 
Marczinski et al 
B 
0a 
 
16 
16 
4 
0 
0 
0 
1 
39

----- Page 178 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
178 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2007)               
Mcleish & Oxoby 
(2007)                    B 
-0.43 1.16 
50 
32 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
15 
Mcleish & Oxoby 
(2007)                    B 
-0.59 0.77 
50 
32 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
15 
Mcleish & Oxoby 
(2007)                    B 
0.14 0.59 
50 
32 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
15 
Overman et al 
(2004)                     B 
0.35 
 
240 
240 
0 
1 
0 
2 
1 
27 
Paaver et al 
(2007)                
B 
-0.07 1.35 
222 
261 
2 
0 
1 
1 
1 
38 
Petry et al (2002)    B 
0.61 
 
32 
32 
4 
0 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Quiroga et al 
(2007)                  
B 
0.02 
 
984 
668 
4 
0 
1 
1 
1 
38 
Quiroga et al 
(2007)                  
B 
-0.79 0.48 
984 
668 
4 
0 
1 
1 
1 
38

----- Page 179 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
179 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Reynolds (2003)     B 
0a 
 
35 
40 
2 
1 
0 
3 
0 
15 
Reynolds et al 
(2004)                 
B 
0a 
 
29 
25 
3 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Reynolds et al 
(2004)                 
B 
0a 
 
29 
25 
3 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Reynolds, 
Ortengren, et al 
(2006)                     B 
0a 
 
35 
35 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
3 
Reynolds, 
Ortengren, et al 
(2006)                 
B 
-0.26 1.24 
35 
35 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Reynolds, 
Ortengren, et al 
(2006)                 
B 
0a 
 
35 
35 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
39 
Reynolds, 
B 
0a 
 
35 
35 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
39

----- Page 180 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
180 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Ortengren, et al 
(2006)                 
Reynolds, 
Richards, et al 
(2006)                     B 
0.19 2.20 
11 
13 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
3 
Reynolds, 
Richards, et al 
(2006  )                   
B 
0.24 0.28 
11 
13 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
15 
Reynolds, 
Richards, et al 
(2006  )                   
B 
-0.12 1.77 
11 
13 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
39 
Reynolds, 
Richards, et al 
(2006  )                   
B 
-0.41 0.38 
11 
13 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
39

----- Page 181 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
181 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Stoltenberg et al 
(2006)                     B 
0.11 0.85 
80 
98 
4 
1 
0 
0 
1 
39 
Taylor (2005)          B 
-0.03 1.72 
50 
73 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
39 
Tinius (2003)           B 
0a 
 
19 
22 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
39 
Walderhaug 
(2007)                     B 
0a 
 
39 
44 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
39 
White et al (2007)   B 
0.18 0.96 
18 
19 
4 
0 
0 
1 
1 
3 
Abramowitz & 
Berenbaum 
(2007)                     GI 
-0.14 
 
66 
123 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
29 
Adams et al 
(1997)                     GI 
0.07 1.19 
420 
489 
1 
0 
0 
2 
1 
10 
Aidman & 
Kollaras-
Mitsinikos (2006)    GI 
-0.11 0.32 
10 
14 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Aklin et al (2005)    GI 
-0.10 
 
26 
25 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
4

----- Page 182 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
182 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Alexander et al 
(2004)                     GI 
0.47 0.98 
82 
87 
2 
0 
1 
0 
1 
10 
Allen et al (1998)    GI 
0a 
 
16 
10 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
4 
Allen et al (1998)    GI 
0a 
 
16 
10 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
10 
Allen et al (1998)    GI 
0a 
 
16 
10 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Alter (2001)             GI 
0.39 0.86 
26 
39 
1 
0 
0 
3 
0 
10 
Aluja & Blanch 
(2007)                    GI 
0.10 0.94 
742 
1075 
4 
1 
1 
2 
1 
4 
Anderson (1986)     GI 
0.31 
 
60 
135 
5 
0 
0 
2 
1 
10 
Antonowicz 
(2002)                     GI 
0.02 1.13 
106 
106 
3 
1 
0 
0 
0 
29 
Archer & Webb 
(2006)                     GI 
0.14 0.99 
88 
219 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
29 
Archer et al 
(1995)                     GI 
0.23 1.18 
160 
160 
0 
1 
1 
0 
1 
10 
Baca-Garcia et al 
GI 
-0.11 0.97 
193 
124 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
29

----- Page 183 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
183 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2006)              
Baca-Garcia et al 
(2006)              
GI 
-0.05 0.95 
44 
37 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Baca-Garcia et al 
(2004)             
GI 
-0.05 0.91 
124 
99 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
29 
Bagge et al 
(2004)                    GI 
-0.04 
 
156 
195 
2 
0 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Baker & Yardley 
(2002)              
GI 
0.57 1.00 
193 
227 
2 
1 
0 
3 
1 
10 
Balodis et al 
(2007)                     GI 
0.14 0.76 
29 
37 
4 
0 
0 
0 
1 
29 
Bare (2006)             GI 
-0.08 
 
41 
51 
4 
1 
0 
0 
0 
29 
Bazargan-Hejazi 
et al (2007)             GI 
0.34 1.30 
243 
169 
4 
0 
0 
1 
1 
4 
Bembenutty & 
Karabenick 
GI 
0a 
 
148 
221 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
10

----- Page 184 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
184 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(1998)             
Berlin et al (2005)   GI 
-0.12 0.73 
10 
29 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Bjork et al (2004)    GI 
0.01 1.39 
27 
14 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Brezo et al (2006)   GI 
0.40 
 
496 
648 
4 
0 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Brown et al 
(2006)                     GI 
0a 
 
21 
37 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Caci et al (2003b)   GI 
0.11 1.15 
197 
364 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Camatla et al 
(1995)                     GI 
-0.36 0.64 
47 
86 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
4 
Case (2007)            GI 
0.26 1.20 
727 
588 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
10 
Caseras et al 
(2003)                     GI 
0.28 1.09 
117 
421 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Caseras et al 
(2003)                     GI 
-0.16 0.99 
117 
421 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
10 
Casillas (2006)       GI 
-0.18 
 
84 
125 
4 
1 
0 
1 
0 
10 
Casillas (2006)       GI 
0.14 
 
84 
125 
4 
1 
0 
1 
0 
10

----- Page 185 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
185 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Chabrol et al 
(2004)                     GI 
0.25 
 
435 
181 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
10 
Chen et al (2007)    GI 
-0.17 
 
29 
29 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Chung & Martin 
(2002)         
GI 
0a 
 
119 
54 
2 
0 
0 
1 
1 
4 
Clark et al (2005)    GI 
0.89 0.48 
27 
13 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
29 
Clarke (2004)          GI 
0.23 1.10 
29 
118 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Clarke (2006)          GI 
0.29 1.02 
33 
136 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Clift et al (1993)      GI 
-0.04 0.89 
176 
333 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Colder & Stice 
(1998)                     GI 
-0.41 
 
164 
207 
2 
1 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Colom et al 
(2007)                     GI 
0.07 0.67 
68 
67 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
10 
Compton & 
Kaslow (2005)        GI 
0.43 1.92 
49 
50 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Cooper et al 
GI 
0.12 
 
783 
883 
4 
0 
0 
1 
1 
4

----- Page 186 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
186 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2000)                     
Cooper et al 
(2003)                     GI 
0.04 
 
981 
997 
2 
0 
0 
1 
1 
10 
Corr et al (1995)     GI 
0.66 1.02 
15 
14 
0 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Corulla (1987)         GI 
0.06 1.22 
92 
215 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Curry & Piquero 
(2003)                
GI 
-0.17 1.03 
286 
172 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Cyders et al 
(2007)                     GI 
0 1.62 
175 
175 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Cyders et al 
(2007)                     GI 
0.14 1.31 
43 
165 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Cyders et al 
(2007)                     GI 
0.14 1.19 
168 
147 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Dahlen et al 
(2004)                     GI 
-0.18 0.99 
67 
157 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
29 
Davelaar et al 
GI 
0.26 1.17 
22 
64 
0 
2 
0 
0 
1 
10

----- Page 187 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
187 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2008)                     
Davelaar et al 
(2008)                     GI 
0.08 0.76 
19 
78 
0 
2 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Davelaar et al 
(2008)                     GI 
0.36 0.56 
20 
68 
0 
2 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Davis et al (2007)   GI 
0.41 0.80 
81 
164 
5 
0 
0 
1 
1 
29 
De Flores et al 
(1986)                     GI 
-0.01 1.15 
94 
122 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Deffenbacher et 
al (2003)             
GI 
0a 
 
137 
233 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
29 
DePasquale et al 
(2001)                    GI 
-0.06 
 
41 
55 
2 
1 
0 
0 
1 
4 
Dhuse (2006)          GI 
0.14 
 
104 
230 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
Diaz & Pickering 
(1993)                    GI 
-0.04 1.50 
89 
82 
4 
0 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Dinn et al (2002)     GI 
0a 
 
28 
75 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
4

----- Page 188 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
188 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Doran, 
McChargue, et al 
(2007)                     GI 
0a 
 
87 
115 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
29 
Doran, Spring, et 
al (2007)                 GI 
0.39 1.94 
30 
30 
5 
1 
0 
2 
1 
29 
Durante (2002)       GI 
0 
 
271 
103 
5 
0 
0 
1 
0 
10 
Enticott et al 
(2006)                     GI 
-0.20 0.83 
14 
17 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
29 
Eysenck & Abdel-
Khalik (1992)       
GI 
-0.11 1.02 
476 
486 
3 
0 
2 
0 
1 
4 
Eysenck & Abdel-
Khalik (1992)       
GI 
0.05 0.89 
147 
179 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Eysenck & 
Jamieson (1986)     GI 
0.07 0.87 
523 
529 
1 
0 
0 
3 
1 
4 
Eysenck & 
Jamieson (1986)     GI 
0.07 0.85 
533 
777 
1 
0 
1 
3 
1 
4

----- Page 189 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
189 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Eysenck (1981)       GI 
0.22 1.21 
118 
309 
1 
0 
1 
3 
1 
4 
Eysenck et al 
(1985)                     GI 
-0.21 1.00 
559 
761 
6 
0 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Eysenck et al 
(1985)                     GI 
0.14 0.94 
383 
206 
4 
0 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Eysenck et al 
(1990)                
GI 
-0.16 0.98 
239 
184 
5 
0 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Eysenck et al 
(1990)                
GI 
-0.41 0.91 
175 
214 
5 
0 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Fallgatter & 
Herrmann (2001)    GI 
0.23 0.84 
12 
10 
6 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Fingeret et al 
(2005)                     GI 
0.02 1.28 
42 
49 
4 
0 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Flora (2007)            GI 
0.22 
 
125 
263 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
10 
Flory et al (2006)    GI 
0.36 0.99 
154 
197 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Ford (1995)       
GI 
-0.01 0.92 
220 
252 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4

----- Page 190 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
190 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Fossati et al 
(2001)                
GI 
-0.07 1.01 
273 
490 
4 
0 
1 
0 
1 
29 
Fossati et al 
(2002)                
GI 
0.17 1.30 
209 
354 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
29 
Fu et al (2007)        GI 
0.04 1.04 
1214 
1248 
3 
2 
2 
0 
1 
29 
Galanti et al 
(2007)                     GI 
0.54 
 
28 
65 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Giancola & 
Parrott (2005)         GI 
-0.06 0.89 
164 
166 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Glicksohn & 
Nahari (2007)         GI 
0.24 0.93 
105 
127 
2 
1 
2 
0 
1 
4 
Glicksohn & 
Nahari (2007)         GI 
-0.06 1.00 
105 
127 
2 
1 
2 
0 
1 
29 
Grano et al (2007)  GI 
-0.19 0.71 
520 
3808 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
28 
Green (1995) 
GI 
0.02 
 
48 
76 
4 
1 
0 
0 
0 
4 
Gudjonsson et al 
GI 
0.02 1.00 
683 
861 
3 
0 
1 
2 
1 
4

----- Page 191 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
191 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2006)                    
Gupta & Gupta 
(1998)                     GI 
0.47 1.29 
100 
100 
4 
0 
2 
0 
1 
4 
Hawton et al 
(2002)                     GI 
-0.09 1.08 
2911 
2374 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
10 
Heaven (1989)        GI 
-0.11 0.92 
69 
100 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
4 
Heaven (1991)        GI 
-0.37 1.09 
70 
100 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
4 
Henle (2005)           GI 
0.35 
 
70 
81 
4 
0 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Hewlett & Smith 
(2006)                  
GI 
0.17 1.09 
120 
164 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Hulsey (2001)         GI 
0a 
 
107 
99 
4 
1 
0 
0 
0 
4 
Hunt et al (2005)     GI 
0.45 0.68 
22 
58 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
29 
Jack & Ronan 
(1998)                     GI 
0a 
 
119 
47 
4 
0 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Jackson & 
Matthews (1988)     GI 
0.34 1.28 
30 
58 
5 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4

----- Page 192 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
192 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
January (2003) 
GI 
0.22 
 
34 
84 
3 
0 
0 
2 
0 
10 
Justus et al 
(2001)                     GI 
0.25 0.96 
87 
103 
4 
0 
0 
0 
1 
4 
Kazemi (2007)       GI 
0.42 1.73 
14 
24 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
29 
Kazemi (2007)        GI 
0.16 0.78 
28 
89 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
29 
Keilp et al (2005)    GI 
0a 
 
21 
37 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Ketzenberger & 
Forrest (2000)         GI 
0a 
 
148 
257 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Kirby & Petry 
(2004)                     GI 
0.33 1.24 
33 
27 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
4 
Klinteberg et al 
(1987)             
GI 
-0.22 0.62 
29 
32 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
4 
Klinteberg et al 
(1987)             
GI 
-0.15 0.66 
29 
32 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
28 
Krueger et al 
(2007)                     GI 
0.20 1.14 
435.5 
435.5 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
10

----- Page 193 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
193 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Krueger et al 
(2007)                     GI 
-0.03 0.92 
435.5 
435.5 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Krueger et al 
(2007)                     GI 
-0.03 0.87 
435.5 
435.5 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Lejuez et al 
(2002)                     GI 
0.43 
 
43 
43 
3 
1 
0 
1 
1 
4 
Lejuez et al 
(2002)                     GI 
0.52 
 
43 
43 
3 
1 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Lejuez et al 
(2003)                   
GI 
-0.20 
 
30 
30 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
4 
Lennings (1991)     GI 
0a 
 
22 
80 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
28 
Lennings & Burns 
(1998)                     GI 
0a 
 
15 
54 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
28 
Leshem & 
Glicksohn (2007)    GI 
0a 
 
59 
123 
2 
1 
2 
3 
1 
4 
Leshem & 
GI 
0a 
 
59 
123 
2 
1 
2 
3 
1 
29

----- Page 194 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
194 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Glicksohn (2007)    
Li & Chen (2007)    GI 
0.06 1.00 
353 
367 
2 
1 
2 
3 
1 
29 
Lijffijit et al (2005)   GI 
0.10 1.14 
193 
855 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Llorenet & 
Torrubia (1988)       GI 
0.22 1.12 
121 
61 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Lopez Viets 
(2001)                    GI 
0.64 0.97 
54 
61 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
Luengo et al 
(1990)                     GI 
-0.01 1.13 
55 
252 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Luengo et al 
(1990)                     GI 
-0.04 0.89 
55 
252 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
29 
Lyke & Spinella 
(2004)                     GI 
0.39 1.25 
32 
80 
4 
0 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Macpherson et al 
(1996)                    GI 
-0.04 0.77 
22 
19 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
4 
Macpherson et al 
GI 
-0.17 0.68 
22 
22 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
4

----- Page 195 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
195 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(1996)                    
Magid et al (2007)  GI 
0.15 0.85 
111 
199 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
28 
Malle & Neubauer 
(1991)                     GI 
-0.61 
 
25 
40 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
10 
Mallet & Vignoli 
(2007)                  
GI 
-0.23 0.85 
235 
401 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
4 
Manuck et al 
(1998)                     GI 
-0.17 0.65 
59 
60 
6 
1 
0 
1 
1 
29 
McCrae & Costa 
(1985)                     GI 
-0.21 1.10 
423 
129 
6 
1 
0 
1 
1 
4 
McFatter (1998)      GI 
0.18 0.97 
578 
932 
2 
1 
0 
0 
1 
4 
Mcleish & Oxoby 
(2007)                    GI 
-0.20 0.86 
50 
32 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
29 
McMahon & 
Washburn (2003)    GI 
0a 
 
56 
100 
1 
0 
0 
3 
1 
10 
Meadows (1995)    GI 
0.24 0.70 
262 
336 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
10

----- Page 196 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
196 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Mehrabian (2000)   GI 
0.28 
 
107 
195 
3 
1 
0 
2 
1 
10 
Mejia et al (2006)    GI 
0.33 1.10 
473 
644 
1 
1 
0 
3 
1 
10 
Molto et al (1993)   GI 
-0.02 0.66 
347 
448 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Nagoshi (1999)       GI 
0.04 0.93 
52 
71 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
4 
Nagoshi et al 
(1994)                     GI 
0a 
 
99 
91 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
4 
Neal & Carey 
(2007)                     GI 
0.23 1.11 
75 
131 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
4 
Neal & Carey 
(2007)                     GI 
0.12 0.99 
75 
131 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Neubauer (1992)    GI 
0a 
 
32 
81 
5 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Nietfeld & Bosme 
(2003)                    GI 
-0.41 
 
30 
29 
4 
1 
0 
0 
1 
4 
Nower et al 
(2004)                    GI 
-0.10 1.20 
101 
150 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
Nower et al 
GI 
0.01 1.03 
462 
523 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4

----- Page 197 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
197 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2004)                    
Oas (1984)             GI 
0.27 
 
66 
48 
2 
1 
0 
1 
1 
10 
Overman et al 
(2004)                     GI 
0a 
 
240 
240 
3 
1 
0 
2 
1 
10 
Owsley (2003)        GI 
-0.05 1.08 
135 
129 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
4 
Paaver et al 
(2007)                
GI 
0.03 0.88 
222 
261 
2 
0 
1 
1 
1 
29 
Patock-Peckham 
& Morgan-lopez 
(2006)      
GI 
0.13 0.94 
215 
206 
2 
0 
0 
0 
1 
4 
Patock-Peckham 
et al (1998)             GI 
0a 
 
142 
222 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
4 
Patton et al 
(1995)                     GI 
0.16 1.01 
130 
279 
2 
1 
0 
0 
1 
29 
Pearson et al 
(1986)                     GI 
-0.10 
 
279 
290 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
4

----- Page 198 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
198 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Peluso et al 
(2007)                     GI 
-0.21 0.53 
17 
34 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Penas-Lledo et al 
(2004)                   
GI 
0.61 1.30 
49 
72 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 
10 
Plouffe & Gravelle 
(1989)             
GI 
0a 
 
40 
40 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
10 
Pompili et al 
(2007)                     GI 
0.25 0.87 
141 
159 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
10 
Pompili et al 
(2007)                     GI 
-0.03 0.76 
141 
159 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
10 
Pompili et al 
(2007)                     GI 
0.18 0.82 
141 
159 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
29 
Pontzer (2007)        GI 
0.01 
 
258 
269 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
10 
Ramadan & 
McMurran (2005)    GI 
0.29 1.13 
39 
69 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
29 
Rawlings (1984)     GI 
0.06 
 
18 
17 
0 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4

----- Page 199 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
199 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Reynolds, 
Ortengren, et al 
(2006)                     GI 
0a 
 
35 
35 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
4 
Reynolds, 
Ortengren, et al 
(2006)                     GI 
0a 
 
35 
35 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Reynolds, 
Richards, et al 
(2006  )                   GI 
0.37 1.35 
11 
13 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Reynolds et al 
(2007)                 
GI 
0a 
 
25 
26 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Rhyff et al (1983)    GI 
0a 
 
135 
135 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Rigby et al (1989)   GI 
0.33 1.00 
56 
59 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
4 
Rigby et al (1992)   GI 
0a 
 
48 
57 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
4 
Rim (1994)              GI 
-0.16 1.38 
53 
45 
4 
3 
2 
0 
1 
4 
Robinson (1990)     GI 
-0.26 
 
69 
125 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
4

----- Page 200 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
200 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Romero et al 
(2001)                     GI 
0.08 
 
435 
529 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
4 
Rowe et al (1995)   GI 
0.41 
 
407 
425 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
10 
Sahoo (1985)          GI 
0.49 
 
80 
80 
2 
1 
2 
3 
1 
4 
Saklofske & 
Eysenck (1983)       GI 
-0.69 
 
20 
11 
1 
1 
0 
3 
1 
4 
Saklofske & 
Eysenck (1983)       GI 
0.09 1.08 
84 
76 
1 
1 
0 
3 
1 
4 
Saklofske & 
Eysenck (1983)       GI 
0.01 0.96 
69 
68 
1 
1 
0 
3 
1 
4 
Saklofske & 
Eysenck (1983)       GI 
0.22 0.79 
61 
70 
1 
1 
0 
3 
1 
4 
Saklofske & 
Eysenck (1983)      GI 
0.21 0.73 
74 
61 
1 
1 
0 
3 
1 
4 
Sasaki & Kanachi 
(2005)                    GI 
0.32 0.90 
54 
40 
4 
1 
2 
0 
1 
10

----- Page 201 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
201 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Schaughency et 
al (1994)                 GI 
0.16 1.41 
425 
413 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
10 
Schwartz (2007)     GI 
0.27 1.21 
55 
168 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Schweizer (2002)    GI 
0a 
 
26 
82 
4 
1 
1 
2 
1 
10 
Schweizer (2002)    GI 
0a 
 
26 
82 
4 
1 
1 
2 
1 
10 
Schweizer (2002)    GI 
0a 
 
26 
82 
4 
1 
1 
2 
1 
10 
Schweizer (2002)    GI 
0a 
 
26 
82 
4 
1 
1 
2 
1 
10 
Sigurdsson et al 
(2006)                    GI 
-0.02 0.91 
191 
242 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Simons & Carey 
(2006)                     GI 
0.04 1.11 
272 
549 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
4 
Simons (2003)        GI 
0.15 1.22 
97 
206 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
4 
Simons et al 
(2005)                     GI 
0.19 1.05 
253 
578 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Smith et al (2006)   GI 
0.02 2.64 
87 
98 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
29 
Smith et al (2006)   GI 
-0.07 0.72 
44 
62 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
29

----- Page 202 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
202 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Soloff et al (2003)   GI 
0.24 0.90 
36 
21 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
29 
Spence et al 
(1991)                     GI 
-0.15 0.68 
183 
292 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
4 
Stanford et al 
(1995)                     GI 
0.12 0.88 
60 
154 
4 
1 
0 
0 
1 
29 
Stanford et al 
(1996)                     GI 
0.17 1.05 
278 
287 
2 
1 
0 
3 
1 
29 
Stanford et al 
(1996)                     GI 
0.34 1.04 
226 
356 
4 
1 
0 
0 
1 
29 
Starrett (1983)        GI 
0.67 1.18 
17 
28 
2 
1 
0 
3 
1 
4 
Starrett (1983)        GI 
0.17 1.03 
19 
46 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
4 
Starrett (1983)        GI 
-0.05 0.58 
26 
27 
1 
1 
0 
3 
1 
4 
Stoltenberg et al 
(2006)                     GI 
-0.38 0.81 
111 
87 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Stoltenberg et al 
(2006)                     GI 
0.61 0.78 
111 
87 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
10

----- Page 203 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
203 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Stoltenberg et al 
(2006)                     GI 
0.01 0.70 
111 
87 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Stoltenberg et al 
(2008)                   
GI 
0.59 0.87 
72 
120 
4 
1 
0 
0 
1 
29 
Thompson et al 
(2007)                 
GI 
0 1.10 
7416 
7611 
1 
0 
0 
3 
1 
10 
Torrubia et al 
(2001)                     GI 
0.03 0.96 
240 
491 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Torrubia et al 
(2001)                     GI 
0.12 0.87 
43 
119 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Torrubia et al 
(2001)                     GI 
-0.05 0.86 
117 
223 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Toyer (1999)           GI 
0.45 1.44 
805 
815 
2 
1 
0 
3 
0 
10 
Van den Broek et 
al (1992)                 GI 
0a 
 
18 
18 
4 
2 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Van den Broek et 
GI 
0a 
 
18 
18 
4 
2 
1 
1 
1 
29

----- Page 204 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
204 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
al (1992)                 
Vazsonyi et al 
(2006)                     GI 
-0.02 1.03 10041 10193 
2 
1 
0 
3 
1 
10 
Vigil-Colet & 
Cordorniu-Raga 
(2004)                
GI 
0.48 1.76 
16 
68 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Vigil-Colet (2007)    GI 
-0.18 1.10 
18 
77 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Von Knorring et al 
(1987)                 
GI 
-0.04 0.88 
56 
81 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
28 
Weller (2001)          GI 
0.76 
 
30 
30 
0 
0 
0 
2 
0 
4 
Weyers et al 
(1995)                     GI 
-0.45 1.39 
40 
40 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Weyers et al 
(1995)                     GI 
-0.73 0.86 
40 
40 
6 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Wingo (2002)          GI 
0.19 1.60 
30 
25 
2 
0 
0 
1 
0 
10 
Zawacki (2002)       GI 
-0.04 
 
90 
90 
4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4

----- Page 205 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
205 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Zimmerman et al 
(2004)                     GI 
-0.12 0.81 
50 
170 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Zimmerman et al 
(2005)                    GI 
-0.13 0.59 
26 
110 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Zuckerman et al 
(1988)                     GI 
-0.12 1.42 
73 
198 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Zuckerman et al 
(1988)                     GI 
-0.13 1.00 
73 
198 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
10 
Zuckerman et al 
(1988)                     GI 
0 0.86 
73 
198 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
28 
Avila & Parcet 
(2000)                 
PS 
0a 
 
23 
85 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
13 
Bjork et al (2004)    PS 
-0.51 1.13 
27 
14 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
19 
Caci et al (2007)     PS 
-0.25 0.67 
36 
100 
2 
1 
1 
0 
1 
13 
Caci et al (2007)     PS 
-0.74 0.87 
35 
109 
2 
1 
1 
0 
1 
19 
Caseras et al 
PS 
-0.11 0.97 
117 
421 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
13

----- Page 206 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
206 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2003)                     
Caseras et al 
(2003)                     PS 
-0.16 0.93 
117 
421 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
13 
Caseras et al 
(2003)                     PS 
-0.56 1.44 
117 
421 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
19 
Caseras et al 
(2003)                     PS 
-0.44 1.05 
117 
421 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
36 
Davis et al (2007)   PS 
0.13 1.04 
81 
164 
5 
0 
0 
1 
1 
13 
Li et al (2007 )        PS 
0.02 1.09 
235 
313 
3 
2 
2 
0 
1 
13 
Nijs et al (2007)      PS 
-0.18 1.13 
20 
24 
4 
0 
1 
1 
1 
19 
Pang & 
Schultheiss 
(2005)                  
PS 
-0.45 1.56 
154 
172 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
19 
Segarra et al 
(2007)                     PS 
-0.45 0.89 
79 
114 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
13 
Segarra et al 
PS 
-0.84 0.98 
79 
114 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
19

----- Page 207 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
207 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2007)                     
Smillie et al 
(2006)                     PS 
-0.68 0.93 
427 
116 
4 
1 
1 
2 
1 
19 
Stewart et al 
(2004)                     PS 
-0.37 1.15 
347 
550 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
36 
Torrubia et al 
(2001)                     PS 
-0.24 1.12 
96 
276 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
13 
Torrubia et al 
(2001)                     PS 
0.05 1.12 
240 
491 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
13 
Torrubia et al 
(2001)                     PS 
-0.21 0.98 
229 
599 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
13 
Uzieblo et al 
(2007)                     PS 
-0.73 1.27 
167 
227 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
19 
van den bree et al 
(2006)                  
PS 
-0.55 0.92 
240 
340 
2 
0 
0 
1 
1 
36 
Weyers et al 
PS 
-0.38 1.19 
40 
40 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
36

----- Page 208 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
208 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(1995)                     
Weyers et al 
(1995)                     PS 
-0.14 1.10 
40 
40 
6 
1 
1 
0 
1 
36 
Avila & Parcet 
(2000)                 
RS 
0a 
 
23 
85 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
14 
Bjork et al (2004)    RS 
-0.25 1.23 
27 
14 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
16 
Bjork et al (2004)    RS 
0.18 1.00 
27 
14 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
17 
Bjork et al (2004)    RS 
-0.59 0.45 
27 
14 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
18 
Caci et al (2007)     RS 
0.08 0.52 
36 
100 
2 
1 
1 
0 
1 
14 
Caci et al (2007)     RS 
0.09 0.92 
35 
109 
2 
1 
1 
0 
1 
16 
Caci et al (2007)     RS 
-0.14 1.40 
35 
109 
2 
1 
1 
0 
1 
17 
Caci et al (2007)     RS 
-0.42 1.26 
35 
109 
2 
1 
1 
0 
1 
18 
Caseras et al 
(2003)                     RS 
0.60 1.45 
117 
421 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
14 
Caseras et al 
(2003)                     RS 
0.53 0.86 
117 
421 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
14

----- Page 209 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
209 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Caseras et al 
(2003)                     RS 
0.14 0.98 
117 
421 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
16 
Caseras et al 
(2003)                     RS 
0.13 1.06 
117 
421 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
17 
Caseras et al 
(2003)                     RS 
-0.11 1.18 
117 
421 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
18 
Caseras et al 
(2003)                     RS 
-0.48 0.95 
117 
421 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
32 
Cyders et al 
(2007)                     RS 
0.03 1.19 
175 
175 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
16 
Cyders et al 
(2007)                     RS 
0.05 1.18 
175 
175 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
17 
Cyders et al 
(2007)                     RS 
-0.12 0.87 
175 
175 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
18 
Davis et al (2007)   RS 
0.46 1.16 
81 
164 
5 
0 
0 
1 
1 
14 
Li et al (2007)         RS 
0.31 1.11 
235 
313 
3 
2 
2 
0 
1 
14

----- Page 210 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
210 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Nijs et al (2007)      RS 
-0.68 0.57 
20 
24 
4 
0 
1 
1 
1 
16 
Nijs et al (2007)      RS 
-0.37 0.85 
20 
24 
4 
0 
1 
1 
1 
17 
Nijs et al (2007)      RS 
-0.49 1.13 
20 
24 
4 
0 
1 
1 
1 
18 
Nijs et al (2007)      RS 
-0.70 0.72 
20 
24 
4 
0 
1 
1 
1 
31 
Pang 
& Schultheiss 
(2005)                  
RS 
0.15 1.38 
154 
172 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
16 
Pang & 
Schultheiss 
(2005)                  
RS 
0.15 0.98 
154 
172 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
17 
Pang & 
Schultheiss 
(2005)                  
RS 
0.01 1.06 
154 
172 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
18 
Pang & 
Schultheiss 
(2005)                  
RS 
0.15 1.12 
154 
172 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
31

----- Page 211 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
211 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Segarra et al 
(2007)                     RS 
0.49 1.14 
79 
114 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
14 
Segarra et al 
(2007)                     RS 
0.01 1.47 
79 
114 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
16 
Segarra et al 
(2007)                     RS 
-0.11 1.08 
79 
114 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
17 
Segarra et al 
(2007)                     RS 
-0.34 0.97 
79 
114 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
18 
Segarra et al 
(2007)                     RS 
-0.20 0.98 
79 
114 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
31 
Smillie et al 
(2006)                     RS 
0.14 1.18 
427 
116 
4 
1 
1 
2 
1 
16 
Smillie et al 
(2006)                     RS 
0.25 0.80 
427 
116 
4 
1 
1 
2 
1 
17 
Smillie et al 
(2006)                     RS 
-0.54 1.11 
427 
116 
4 
1 
1 
2 
1 
18

----- Page 212 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
212 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Torrubia et al 
(2001)                     RS 
0.53 1.45 
229 
599 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
14 
Torrubia et al 
(2001)                     RS 
0.45 1.12 
51 
156 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
14 
Torrubia et al 
(2001)                     RS 
0.45 1.03 
240 
491 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
14 
Uzieblo et al 
(2007)                     RS 
-0.02 1.07 
167 
227 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
16 
Uzieblo et al 
(2007)                     RS 
0.04 1.52 
167 
227 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
17 
Uzieblo et al 
(2007)                     RS 
-0.31 0.81 
167 
227 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
18 
Uzieblo et al 
(2007)                     RS 
-0.13 1.13 
167 
227 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
31 
van den bree et al 
(2006)                  
RS 
-0.61 1.40 
240 
340 
2 
0 
0 
1 
1 
32

----- Page 213 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
213 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Weyers et al 
(1995)                     RS 
-0.75 1.10 
40 
40 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
32 
Weyers et al 
(1995)                     RS 
-0.38 0.94 
40 
40 
6 
1 
1 
0 
1 
32 
Aklin et al (2005)    SS/RT 
0.14 
 
26 
25 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
12 
Alexander et al 
(2004)                     SS/RT 
0.29 1.00 
82 
87 
2 
0 
1 
0 
1 
11 
Alter (2001)             SS/RT 
-0.74 0.67 
26 
39 
1 
0 
0 
3 
0 
33 
Aluja & Blanch 
(2007)                    SS/RT 
0.52 1.14 
742 
1075 
4 
1 
1 
2 
1 
5 
Anestis et al 
(2007)                     SS/RT 
0 0.83 
12 
58 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
9 
Bates & Labouvie 
(1995)               
SS/RT 
0.56 
 
654 
654 
2 
0 
0 
2 
1 
21 
Bazargan-Hejazi 
et al (2007)             SS/RT 
-0.45 1.03 
243 
169 
4 
0 
0 
1 
1 
11

----- Page 214 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
214 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Bazargan-Hejazi 
et al (2007)             SS/RT 
0.38 1.09 
243 
169 
4 
0 
0 
1 
1 
30 
Billieux et al 
(2008)                     SS/RT 
0.46 0.88 
74 
76 
4 
1 
1 
2 
1 
9 
Bjork et al (2004)    SS/RT 
0.60 1.43 
27 
14 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
20 
Bjork et al (2004)    SS/RT 
0.48 1.73 
27 
14 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
21 
Bjork et al (2004)    SS/RT 
0.14 1.39 
27 
14 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
22 
Bjork et al (2004)    SS/RT 
0.34 1.12 
27 
14 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
23 
Bjork et al (2004)    SS/RT 
0.49 1.57 
27 
14 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
30 
Caci et al (2003b)   SS/RT 
0.57 1.20 
197 
364 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
5 
Caci et al (2003a)   SS/RT 
0.19 0.88 
201 
390 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
24 
Camatla et al 
(1995)                     SS/RT 
0.64 0.67 
47 
86 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
5 
Caseras et al 
(2003)                     SS/RT 
0.04 1.00 
117 
421 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
12 
Casillas (2006)       SS/RT 
0.61 
 
84 
125 
4 
1 
0 
1 
0 
9

----- Page 215 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
215 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Casillas (2006)       SS/RT 
0.32 
 
84 
125 
4 
1 
0 
1 
0 
20 
Casillas (2006)       SS/RT 
0.72 
 
84 
125 
4 
1 
0 
1 
0 
21 
Casillas (2006)       SS/RT 
0.49 
 
84 
125 
4 
1 
0 
1 
0 
23 
Cherpitel (1993)      SS/RT 
-0.54 
 
575 
575 
0 
0 
0 
4 
1 
11 
Cherpitel (1993)      SS/RT 
0.30 
 
575 
575 
0 
0 
0 
4 
1 
11 
Cherpitel (1993)      SS/RT 
0.30 
 
575 
575 
0 
0 
0 
4 
1 
12 
Claes et al (2000)   SS/RT 
0.43 
 
159 
156 
6 
1 
1 
1 
1 
24 
Clarke (2004)          SS/RT 
-0.31 1.18 
29 
118 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
5 
Clift et al (1993)      SS/RT 
0.51 0.81 
176 
333 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
Colom et al 
(2007)                     SS/RT 
0.92 1.75 
68 
67 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
12 
Cooper et al 
(2003)                     SS/RT 
0.45 
 
981 
997 
2 
0 
0 
1 
1 
23 
Copping (2007)       SS/RT 
1.16 
 
94 
104 
1 
1 
1 
3 
0 
9 
Corulla (1987)         SS/RT 
0.54 0.90 
92 
215 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
5 
Cross (2007)           SS/RT 
0.49 1.04 
127 
201 
4 
0 
1 
2 
0 
30

----- Page 216 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
216 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Cross (2007)           SS/RT 
0.22 1.30 
127 
201 
4 
0 
1 
2 
0 
11 
Cross (2008)           SS/RT 
0.25 1.17 
50 
65 
5 
0 
1 
1 
0 
11 
Cross (2009)           SS/RT 
0.34 1.03 
2261 
1514 
5 
0 
1 
1 
0 
11 
Curran (2006)         SS/RT 
-0.43 0.38 
61 
19 
5 
1 
0 
1 
0 
20 
Curran (2006)         SS/RT 
-0.27 0.47 
61 
19 
5 
1 
0 
1 
0 
21 
Curran (2006)         SS/RT 
-0.60 0.53 
61 
19 
5 
1 
0 
1 
0 
22 
Curran (2006)         SS/RT 
-0.35 0.69 
61 
19 
5 
1 
0 
1 
0 
23 
Curran (2006)         SS/RT 
-0.54 0.44 
61 
19 
5 
1 
0 
1 
0 
34 
Curry (2005)           SS/RT 
0.54 
 
117 
173 
2 
0 
0 
1 
0 
9 
Cyders et al 
(2007)                     SS/RT 
-0.02 1.07 
175 
175 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
9 
Cyders et al 
(2007)                     SS/RT 
0.52 0.72 
43 
165 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
9 
Cyders et al 
(2007)                     SS/RT 
0.51 0.64 
168 
147 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
9 
d'Acrement & Van SS/RT 
0.70 0.80 
314 
314 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
9

----- Page 217 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
217 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Der Linden (2005)  
Dahlen et al 
(2005)                     SS/RT 
0.54 0.97 
67 
157 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
12 
Dahlen et al 
(2005)                     SS/RT 
0.14 0.96 
67 
157 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
12 
DePasquale et al 
(2001)                    SS/RT 
0.70 
 
41 
55 
2 
1 
0 
0 
1 
5 
Dhuse (2006)          SS/RT 
0.70 
 
104 
230 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
5 
Diaz & Pickering 
(1993)                    SS/RT 
0.22 0.94 
89 
82 
4 
0 
1 
1 
1 
5 
Driscoll et al 
(2006)                 
SS/RT 
-0.77 1.24 
221 
386 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
33 
Eysenck & Abdel-
Khalik (1992)       
SS/RT 
0.54 0.97 
476 
486 
3 
0 
2 
0 
1 
5 
Eysenck & Abdel-
Khalik (1992)       
SS/RT 
0.55 0.66 
147 
179 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
5

----- Page 218 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
218 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Eysenck & 
Jamieson (1986)     SS/RT 
0.55 0.81 
533 
777 
1 
0 
1 
3 
1 
5 
Eysenck & 
Jamieson (1986)     SS/RT 
0.37 0.70 
523 
529 
1 
0 
0 
3 
1 
5 
Eysenck (1981)       SS/RT 
0.19 0.92 
118 
309 
1 
0 
1 
3 
1 
5 
Eysenck et al 
(1985)                     SS/RT 
0.27 1.13 
559 
761 
6 
0 
1 
1 
1 
5 
Eysenck et al 
(1985)                     SS/RT 
0.65 0.75 
383 
206 
4 
0 
1 
1 
1 
5 
Eysenck et al 
(1990)                
SS/RT 
0.75 1.03 
175 
214 
5 
0 
1 
1 
1 
5 
Eysenck et al 
(1990)                
SS/RT 
0.92 0.97 
239 
184 
5 
0 
1 
1 
1 
5 
Fallgatter & 
Herrmann (2001)    SS/RT 
0.28 0.72 
12 
10 
6 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
Fischer & Smith 
SS/RT 
0.44 
 
113 
247 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
11

----- Page 219 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
219 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2004)                     
Fischer & Smith 
(2004)                     SS/RT 
0.45 
 
113 
247 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
11 
Flannery et al 
(1994)                     SS/RT 
0.29 1.27 
370 
369 
1 
1 
0 
3 
1 
12 
Flannery et al 
(1994)                     SS/RT 
-0.20 1.08 
144 
131 
1 
1 
0 
3 
1 
12 
Flora (2007)            SS/RT 
-0.12 
 
125 
263 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
12 
Flora (2007)            SS/RT 
-0.08 
 
125 
263 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
20 
Flory et al (2006)    SS/RT 
0.13 0.77 
154 
197 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
12 
Flory et al (2006)    SS/RT 
0.40 0.99 
154 
197 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
20 
Flory et al (2006)    SS/RT 
0.76 1.53 
154 
197 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
21 
Flory et al (2006)    SS/RT 
0.19 1.02 
154 
197 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
22 
Flory et al (2006)    SS/RT 
0.44 0.77 
154 
197 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
23 
Flory et al (2006)    SS/RT 
0.54 1.06 
154 
197 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
30 
Ford (1995)       
SS/RT 
0 0.87 
220 
252 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
20

----- Page 220 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
220 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Ford (1995)       
SS/RT 
0.44 0.73 
220 
252 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
30 
Franken et al 
(2005)                     SS/RT 
0 1.47 
14 
21 
4 
1 
1 
2 
1 
24 
Garland (1999)       SS/RT 
-0.05 
 
26 
35 
5 
1 
0 
1 
0 
30 
Garland (1999)       SS/RT 
-0.03 1.16 
26 
35 
5 
1 
0 
1 
0 
34 
Giancola & 
Parrott (2005)         SS/RT 
0.70 0.69 
164 
166 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
30 
Glicksohn & 
Nahari (2007)         SS/RT 
0.68 0.92 
105 
127 
2 
1 
2 
0 
1 
5 
Green (1995)          SS/RT 
0.04 
 
48 
76 
4 
1 
0 
0 
0 
5 
Gudjonsson et al 
(2006)                    SS/RT 
0.48 0.80 
699 
875 
3 
0 
1 
2 
1 
5 
Hartman & 
Rawson (1992)       SS/RT 
0.31 1.89 
26 
77 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
21 
Hartman & 
Rawson (1992)       SS/RT 
0.79 1.73 
29 
27 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
21

----- Page 221 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
221 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Hartman & 
Rawson (1992)       SS/RT 
0.66 1.62 
26 
77 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
21 
Hartman & 
Rawson (1992)       SS/RT 
0.80 0.85 
29 
27 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
21 
Hartman & 
Rawson (1992)       SS/RT 
0.83 1.69 
26 
77 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
23 
Hartman & 
Rawson (1992)       SS/RT 
0.34 1.16 
29 
27 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
23 
Hartman & 
Rawson (1992)       SS/RT 
0.60 0.82 
26 
77 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
23 
Hartman & 
Rawson (1992)       SS/RT 
0.05 0.59 
29 
27 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
23 
Heaven (1991)        SS/RT 
0.23 1.09 
70 
100 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
11 
Heaven (1991)        SS/RT 
0.13 0.69 
70 
100 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
12 
Heaven (1991)        SS/RT 
0.51 1.05 
70 
100 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
5 
Hutchinson et al 
SS/RT 
-0.09 0.79 
87 
116 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
5

----- Page 222 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
222 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(1998)                    
Jack & Ronan 
(1998)                     SS/RT 
0.56 0.94 
119 
47 
4 
0 
1 
1 
1 
30 
Justus et al 
(2001)                     SS/RT 
0.75 0.88 
87 
103 
4 
0 
0 
0 
1 
5 
Justus et al 
(2001)                     SS/RT 
0.37 1.23 
87 
103 
4 
0 
0 
0 
1 
20 
Justus et al 
(2001)                     SS/RT 
0.41 0.79 
87 
103 
4 
0 
0 
0 
1 
21 
Justus et al 
(2001)                     SS/RT 
0.41 0.90 
87 
103 
4 
0 
0 
0 
1 
23 
Justus et al 
(2001)                     SS/RT 
-0.82 0.90 
87 
103 
4 
0 
0 
0 
1 
33 
Kirby & Petry 
(2004)                     SS/RT 
0.85 0.97 
33 
27 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
5 
Klinteberg et al 
SS/RT 
0.06 0.85 
29 
32 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
37

----- Page 223 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
223 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(1987)             
Krueger et al 
(2007)                     SS/RT 
0.56 1.26 
435.5 
435.5 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
12 
Krueger et al 
(2007)                     SS/RT 
0.19 1.03 
435.5 
435.5 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
12 
Lejuez et al 
(2002)                     SS/RT 
0.70 
 
43 
43 
3 
1 
0 
1 
1 
5 
Lejuez et al 
(2002)                     SS/RT 
0.90 
 
43 
43 
3 
1 
0 
1 
1 
30 
Lejuez et al 
(2003)                   
SS/RT 
0.26 
 
30 
30 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
30 
Lennings (1991)     SS/RT 
0a 
 
22 
80 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
12 
Lennings (1991)     SS/RT 
0a 
 
22 
80 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
30 
Leshem & 
Glicksohn (2007)    SS/RT 
0a 
 
59 
123 
2 
1 
2 
3 
1 
5 
Lijffijit et al (2005)   SS/RT 
0.62 0.98 
193 
855 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
5

----- Page 224 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
224 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Lonczak et al 
(2007)                     SS/RT 
0.54 1.56 
780 
432 
5 
0 
0 
1 
1 
12 
Luengo et al 
(1990)                     SS/RT 
0.57 0.85 
55 
252 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
5 
Lundahl (1995)       SS/RT 
1.12 0.66 
21 
23 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
5 
Lundahl (1995)       SS/RT 
0.66 1.94 
21 
23 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
20 
Lundahl (1995)       SS/RT 
0a 
 
21 
23 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
21 
Lundahl (1995)       SS/RT 
0a 
 
21 
23 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
22 
Lundahl (1995)       SS/RT 
1.20 0.35 
21 
23 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
23 
Magid & Colder 
(2007)                    SS/RT 
0.51 0.91 
131 
136 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
9 
Magid et al (2007)  SS/RT 
0.18 0.73 
111 
199 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
37 
Mallet & Vignoli 
(2007)                  
SS/RT 
-0.30 1.07 
235 
401 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
12 
Mallet & Vignoli 
(2007)                  
SS/RT 
0.79 1.00 
235 
401 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
12

----- Page 225 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
225 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Matczak (1990)       SS/RT 
0.39 
 
152.5 
152.5 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
30 
McAlister et al 
(2005)                    SS/RT 
-0.39 
 
43 
76 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
24 
McDaniel & 
Zuckerman 
(2003)                
SS/RT 
0.32 1.18 
347 
436 
6 
1 
0 
1 
1 
34 
Meadows (1995)    SS/RT 
0.54 0.98 
262 
336 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
30 
Nagoshi (1999)       SS/RT 
0.65 0.91 
52 
71 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
5 
Ng et al (1998)        SS/RT 
0.45 0.76 
101 
101 
1 
2 
2 
3 
1 
12 
Overman et al 
(2004)                     SS/RT 
0a 
 
240 
240 
3 
1 
0 
2 
1 
12 
Owsley (2003)        SS/RT 
0.52 1.46 
135 
129 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
5 
Pearson et al 
(1986)                     SS/RT 
0.54 
 
279 
290 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
5 
Pearson et al 
(1986)                     SS/RT 
0.49 
 
279 
290 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
12

----- Page 226 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
226 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Perez & Torrubia 
(1985)                    SS/RT 
0.61 1.47 
173 
176 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
30 
Perez & Torrubia 
(1985)                    SS/RT 
0.30 1.31 
173 
176 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
20 
Perez & Torrubia 
(1985)                    SS/RT 
0.94 1.62 
173 
176 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
21 
Perez & Torrubia 
(1985)                    SS/RT 
-0.20 1.14 
173 
176 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
22 
Perez & Torrubia 
(1985)                    SS/RT 
0.26 1.14 
173 
176 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
23 
Pfefferbaum et al 
(1994)                   
SS/RT 
0.54 
 
148 
148 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
23 
Plastow (2007)       SS/RT 
0.73 1.01 
56 
267 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
9 
Ramadan & 
McMurran (2005)    SS/RT 
0.80 0.50 
39 
69 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
30 
Rammsayer et al 
SS/RT 
-0.14 0.75 
25 
35 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
24

----- Page 227 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
227 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2000)                     
Rawlings (1984)     SS/RT 
-0.08 
 
18 
17 
0 
1 
1 
0 
1 
5 
Reeve (2007)          SS/RT 
0.68 1.35 
72 
125 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
24 
Reynolds, 
Ortengren, et al 
(2006)                 
SS/RT 
0a 
 
35 
35 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
5 
Rim (1994)              SS/RT 
-0.24 0.65 
53 
45 
4 
2 
2 
0 
1 
5 
Romero et al 
(2001)                     SS/RT 
0.31 
 
435 
529 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
20 
Romero et al 
(2001)                     SS/RT 
0.35 
 
435 
529 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
21 
Romero et al 
(2001)                     SS/RT 
0.03 
 
435 
529 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
22 
Romero et al 
(2001)                     SS/RT 
0.16 
 
435 
529 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
23 
Roth et al (2007)     SS/RT 
0.21 1.09 
1095 
1244 
6 
1 
1 
1 
1 
12

----- Page 228 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
228 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Roth et al (2007)     SS/RT 
0.16 1.00 
1095 
1244 
6 
1 
1 
1 
1 
12 
Roth et al (2007)     SS/RT 
0.17 0.93 
1095 
1244 
6 
1 
1 
1 
1 
12 
Sahoo (1985)          SS/RT 
0a 
 
80 
80 
0 
1 
2 
3 
1 
11 
Saklofske & 
Eysenck (1983)       SS/RT 
0.11 2.05 
20 
11 
1 
1 
0 
3 
1 
5 
Saklofske & 
Eysenck (1983)       SS/RT 
0.29 0.80 
84 
76 
1 
1 
0 
3 
1 
5 
Saklofske & 
Eysenck (1983)       SS/RT 
0.80 0.78 
74 
61 
1 
1 
0 
3 
1 
5 
Saklofske & 
Eysenck (1983)       SS/RT 
0.66 0.72 
69 
68 
1 
1 
0 
3 
1 
5 
Saklofske & 
Eysenck (1983)       SS/RT 
0.56 0.65 
61 
70 
1 
1 
0 
3 
1 
5 
Sasaki & Kanachi 
(2005)                    SS/RT 
0.42 1.17 
54 
40 
4 
1 
2 
0 
1 
30 
Sigurdsson et al 
SS/RT 
0.50 0.79 
191 
242 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
5

----- Page 229 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
229 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2006)                    
Simo et al (1991)    SS/RT 
-0.05 1.10 
136 
144 
3 
1 
1 
2 
1 
20 
Simo et al (1991)    SS/RT 
0.49 1.84 
136 
144 
3 
1 
1 
2 
1 
21 
Simo et al (1991)    SS/RT 
0.29 1.28 
136 
144 
3 
1 
1 
2 
1 
22 
Simo et al (1991)    SS/RT 
0.94 1.09 
136 
144 
3 
1 
1 
2 
1 
23 
Simo et al (1991)    SS/RT 
0.71 1.00 
136 
144 
3 
1 
1 
2 
1 
30 
Spillane & Smith 
(2006a)               
SS/RT 
0.35 2.54 
97 
117 
2 
0 
0 
0 
1 
9 
Spillane & Smith 
(2006b)               
SS/RT 
0.25 0.98 
148 
210 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
9 
Spinella (2005)       SS/RT 
0.76 1.05 
50 
51 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
12 
Stewart et al 
(2004)                     SS/RT 
0.09 1.11 
347 
550 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
12 
Torrubia et al 
(2001)                     SS/RT 
0.31 1.11 
229 
599 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
20 
Torrubia et al 
SS/RT 
0.72 1.26 
229 
599 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
21

----- Page 230 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
230 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2001)                     
Torrubia et al 
(2001)                     SS/RT 
0.01 1.26 
229 
599 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
22 
Torrubia et al 
(2001)                     SS/RT 
0.13 0.97 
229 
599 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
23 
Torrubia et al 
(2001)                     SS/RT 
0.45 1.09 
229 
599 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
30 
van den bree et al 
(2006)                  
SS/RT 
0.10 1.00 
240 
340 
2 
0 
0 
1 
1 
12 
Van der Linden et 
al (2006)                SS/RT 
0.41 0.87 
39 
195 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
9 
Verdejo-Garcia et 
al (2007)                SS/RT 
0a 
 
14 
22 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
9 
Vigil - Colet & 
Cordorniu-Raga 
(2004)                
SS/RT 
0.47 0.85 
16 
68 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
5

----- Page 231 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
231 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Vigil - Colet & 
Cordorniu-Raga 
(2004)                
SS/RT 
0.47 1.33 
16 
68 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
24 
Vigil-Colet & 
Morales-Vives 
(2005)         
SS/RT 
0.26 0.91 
107 
134 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
24 
Vigil-Colet (2007)    SS/RT 
0.23 1.33 
18 
77 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
5 
Vigil-Colet (2007)    SS/RT 
0.55 0.95 
18 
77 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
24 
Vigil-Colet et al (in 
press)             
SS/RT 
0.14 1.02 
208 
114 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
24 
Vigil-Colet et al (in 
press)             
SS/RT 
0.23 0.92 
72 
150 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
24 
Von Knorrin et al 
(1987)                 
SS/RT 
0.10 0.92 
56 
81 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
37 
Weyers et al 
(1995)                     SS/RT 
0.54 1.64 
40 
40 
6 
1 
1 
0 
1 
5

----- Page 232 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
232 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Weyers et al 
(1995)                     SS/RT 
0.88 0.92 
40 
40 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
5 
Weyers et al 
(1995)                     SS/RT 
-0.53 2.15 
40 
40 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
12 
Weyers et al 
(1995)                     SS/RT 
-0.32 1.15 
40 
40 
6 
1 
1 
0 
1 
12 
Weyers et al 
(1995)                     SS/RT 
0.11 1.02 
40 
40 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
30 
Weyers et al 
(1995)                     SS/RT 
0.26 0.76 
40 
40 
6 
1 
1 
0 
1 
30 
Wilson & Daly 
(2006)                     SS/RT 
0.54 0.85 
165 
119 
2 
0 
0 
3 
1 
30 
Yang (2002)            SS/RT 
1.10 
 
189 
216 
4 
1 
0 
0 
0 
34 
Yang (2002)            SS/RT 
0.36 0.91 
189 
216 
4 
1 
0 
0 
0 
34 
Zaleskiewicz 
(2001)                     SS/RT 
0.49 
 
65 
94 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
11

----- Page 233 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
233 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Zaleskiewicz 
(2001)                     SS/RT 
0.51 
 
65 
94 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
11 
Zimmerman et al 
(2004)                     SS/RT 
0.64 0.85 
50 
170 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
5 
Zimmerman et al 
(2005)                    SS/RT 
0.84 0.88 
26 
110 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
5 
Zuckerman et al 
(1978)                
SS/RT 
0.10 1.11 
97 
122 
3 
1 
0 
1 
1 
20 
Zuckerman et al 
(1978)                
SS/RT 
0.45 0.93 
97 
122 
3 
1 
0 
1 
1 
21 
Zuckerman et al 
(1978)                
SS/RT 
-0.10 0.91 
97 
122 
3 
1 
0 
1 
1 
22 
Zuckerman et al 
(1978)                
SS/RT 
0.36 0.78 
97 
122 
3 
1 
0 
1 
1 
23 
Zuckerman et al 
(1978)                
SS/RT 
0.32 0.75 
97 
122 
3 
1 
0 
1 
1 
30

----- Page 234 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
234 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Zuckerman et al 
(1988)                     SS/RT 
0.65 1.09 
73 
198 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
11 
Zuckerman et al 
(1988)                     SS/RT 
0.25 0.95 
73 
198 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
12 
Zuckerman et al 
(1988)                     SS/RT 
0.25 1.10 
73 
198 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
20 
Zuckerman et al 
(1988)                     SS/RT 
0.29 1.28 
73 
198 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
21 
Zuckerman et al 
(1988)                     SS/RT 
-0.04 1.09 
73 
198 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
22 
Zuckerman et al 
(1988)                     SS/RT 
0.54 0.66 
73 
198 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
23 
Zuckerman et al 
(1988)                     SS/RT 
0.15 0.93 
73 
198 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
37 
Anestis et al 
(2007)                     SF 
-0.40 1.26 
12 
58 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
6

----- Page 235 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
235 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Anestis et al 
(2007)                     SF 
-0.68 1.95 
12 
58 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
7 
Anestis et al 
(2007)                     SF 
-0.27 0.88 
12 
58 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
8 
Baca-Garcia et al 
(2006)              
SF 
-0.10 0.86 
44 
37 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
0 
Baca-Garcia et al 
(2006)              
SF 
-0.32 0.77 
193 
124 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
Baca-Garcia et al 
(2006)              
SF 
0.01 0.99 
44 
37 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
Baca-Garcia et al 
(2006)              
SF 
0.02 0.94 
193 
124 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Baca-Garcia et al 
(2006)              
SF 
0.01 1.43 
193 
124 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
Baca-Garcia et al 
(2006)              
SF 
-0.03 0.97 
44 
37 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
2

----- Page 236 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
236 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Baca-Garcia et al 
(2004)             
SF 
0 0.87 
124 
99 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
Baca-Garcia et al 
(2004)             
SF 
0.03 0.99 
124 
99 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Baca-Garcia et al 
(2004)             
SF 
-0.13 0.87 
124 
99 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
Balodis et al 
(2007)                     SF 
0.06 1.00 
29 
37 
4 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
Balodis et al 
(2007)                     SF 
0.22 0.72 
29 
37 
4 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
Balodis et al 
(2007)                     SF 
-0.10 0.91 
29 
37 
4 
0 
0 
0 
1 
2 
Berlin et al (2005)   SF 
-0.17 0.96 
10 
29 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
Berlin et al (2005)   SF 
0.06 1.09 
10 
29 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
Berlin et al (2005)   SF 
-0.17 0.47 
10 
29 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
2 
Billieux et al 
SF 
0.41 0.90 
74 
76 
4 
1 
1 
2 
1 
6

----- Page 237 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
237 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2008)                     
Billieux et al 
(2008)                     SF 
0.09 0.90 
74 
76 
4 
1 
1 
2 
1 
7 
Billieux et al 
(2008)                     SF 
-0.23 0.67 
74 
76 
4 
1 
1 
2 
1 
8 
Bjork et al (2004)    SF 
-0.05 1.03 
27 
14 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
0 
Bjork et al (2004)    SF 
-0.07 1.38 
27 
14 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
Bjork et al (2004)    SF 
0.13 0.09 
27 
14 
5 
1 
0 
1 
1 
2 
Caci et al (2003b)   SF 
0.36 0.99 
194 
342 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
0 
Caci et al (2003b)   SF 
0.18 1.19 
194 
342 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
Caci et al (2003b)   SF 
0.02 1.05 
194 
342 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
2 
Caci et al (2003a)   SF 
0.08 0.91 
201 
390 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
25 
Calvete & 
Cardenoso (2005)  SF 
0.36 0.90 
365 
491 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
35 
Casillas (2006)       SF 
0.39 
 
84 
125 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
2 
Casillas (2006)       SF 
0.30 
 
84 
125 
4 
1 
0 
1 
0 
6

----- Page 238 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
238 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Casillas (2006)       SF 
0 
 
84 
125 
4 
1 
0 
1 
0 
7 
Casillas (2006)       SF 
-0.10 
 
84 
125 
4 
1 
0 
1 
0 
8 
Claes et al (2000)   SF 
0.33 
 
159 
156 
6 
1 
1 
1 
1 
25 
Clark et al (2005)    SF 
0.75 0.90 
27 
13 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
Clark et al (2005)    SF 
0.65 0.66 
27 
13 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Clark et al (2005)    SF 
0.61 0.55 
27 
13 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
Copping (2007)       SF 
-0.20 0.68 
94 
104 
1 
1 
1 
3 
0 
6 
Copping (2007)       SF 
0 0.90 
94 
104 
1 
1 
1 
3 
0 
7 
Copping (2007)       SF 
-0.21 0.60 
94 
104 
1 
1 
1 
3 
0 
8 
Cyders et al 
(2007)                     SF 
0.43 1.05 
43 
165 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
6 
Cyders et al 
(2007)                     SF 
0 1.00 
175 
175 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
6 
Cyders et al 
(2007)                     SF 
-0.14 0.76 
168 
147 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
6 
Cyders et al 
SF 
-0.09 1.09 
43 
165 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
7

----- Page 239 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
239 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2007)                     
Cyders et al 
(2007)                     SF 
-0.09 1.00 
175 
175 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
7 
Cyders et al 
(2007)                     SF 
-0.07 0.83 
168 
147 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
7 
Cyders et al 
(2007)                     SF 
0.05 1.23 
175 
175 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
8 
Cyders et al 
(2007)                     SF 
0 1.11 
168 
147 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
8 
Cyders et al 
(2007)                     SF 
0.15 1.00 
43 
165 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
8 
d'Acrement & Van 
Der Linden (2005)  SF 
0 0.99 
314 
314 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
6 
d'Acrement & Van 
Der Linden (2005)  SF 
0.08 0.92 
314 
314 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
7 
d'Acrement & Van SF 
-0.28 0.82 
314 
314 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
8

----- Page 240 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
240 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Der Linden (2005)  
Davis et al (2002)   SF 
0.11 0.93 
104 
107 
4 
1 
0 
0 
1 
26 
de Wit et al 
(2007)                  
SF 
0.06 1.08 
303 
303 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
de Wit et al 
(2007)                  
SF 
-0.14 1.24 
303 
303 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
de Wit et al 
(2007)                  
SF 
0.29 1.03 
303 
303 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
2 
Dhuse (2006)          SF 
-0.09 
 
104 
230 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Dhuse (2006)          SF 
0.06 
 
104 
230 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
Dhuse (2006)          SF 
0.38 
 
104 
230 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
Driscoll et al 
(2006)                 
SF 
-0.37 1.02 
221 
386 
2 
0 
1 
3 
1 
26 
D'zurilla et al 
(1998)                     SF 
0.32 1.03 
405 
499 
3 
1 
0 
2 
1 
35 
D'zurilla et al 
SF 
0.10 0.98 
30 
70 
6 
1 
0 
2 
1 
35

----- Page 241 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
241 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(1998)                     
D'zurilla et al 
(1998)                     SF 
0.06 0.88 
30 
70 
6 
1 
0 
2 
1 
35 
Enticott et al 
(2006)                     SF 
-0.38 0.45 
14 
17 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
Enticott et al 
(2006)                     SF 
-0.14 1.52 
14 
17 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Enticott et al 
(2006)                     SF 
-0.02 1.23 
14 
17 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
Flory et al (2006)    SF 
0.23 1.17 
154 
197 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
Flory et al (2006)    SF 
0.13 1.03 
154 
197 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
Flory et al (2006)    SF 
0.44 1.08 
154 
197 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
2 
Fossati et al 
(2004)                     SF 
-0.08 0.94 
265 
482 
4 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
Fossati et al 
(2004)                     SF 
-0.08 1.15 
265 
482 
4 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1

----- Page 242 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
242 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Fossati et al 
(2004)                     SF 
-0.04 1.08 
265 
482 
4 
0 
1 
0 
1 
2 
Fox et al (2007)      SF 
0a 
 
26 
24 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
26 
Franken et al 
(2005)                     SF 
-0.29 0.49 
14 
21 
4 
1 
1 
2 
1 
25 
Fu et al (2007)        SF 
0.02 1.00 
1214 
1248 
3 
2 
2 
0 
1 
1 
Fu et al (2007)        SF 
0.07 1.10 
1214 
1248 
3 
2 
2 
0 
1 
2 
Galanti et al 
(2007)                     SF 
0.69 
 
28 
65 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
Galanti et al 
(2007)                     SF 
0.60 
 
28 
65 
6 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
Justus et al 
(2001)                     SF 
-0.23 0.88 
87 
103 
4 
0 
0 
0 
1 
26 
Kirkcaldy et al 
(1998)                     SF 
-0.81 0.72 
55 
56 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
26 
Lehnart et al 
SF 
0.38 0.53 
215 
108 
2 
0 
0 
3 
1 
26

----- Page 243 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
243 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(1994)                     
Lyke & Spinella 
(2004)                     SF 
0.29 0.82 
32 
80 
4 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
Lyke & Spinella 
(2004)                     SF 
0.38 1.45 
32 
80 
4 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
Lyke & Spinella 
(2004)                     SF 
0.05 2.13 
32 
80 
4 
0 
0 
1 
1 
2 
Magid & Colder 
(2007)                    SF 
-0.24 1.21 
131 
136 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
6 
Magid & Colder 
(2007)                    SF 
-0.04 1.12 
131 
136 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
7 
Magid & Colder 
(2007)                    SF 
0.07 1.19 
131 
136 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
8 
Maydeu-Olivares 
et al (2000)        
SF 
0a 
 
121 
651 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
35 
McAlister et al 
SF 
0.12 
 
43 
76 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
25

----- Page 244 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
244 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2005)                    
Pfefferbaum et al 
(1994)                   
SF 
0.30 
 
148 
148 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
26 
Plastow (2007)       SF 
-0.05 0.98 
56 
267 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
6 
Plastow (2007)       SF 
-0.02 1.44 
56 
267 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
7 
Plastow (2007)       SF 
-0.04 0.89 
56 
267 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
8 
Pompili et al 
(2007)                     SF 
0.22 0.99 
141 
159 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
2 
Ramadan & 
McMurran (2005)    SF 
0.36 1.61 
39 
69 
3 
0 
1 
0 
1 
35 
Rammsayer et al 
(2000)                     SF 
-0.23 0.66 
25 
35 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
25 
Reeve (2007)          SF 
0.05 0.78 
72 
125 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
25 
Reto et al (1993)     SF 
0.05 0.59 
57 
126 
5 
0 
0 
0 
1 
26 
Rose (2007)            SF 
0.32 0.87 
89 
148 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
26 
Simons et al 
SF 
0.50 1.02 
228 
363 
3 
1 
0 
0 
1 
26

----- Page 245 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
245 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
(2004)                     
Spillane & Smith 
(2006a)               
SF 
-0.11 1.35 
97 
117 
2 
0 
0 
0 
1 
6 
Spillane & Smith 
(2006a)               
SF 
0.05 1.99 
97 
117 
2 
0 
0 
0 
1 
7 
Spillane & Smith 
(2006a)               
SF 
-0.40 1.73 
97 
117 
2 
0 
0 
0 
1 
8 
Spillane & Smith 
(2006b)               
SF 
0.15 0.62 
148 
210 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
6 
Spillane & Smith 
(2006b)               
SF 
0.04 1.00 
148 
210 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
7 
Spillane & Smith 
(2006b)               
SF 
0 0.93 
148 
210 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
8 
Spinella (2005)       SF 
0.45 0.81 
49 
49 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
0 
Spinella (2005)       SF 
-0.07 0.83 
49 
49 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
Spinella (2005)       SF 
0.37 0.50 
49 
49 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
2

----- Page 246 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
246 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Stoltenberg et al 
(2008)                   
SF 
0.50 1.55 
72 
120 
4 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
Stoltenberg et al 
(2008)                   
SF 
0.53 0.95 
72 
120 
4 
1 
0 
0 
1 
1 
Stoltenberg et al 
(2008)                   
SF 
0.39 1.11 
72 
120 
4 
1 
0 
0 
1 
2 
Sullivan (1997)        SF 
0.35 1.53 
172 
172 
4 
0 
0 
1 
0 
25 
Van der Linden et 
al (2006)                SF 
0.45 0.67 
39 
195 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
6 
Van der Linden et 
al (2006)                SF 
-0.10 0.49 
39 
195 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
7 
Van der Linden et 
al (2006)                SF 
-0.11 0.72 
39 
195 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
8 
Verdejo-Garcia et 
al (2007)                SF 
0a 
 
14 
22 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
6 
Verdejo-Garcia et 
SF 
0a 
 
14 
22 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
7

----- Page 247 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
247 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
al (2007)                
Verdejo-Garcia et 
al (2007)                SF 
0a 
 
14 
22 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
8 
Vigil - Colet & 
Cordorniu-Raga 
(2004)                
SF 
0.40 1.67 
16 
68 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
25 
Vigil-Colet & 
Morales-Vives 
(2005)         
SF 
0.23 0.92 
107 
134 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
0 
Vigil-Colet & 
Morales-Vives 
(2005)         
SF 
0.02 0.96 
107 
134 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
1 
Vigil-Colet & 
Morales-Vives 
(2005)         
SF 
0 0.95 
107 
134 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
2 
Vigil-Colet & 
SF 
0.03 0.98 
107 
134 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
25

----- Page 248 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
248 
 
Study 
Domain 
d 
VR 
NM 
NF Age Author Sex Nationality Population Published Category 
Morales-Vives 
(2005)         
Vigil-Colet (2007)    SF 
-0.30 0.88 
18 
77 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
25 
Vigil-Colet et al 
(2008)             
SF 
0.02 1.03 
208 
114 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
25 
Vigil-Colet et al 
(2008)             
SF 
0.21 0.75 
72 
150 
4 
1 
1 
0 
1 
25 
Zuckerman et al 
(1988)                     SF 
0 1.42 
73 
198 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
26 
 
Note: Domain: B = Behavioral Measures, GI = General Measures of Impulsivity, PS = Punishment Sensitivity, RS = Reward 
Sensitivity, SS/RT = Sensation Seeking and Risk Taking, SF = Specific Forms of Impulsivity;  d = effect size; subscript a = effect 
size estimated as zero due to insufficient information; VR = Untransformed Variance Ratio; NM = n males; NF = n females; Age: 0 
= Unspecified/ Wide age range, 1 = 10-15 years old, 2 = 15-18 years old, 3 = 18-21 years old, 4 = 21-30 years old, 5 = 30-40 years 
old, 6 = 40+ years old; Author Sex: 0 = Female, 1 = Male, 2 = Information not found; Nationality: 0 = US, Canada & Central 
America, 1 = UK, Europe, Australia/New Zealand, 2 = Asia, Africa & Middle East; Population: 0 = University Students (Including

----- Page 249 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
249 
 
Undergraduates, College Students, and Post-Graduate Students), 1 = Community, 2 = Mixed, 3 = Schools (up to age 18), 4 = Not 
Specified; Published: 0 = Unpublished Study, 1 = Published Study; Category: 0 = BIS Cognitive Subscale (Barrett Impulsivity 
Scale), 1 =  BIS Motor (Barrett Impulsivity Subscale), 2 = BIS Non Planning (Barrett Impulsivity Subscale), 3 =  BART, 4 = Eysenck 
Impulsivity Measures (Including all versions of the Impulsivity Scale and Impulsivity from Eysenck Personality Inventory), 5 = 
Venturesomeness (Venturesomeness subscales from versions of the Eysenck Impulsivity Scale), 6 = UPPS Lack of Perseverance, 
7 = UPPS Lack of Premeditation, 8 = UPPS Urgency, 9 = UPPS Sensation Seeking, 10 = Impulsivity Other Measures (General 
Impulsivity measures including study specific impulsivity measures and excluding Eysenck measures), 11 = Risk Taking (Scales 
representing risky behaviour or the propensity to engage in risky behaviour as well as Risky Impulsivity), 12 = Other Sensation 
Seeking Measures (Study specific Sensation Seeking measures or measures excluding the Zuckerman SSS and the UPPS 
Sensation Seeking Scale), 13 = SPSRQ/GRAPES Punishment Sensitivity, 14 = SPSRQ/GRAPES  Reward Sensitivity, 15 = Delay 
Discounting, 16 = BAS Drive Subscale from BIS/BAS, 17 = BAS Fun Subscale from BIS/BAS, 18 = BAS Reward Subscale from 
BIS/BAS, 19 = BIS Total from BIS/BAS, 20= Boredom Susceptibility Subscale of Zuckerman SSS, 21 = Disinhibition Subscale of 
Zuckerman SSS, 22 = Experience Seeking Subscale of Zuckerman SSS, 23= Thrill and Adventure Seeking Subscale of 
Zuckerman SSS, 24 = Functional Impulsivity (Dickman Scales), 25 = Dysfunctional Impulsivity (Dickman Scales), 26 = Impulse 
Control (Measures of the ability to control impulses/urges), 27 = Iowa Gambling Task, 28 = KSP Impulsivity Subscales, 29 =  Total 
of Barrett Impulsivity Scale (BIS Total), 30 = Total of Zuckerman SSS (SSS Total), 31 = BAS Total from BIS/BAS, 32 = TPQ/TCI 
Reward Dependence, 33 = MPQ/PRF Harm Avoidance, 34 = ZKPQ Impulsive Sensation Seeking (ImpSS), 35 = Social Problem

----- Page 250 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
250 
 
Solving Inventory (SPSI), Impulsive/Careless style score 36, TPQ/TCI Harm Avoidance, 37 = KSP Monotony Avoidance, 38 = 
Visual-Cognitive Tasks, 39 = Executive response inhibition tasks: Stop Task/Go-no-go task/Stroop tasks/Continuous Performance 
Test.

----- Page 251 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
251

----- Page 252 (native) -----
Sex differences in impulsivity 
252 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
Catharine Cross, Lee Copping and Anne Campbell, Psychology Department, Durham 
University, United Kingdom.  
The authors would like to thank Steven Muncer for statistical advice and two anonymous 
reviewers for their constructive suggestions on the manuscript. Thanks also to all the 
authors who kindly provided data for inclusion in the analysis, and to Natalie Gray, Joanne 
Campbell, and Trixie Lo for assistance with coding and proofreading.  We are grateful to 
Roy Baumeister, Philip Corr, and Marvin Zuckerman for responding to theoretical and 
conceptual queries.  
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Catharine Cross, Durham 
University, Queens Campus, University Boulevard, Thornaby, Stockton-on-Tees, TS17 
6BH, United Kingdom. E-mail: c.p.cross@durham.ac.uk