

----- Page 1 (native) -----
A Quantitative Review of Urban Ecosystem Service Assessments:
Concepts, Models, and Implementation
Dagmar Haase, Neele Larondelle, Erik Andersson, Martina Artmann,
Sara Borgstro¨m, Ju¨rgen Breuste, Erik Gomez-Baggethun, A˚ sa Gren,
Zoe´ Hamstead, Rieke Hansen, Nadja Kabisch, Peleg Kremer, Johannes Langemeyer,
Emily Lorance Rall, Timon McPhearson, Stephan Pauleit, Salman Qureshi,
Nina Schwarz, Annette Voigt, Daniel Wurster, Thomas Elmqvist
Abstract
Although a number of comprehensive reviews
have examined global ecosystem services (ES), few have
focused on studies that assess urban ecosystem services
(UES). Given that more than half of the world’s population
lives in cities, understanding the dualism of the provision
of and need for UES is of critical importance. Which UES
are the focus of research, and what types of urban land use
are examined? Are models or decision support systems
used to assess the provision of UES? Are trade-offs con-
sidered? Do studies of UES engage stakeholders? To
address these questions, we analyzed 217 papers derived
from an ISI Web of Knowledge search using a set of
standardized criteria. The results indicate that most UES
studies have been undertaken in Europe, North America,
and China, at city scale. Assessment methods involve bio-
physical models, Geographical Information Systems, and
valuation, but few study ﬁndings have been implemented
as land use policy.
Keywords
Review  Urban ecosystem services 
Models  Demand-provisioning  Policy implementation
INTRODUCTION
The Global Urban Dimension
Cities are complex adaptive systems embedded within even
more complex adaptive ecosystems (Burkhard et al. 2010).
Cites and their regions are hubs for people, infrastructure
and commerce, requiring extensive resources and putting
intense pressure on the environment (Grimm et al. 2008).
Urban landscapes are the everyday environment of the
majority of the global population ([51 %), including
nearly 80 % of European and US citizens, almost 50 % of
Asians and [90 % of Latin Americans (UN 2012; Haase
2014). The continuous increase in the number and size of
cities and the ensuing transformation of virgin landscapes
on different scales pose signiﬁcant challenges for reducing
the rate of biodiversity loss and related ecosystem func-
tionality and ensuring human welfare. Plants, animals, and
microorganisms, that is, biodiversity, is the basis of all
ecosystems and the services they provide. Because urban-
isation and soil sealing provoke changes, predominantly a
decline, in species diversity and human well-being in cities
both ‘‘…are inextricably linked’’ (Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment 2005b).
However, urban areas also provide a range of beneﬁts
to sustain and improve human livelihood and the quality
of life through urban ecosystem services, UES (TEEB
2011). UES have been classiﬁed in a variety of ways;
most commonly, they are divided into four categories:
provisioning services, regulating services, habitat or
supporting services, and cultural services (Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment 2005a; Cowling et al. 2008;
TEEB 2011). Provisioning services include material
outputs from ecosystems, including food, water, medic-
inal plants, and other resources. Regulating services
maintain functions, such as air and soil quality and ﬂood,
storm water and disease control. Habitat and supporting
services underpin almost all other services by providing
living spaces for organisms. Supporting services also
maintain plant and animal diversity. Finally, cultural
services include the non-material, socio-ecological ben-
eﬁts (including psychological and cognitive beneﬁts)
people obtain from contact with environs, such as
Electronic supplementary material
The online version of this
article (doi:10.1007/s13280-014-0504-0) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users.
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en
123
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
DOI 10.1007/s13280-014-0504-0

----- Page 2 (native) -----
recreation, esthetic, spiritual, and psychological beneﬁts
and tourism (TEEB 2011). In general, locally generated
ES have substantial impacts on the quality of life in urban
areas and should, therefore, be more explicitly addressed
in conceiving strategies aimed at sustainable develop-
ment, liveability, and resilience in urban milieu (Gomez-
Baggethun et al. 2013).
The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment concluded that
60 % of ES are degraded or used unsustainably, having
adverse effects on human well-being (Millennium Eco-
system Assessment 2005a). Because almost no ecosystems
remain un-impacted by humans and humans cannot exist
without ecosystems, protection and sustainable use of
ecosystems are no longer an isolated interest but a key
component
of
global
sustainable
development.
The
observed rapid degradation of the ability of ecosystems to
generate services not only necessitates a better under-
standing of how to maintain important ecosystem functions
but also requires that this knowledge is put into a broad
institutional and governance context (TEEB 2011). To
address the challenges of ecosystem degradation, an
interdisciplinary social–ecological system
approach
is
critically important and needed at this time (Folke et al.
2004).
Today, cities are facing enormous challenges, such as
climate change, demographic aging, and natural resource
depletion. Ecosystems play an important role in facilitating
transformations
needed
to
address
these
challenges.
Understanding how urban ecosystems work, how they
change, and what limits their performance can add to the
general understanding of ecosystem change and gover-
nance in an ever more human-dominated world (Elmqvist
et al. 2008). In general, functioning ecosystems provide the
ﬂexibility in urban landscapes to build adaptive capacity
and cope with problems such as increased risks of heat
waves and ﬂooding. Although urban social–ecological
system analyses have been found to be promising for
enhancing our understanding of how exactly ecosystems
can help address the moderation of climate change effects,
large knowledge gaps, particularly for cities, are still
present. For example, urban ecosystems were vastly under-
represented in the world’s largest assessment of ecosys-
tems. The TEEB study (2011) made one of the ﬁrst suc-
cessful attempts to explicitly represent urban ecosystems in
their ‘‘Manual for Cities.’’
If sustainable development practices are to match the
pace of rapid changes resulting from urbanisation, the
urban knowledge gap must be quickly bridged. Recent
literature indicates that urban biodiversity contributes to
multiple ES that are very important for the well-being of
urban residents. Examples of important UESs include (i)
reductions in local air pollution (Gomez-Baggethun et al.
2013); (ii) reductions in the urban heat island effect
(Schwarz et al. 2011); (iii) direct health beneﬁts, such as a
lower prevalence of early childhood asthma (Lovasi et al.
2008), reduced mortality, and general health enhancements
(Maas et al. 2006; Mitchell and Popham 2008), and (iv)
enhanced public ecological knowledge and awareness of
sustainability challenges. Such UESs are generated by a
diverse set of land uses, including parks, cemeteries, golf
courses, watercourses, avenues, gardens and yards, verges,
commons, green roofs and facades, sports ﬁelds, vacant
lots, industrial sites, and landﬁlls. Thus, the management of
urban ecosystems must be connected to the social–eco-
logical dynamics of developed land. Furthermore, the
dependence of cities on surrounding landscape and its
biodiversity as well as ongoing interactions between pro-
cesses occurring in urban, peri-urban, and rural contexts
are essential for sustaining the production, enhancement
and maintenance of UESs and overall urban resilience.
Urban Ecosystem Services Versus Ecosystem
Functions
ES are the subset of ecological functions (physical,
chemical, and biological processes) that are directly rele-
vant or beneﬁcial to human well-being (De Groot et al.
2002). Examples of ecosystem functions include provi-
sioning of wildlife habitat, carbon cycling, decomposition,
primary productivity, and nutrient cycling. Urban ecosys-
tems, such as urban wetlands, forests, parks and estuaries,
can be characterized by the processes, or functions, that
occur within them. The services provided by ecosystems
are produced by the functional attributes of ecological
communities; in turn, these functions can be characterized
by ES indicators and service providing units (SPUs), which
are segments of a component of populations, species,
functional groups (guilds), food webs, or habitat types that
collectively provide the service in a given area (Kremen
2005).
Most of the research on urban biodiversity and ecosys-
tem functioning (BEF) has focused on the role of species
richness as a measure of diversity, but ecosystem func-
tioning also depends on the identities, densities, biomasses,
and interactions of populations of species within a com-
munity and the aggregate abundance and spatial and tem-
poral variation of these attributes. ES and their contribution
to quality of life, human health, and well-being are
dependent upon the level of biodiversity at the ecosystem
and landscape levels. There is still no empirical evidence
addressing whether ecosystems need species to deliver
more UESs; ecosystems do not necessarily provide more or
better UESs when the level of biodiversity is changed.
Some studies show that some ecosystems need only a few
species to deliver what we want from them. In addition,
some systems face a reduction in UES delivery when
414
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
123
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en

----- Page 3 (native) -----
biodiversity is high due to competition between species. In
terms of land use changes, it is important for the resilience
of an urban system to maintain high levels of biodiversity
from an ES point of view because the higher the level of
biodiversity, the higher the resilience, potentially. Set
against this background, to manage UESs in the urban
context, we need to understand how changes in the com-
munity structure affect the magnitude and resilience of ES
over space and time (Kremen 2005).
A recent comprehensive quantitative review (Cardinale
et al. 2012) examined 20 years of literature on the rela-
tionship between BEF outside of the urban context. The
authors argue that BEF research should inform the
expanding biodiversity and ecosystem services (BES)
research for implementation in planning and policymaking
contexts, especially in cities. As with most ES, speciﬁc
services can only be properly integrated with policy and
planning after additional research on BEF relationships and
links between ecosystem functions and
services
are
understood. Kremen (2005) suggests a framework for
linking BEF and BES research that overlaps with the
review by Cardinale et al. (2012), who identiﬁes the fol-
lowing: (1) key species or traits providing ecosystem
functions, (2) relationships between ecosystem function
and community assembly and disassembly processes, (3)
environmental factors inﬂuencing the production of eco-
system functions, (4) spatio-temporal scales relevant to
both SPUs and their functions, and (5) speciﬁc relation-
ships between ecosystem functions and ES. The latter can
be identiﬁed by examining socio-economic and ecological
contexts where a given function is directly relevant to
humans.
Further, Daily et al. (2009) suggest that the translation of
ecosystem conditions and functions into ES requires
interdisciplinary and user-oriented research, including (1)
collaborating with stakeholders to deﬁne services about
which people care (e.g., Carpenter et al. 2006; Cowling
et al. 2008), (2) developing transparent, ﬂexible models of
ecological production functions at scales relevant to deci-
sion making, and (3) testing and reﬁning these models in
systems around the world to derive general insights
(Ricketts et al. 2008). What remains to be explored both
theoretically and empirically are the relationships between
ecosystem functioning and ES in urban contexts.
Objectives of the Review
There are a number of comprehensive quantitative and
qualitative reviews of global ES (e.g., Seppelt et al. 2011;
Cardinale et al. 2012; Herna´ndez-Morcillo et al. 2013), but
quantitative comprehensive assessments of ES in an urban
context are still rare and very needed at this time. The
following questions have not been addressed by the
literature: What types of UESs are the focus of current
research, and what types of urban land use are examined?
Are models used to quantify and assess UES? Are trade-
offs and synergies between UES as well as between UESs
and other quality of life goals considered? Finally, do
studies on UES engage stakeholders in a way that relates to
management, policy, or planning practices? This review
study seeks to better understand linkages and knowledge of
BEF in cities. The statement mentioned earlier that few if
any of the reviewed studies examine biodiversity and ES
relationships makes clear that BEF in cities is understudied
and research is crucial for better understanding links
between BEF and UES.
Against this background, we present a comprehensive
review of current research on UESs—the ﬁrst review that
focuses exclusively on cities. So doing, ﬁrst, we describe
the materials, methodological design, and quantitative
results of the review study. In the discussion, we describe
deﬁnitions of UES and ecosystem functions and explain
their dynamics. We then report which types of UESs are
analyzed in the reviewed studies, how provisioning and
demand are treated, what methods and indicators are used
for analyzing UESs and to what extent implementation and
stakeholder engagement are integrated into UES studies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
This UES review is a meta-analysis of published scientiﬁc
papers. The following search terms and Boolean operators
were used for a literature search through the ISI Web of
Science to identify studies suitable for inclusion: (i) urban
AND ecosystem AND services, (ii) urban AND ecosys-
tems, (iii) urban AND environment, (iv) urban AND land
AND use OR cover, (v) urban AND ecosystem AND value
OR valuation. These search terms generally cover the
topical area of UES.
The search returned 393 unique records. The title of
each paper was checked for relevance. Those not focused
on the urban context were removed. We also removed
studies that were reviews of previous work. As a result, 176
studies were discarded, and 217 articles were included for
in-depth analyses. Due to the interdisciplinary and broad
character of the subject of ‘‘UES,’’ journals in which these
217 papers were published span over a range of disciplines
including geography, ecology, landscape ecology, biology,
land use science, planning, forestry, computational science
and
remote
sensing
(see
Electronic
Supplementary
Material).
Papers were analyzed using a list of assessment criteria
(in the form of questions/choices; Table 1), which was
developed based on criteria used in existing reviews on ES
(Table 1) and issues unique to urban systems, such as
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
415
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en
123

----- Page 4 (native) -----
different urban scales and planning/implementation issues.
The quantitative results of the criteria analysis are shown in
Figs. 1–7.
RESULTS
Most of the existing studies on UESs were undertaken in
Europe, North America, and China (Fig. 1) with an
increasing number of papers from 1975 onward (Fig. 2).
With the exception of China, nearly all the empirical evi-
dence about the provision of and demand for urban eco-
system goods and services and the implementation of study
ﬁndings into land use policy has been gathered in the
Western developed world.
Almost 50 % of the ES assessed within the reviewed
papers are regulating ES. Twenty percent of all the ana-
lyzed services are supporting services, 15 % are cultural
Table 1 Criteria for the paper analysis
Criterion (question)
Possible entries
Which type(s) of ES are analyzed?
Provisioning, regulating, supporting and biodiversity, cultural, not applicable
Which number of ES is analyzed?
Numeric answer
In which country is the case study located?
Name of the country where the study is located
In which city (region) is the case study located?
Name of the city where the study is located
Does the paper explicitly mention ‘‘urban ecosystem
services’’?
Is a speciﬁc vulnerability to change (climate change,
loss of BD, etc.) considered?
Are off-site effects considered?
Is a model used for the quantiﬁcation of ES
provisioning?
Is a model used for the quantiﬁcation of ES demand?
Are synergies considered?
Yes, no, not applicable
What is/are the speciﬁc ES analyzed?
Food, raw materials, fresh water, medicinal resources, local climate and air
quality regulation, carbon sequestration and storage, moderation of extreme
events, waste water treatment, erosion prevention and maintenance of soil
fertility, pollination, biological (pest) control, habitat for species, maintenance
of genetic diversity, biodiversity, recreational and mental and physical health,
tourism, esthetic appreciation and inspiration for culture, art and design,
spiritual experience and sense of place, other, not applicable
Which indicator(s) are used?
Indicator and unit (e.g., carbon storage in MgCO3)
Does the paper deal with ES potential or demand
and provisioning?
Potential, demand and provision, demand, not applicable
What scale is used?
City region, city, neighborhood, site, not applicable
Which SPUs is the paper dealing with?
Forests, urban agriculture, urban parks, waterways/lakes, cemeteries, urban
fabric, allotments, rural surroundings, infrastructure, brownﬁelds, land use
mixture, urban–rural gradient, green infrastructure, other, not applicable
What is the temporal scale?
One time step, time series analysis, not applicable
What is the relation between demand and
provisioning?
Local, regional, distal (teleconnections), not applicable
What kind of valuation methods/indicators is
applied?
Monetary, non-monetary, both, not applicable
What type of model is used for the quantiﬁcation of
ES supply/provisioning?
What type of model is used for the quantiﬁcation of
ES demand?
Bio-physical, GIS-based, statistical, qualitative, causal loop, look-up table,
willingness-to-pay, survey, interview, conjoint analysis, prize, trading, REDD,
risk assessment, empirical, other, not applicable
Are trade-offs considered?
No, between ES, between land use and ES, between ES and quality of life,
between ES and economy, other, not applicable
Are stakeholders involved within the assessment?
Policy makers, policy analysts, NGOs, land owner/lords, scientists, ﬁrms/
industry, farmers, foresters, public, residents, tourists, various, various-local,
various-regional, EU-policy makers, no, not applicable
Is the approach implemented?
Tool, toolkit, monoservice, multi-service, test phase, plan, strategy,
communication, awareness, no, not applicable
416
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
123
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en

----- Page 5 (native) -----
services and 11 % are provisioning services. Few studies
discuss the relationship between urban biodiversity and
ES such as, e.g., Beza´k and Lyytima¨ki (2011). Also rare
are studies investigating urban soil supporting services
such as by Haase (2009) on groundwater recharge and
run-off generation. Figure 3 shows which types of UESs
were analyzed in the reviewed studies. Most of the
investigated regulating services focus on local climate, air
quality regulation, and carbon sequestration and storage.
By contrast, biological regulating services, such as bio-
logical pest control, are analyzed in only 1 % of all the
reviewed papers. In terms of the number of UES valued
within each reviewed paper, the results of the review
show that the numbers reveal a lack of multi-service
valuations; almost 60 % of the reviewed studies focus on
a single UES.
Figure 4 shows the variety of ecosystem service pro-
viding units (SPUs) examined in the reviewed papers. Most
of the studies analyze ESs that are generated by forest areas
or patches (18.9 %), land use mixtures (15.6 %) or urban
green infrastructure (parks, leisure areas; 11.7 %). Fur-
thermore, Fig. 4 highlights the need to consider industrial
and brownﬁeld land uses, which are gaining importance,
particularly in stagnating and shrinking cities, as well as
allotment and community gardens, which form an impor-
tant niche of food supply for an increasing number of cities
(Barthel et al. 2010).
DISCUSSION
The Temporal Dimension: Dynamics of UES
An analysis of the relationships between processes of
urbanisation, including impact assessments of plans or
projects, and the ﬂow of ES is essential to support informed
decision making. Information is needed both to assess the
consequences of past urbanisation trends and planning
Fig. 1 Geographic distribution of 217 UES studies
1
1
2
2
2
3
1
1
4
6
6
5
8
5
9
9
13
17
18 18
20
19
22
25
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
1973
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
number of entries
Fig. 2 Number of articles published on UES between 1973 and 2012
(N = 217)
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
417
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en
123

----- Page 6 (native) -----
decisions and to inform the possible future impacts of
pathways of urbanisation and planning decisions.
Thematically, the reviewed papers cover a diverse
range of studies. Most papers presented information on
the change of UESs at a regional or city scale, whereas
only ﬁve papers presented results from more ﬁne-grained
analysis at a neighborhood or site scale. Approximately
half of the studies provided some kind of historic ana-
lysis. Only two studies undertook long-term assessments
(Imhoff et al. 2004; Haase 2009). For instance, Haase
(2009) analyzed the changes of regulating ES related to
hydrology for the city of Leipzig over a period of
130 years. Another study established the impacts of
urbanisation on net primary productivity (NPP) for the
coterminous United States by contrasting pre-industrial
urbanisation with the state in 1995 (Imhoff et al. 2004).
All other papers included in this review covered shorter
periods
of
20–40 years.
Other
studies
projected
the
accumulated beneﬁts of existing and/or additional urban
trees and forests over certain time periods (McPherson
1992; McPherson and Rowntree 1993; McPherson et al.
1997; McPherson and Simpson 2003; Morani et al.
2011). The study by Schetke and Haase (2008) was the
only one found to combine historic analysis with a sce-
nario approach.
Overall, the studies encompassed a broad range of ES,
though regulating services, such as carbon sequestration
and storage, the regulation of air temperatures, air pollution
removal, and/or storm water runoff, were the most com-
mon. A small number of studies dealt with provisioning
services (food, raw materials), and only one study exam-
ined the effects of urbanisation on a supporting service—
the pollination of plants by bumble bees (Jansson and
Polasky 2010). Only three of the selected papers, two of
which referred to the same study, dealt with a change in
cultural ES, such as recreation (Schetke and Haase 2008;
Schetke et al. 2010).
A few studies covered more than one dimension of ES,
i.e., studied concurrent changes of services, such as the
provision of food, the regulation of microclimates and
Fig. 4 Service providing units analyzed sorted according to the
number (% of 217 entries)
Fig. 3 Type of ecosystem services analyzed (% of 217 entries)
418
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
123
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en

----- Page 7 (native) -----
storm water retention. Among these are several studies
assessing the multiple regulating ES of urban forests. For
instance, Morani et al. (2011) assessed the potential impact
of New York’s MillionTrees NYC program on carbon
storage and air quality improvement over a period of
100 years. However, none of the studies included in this
review addressed trade-offs or synergies between the var-
ious UESs.
The majority of the reviewed studies used a spatial
approach. These typically related land use and/or land
cover change derived from maps, aerial photographs and
satellite imagery to ES. The results were presented at a
variety of different levels of resolution. Studies such as
Burkhard et al. (2009), and Kroll et al. (2011) provided ES
assessments in the form of land cover maps for land cover/
land use types. In other studies, information was provided
at the aggregate level of administrative subunits (Escobedo
and Nowak 2009) or for the city level (McPherson et al.
1994).
Even when land use remains the same over time, its
character may change. For instance, urban green spaces
and agricultural land may be managed more or less inten-
sely, and trees may mature or be removed. The studies that
used land use/land cover data rarely addressed these
dynamics. For instance, in Haase’s (2009) assessment of
long-term hydrological changes for the city of Leipzig, the
average values of surface cover remained the same for land
use types over a period of 130 years, whereas the per-
centage cover of the land use types changed. By contrast,
Burkhard et al. (2009, 2011) were able to show that the
increase in the productivity of farming in the Leipzig
region overcompensated for the loss of farmland due to
urbanisation.
The Facts: Indicators for UES Assessment
Understanding the factors inﬂuencing UESs requires the
use of linked or bundled indicators that track driving
social–ecological forces as well as pressures on ecosys-
tems. Researchers are increasingly developing and testing
ES indicators from a wide scale to a local site scale.
Indicators allow researchers to analyze, monitor, and efﬁ-
ciently measure the conditions, characteristics, trends, and
rates of change of UESs (Layke 2009; Sparks et al. 2011)
and help reduce complexity. An indicator is deﬁned as a
measure or metric based on veriﬁable data that conveys
information about more than itself. For example, the size,
structure, and accessibility of urban green areas and the
number of visits per day are indicators for recreational
UESs produced by city green areas. Indicators help track
and communicate how ecosystems support the physical,
economic, and socio-cultural well-being of people. With
the help of indicators, the complexity can be condensed to
a manageable level that can inform decisions and actions
(Bossel 1999). Best case scenario, public and private sector
decision makers can base decisions on scientiﬁc evidence,
identify and prioritise measures, track progress toward
targets, and effectively communicate the value of UESs
(Layke 2009).
The approaches to analyzing and assessing UESs are
relatively new and still evolving. There are numerous UES
indicators and metrics with differing quality and applica-
bility in use, including many of which are still conceptual
in nature and lack demonstrated relevance. In general, the
most common and developed indicators are for provi-
sioning UES which is most likely due to data availability
(Sparks et al. 2011). However, the conceptual and data
underpinnings
for
indicators
remain
underdeveloped
(Millennium ecosystem assessment 2005a; Boyd and
Banzhaft 2007; Wallace 2007; Turner et al. 2008; Layke
2009; De Groot et al. 2010a, b; Sparks et al. 2011). The
choice of services to assess and indicators to use in
assessments is often determined by policy objectives and
data availability. Indicators have to be adequate for the
particular service, comparable and simple enough to be
intuited and easily communicated (Sparks et al. 2011).
The indicators applied by the studies we analyzed were
developed for a variety of purposes (e.g., indicators from
narrower environmental ﬁelds, economics, agriculture, or
tourism); therefore, they neither focused on the contribu-
tions of UESs to human well-being nor helped public/
private sector decision makers integrate UESs (Layke
2009).
The quality and quantity of data vary widely from scale
to scale. Available data are not always sufﬁcient to support
the use of particular indicators. Applying the ES frame-
work requires information at multiple spatial and temporal
scales; therefore, monitoring systems need to gather data
with sufﬁcient regularity and at a relevant scale to track
changes at a rate appropriate to the ‘‘characteristic scale’’
of ecosystem processes and ﬂows of service (Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment 2005a).
Despite the growing literature on UES indicators, there
are still many challenges to the development of indicators.
Redundancy and double counting are as much issues in
indicator development as they are in UES assessment. The
number of indicators that convey very similar information
under different names needs to be reduced. In addition,
how indicators are linked to services and beneﬁts remains
an important and unresolved issue. An indicator’s capacity
to convey the characteristics of a UES at multiple spatial
and temporal scales varies widely between services. Only
sensitive indicators are able to detect changes in time for
prompt policy adjustments. Some researchers claim that
one indicator covers a number of issues related to a par-
ticular UES, whereas others use several indicators focusing
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
419
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en
123

----- Page 8 (native) -----
on only one aspect. However, in general, a single indicator
is not sufﬁcient for most assessment purposes. In addition,
the indicators used in studies we reviewed were inadequate
to characterize the diversity, quality and complexity of the
beneﬁts people derive from ecosystems. As with all mod-
els, indicators are intended to reduce complexity and
therefore do not provide a complete picture of all services
or indeed even a particular service (Layke 2009). Indicators
often mix structural or compositional attributes with
functional ones; structure and composition are easier to
measure than function.
An important distinction can be made between different
types of indicator metrics, including supply, consumption,
and sustainability (Sparks et al. 2011). Indicators of bio-
diversity or the stock of particular components imply
something about the ecosystem’s ability to provide ESs,
but say little about the beneﬁts people effectively derive
from those services. Similarly, consumption indicators
provide information about the ﬂow of beneﬁts but say little
about the sustainability of these beneﬁt ﬂows. De Groot
et al. (2010b) distinguish two main types of indicators:
state indicators, which describe what ecosystem component
or process is providing the service (e.g., the number/area of
landscape features with stated recreational value), and
performance indicators, which describe how much of the
service can potentially be used in a sustainable way (the
maximum sustainable number of people and facilities).
Communicating about ES in a comprehensive way is a
challenge regardless of whether the end user is a planner,
policy maker, manager, or practitioner. ES indicators have
to communicate ES characteristics clearly without ambi-
guity, avoiding differing interpretations of the state or trend
of the ES. In addition, indicators have to be easily under-
stood by policy makers and other non-scientiﬁc audiences
so that the importance of UESs for citizens’ economic,
physical, or spiritual well-being is well understood.
Two Sides of a Coin: Demand and Provisioning
of Urban Ecosystem Services
Ecosystems deliver several services at the same time,
potentially create synergies and trade-offs among UES
and between these services and other factors. The
equitable distribution of resources and social–cultural
demand for ES are rarely simultaneously evaluated, yet
it is clearly important to not only identify services pro-
vided by urban ecosystem but also understand social–
cultural needs for services and identify locations where
needs are unmet. Additionally, there can be ambiguity in
the way different researchers distinguish between ser-
vices, functions, and beneﬁts and therefore valuation
discrepancies arise.
Useful classiﬁcation and evaluation schemes of ES
demand need to take into account the complex nature of
ecological systems, including their nonlinear nature, the
joint production of ESs, multiple spatial–temporal scales,
the variety of beneﬁciaries, and decision contexts in which
ES are evaluated (Fisher et al. 2009). Developing methods
that are able to account for these multiple perspectives is
one of the pervasive challenges in making ecosystem
approaches to urban planning operational at the policy and
decision making levels.
Regulating services play a major role contributing to
human well-being in cities; they can help reduce urban
heat island effects and mitigate climate change and air
pollution. Whereas well-proven indicators and empirical
studies exist for regulating services, basic knowledge gaps
still need to be closed for cultural and provisioning ser-
vices. Approximately 15 % of all reviewed studies use
value indicators for local climate and air quality (33)
regulation and/or carbon sequestration and storage (32). It
is interesting that carbon sequestration and storage make
up such a large component of ES assessment given the
recent criticism of their utility in urban contexts (Pataki
et al. 2011). Additional studies of provisioning services
include those dealing with energy supply (Kroll et al.
2011; Lundy and Wade 2011). Almost 7 % of the assessed
papers address biodiversity valuation (37) and 7.5 %
address habitats for species (39). Indicators for recreation
and mental and physical health (48), habitats for species
(39), and biodiversity (37) were assessed more than 30
times each. Indicators for biological pest control (6),
tourism (1), and medicinal resources (0) were addressed
less than ten times. All other UESs described in TEEB
were assessed in 10–30 of the studies reviewed. The
remaining studies (33) primarily address ESs in the reg-
ulating category, including wetland analysis (Barthel et al.
2005), indicators for nutrient removal (Tong et al. 2007),
and yield stability studies (Schetke et al. 2012). Cultural
service studies used indicators for educational value
(Lundy and Wade 2011) and communication.
A broad diversity of indicators has been used to assess
UESs in the reviewed studies, and most indicators were
only used once. Local climate regulation, fresh water
supply, and recreation were the three most frequently
investigated UESs. In 37 papers dealing with local climate
regulation, more than 20 different indicators were used. In
24 papers, more than 15 different indicators were used to
measure carbon sequestration. A large number of different
indicators were used as biodiversity measures, including
the number of species and bird or butterﬂy diversity. Cul-
tural service indicators and metrics included access, the
distance to green space, the number of visitors, willing-
ness-to-pay, human health, opportunities in recreation, the
motivation of users, the numbers of features with speciﬁc
420
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
123
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en

----- Page 9 (native) -----
value, money ﬂow, and increases in real estate value.
Esthetic appreciation, inspiration for culture, spiritual
experience, and regional identity were rarely considered.
Most indicators were derived from data on the structure
(extent/condition/stock) of underlying elements of an eco-
system or on the provisioning or use of services by humans.
However, there were few assessments of the sustainability
of UESs.
The Economic Dimension: Monetary
and Non-monetary Valuation
The pluralism of values with respect to UESs has been
highlighted from both theoretical and empirical perspec-
tives (Chiesura 2004; Hubacek and Kronenberg 2013).
Thus, different values and perceptions should be consid-
ered to make well-informed decisions in the management
of urban ecosystems (De Groot et al. 2010b). The choice of
which speciﬁc values should be assessed and articulated in
the processes of urban planning depends on the charac-
teristics of the UESs that are being valued and the insti-
tutional and socio-cultural contexts in which decisions take
place. Of the reviewed studies, 156 applied exclusively
non-monetary indicators and methods to assess UES val-
ues, while 77 studies used both monetary methods and non-
monetary indicators and methods.
Although there has been a recent thrust to apply mon-
etary means to value ES and biodiversity, these means can
be inappropriate when they fail to take into account the
totality and plurality of values, which are also character-
istic of non-monetary indicators (TEEB 2011). Within the
group of non-monetary valuation methods, a broad number
of methods, criteria and indicators have been developed to
assess UESs, which can be broadly divided into ecological
and socio-cultural methods.
Ecological valuation does not directly consider human
needs or stated preferences and wants. It instead considers
physical or nonphysical environmental outputs, which have
indirect value for humans (Winkler 2006). The non-mon-
etary assessments using ecological indicators and criteria
that we reviewed focused on regulating and supporting
services.
Among
regulating
services,
air
puriﬁcation
(using, e.g., the leaf area of trees and shrubs as preferred
indicator; Escobedo and Nowak 2009; Jim and Chen 2009;
Escobedo et al. 2011), the cooling effect of trees and parks
(e.g., Upmanis and Chen 1999; Shashua-Bar and Hoffman
2000) and carbon storage and sequestration (Lal 2004) are
of primary interest. Wastewater treatment, pollination and
the moderation of extreme events (Costanza et al. 2012) are
less frequently considered and should be more strongly
integrated into future research. Chapin et al. (2000) high-
lighted the importance of habitat and species diversity for
the functioning of ecosystems and the support of ES
(Clergeau et al. 1998; Zerbe et al. 2003). By contrast,
genetic diversity (Dobbs et al. 2011) and medicinal
resources were less frequently examined.
Freshwater is a vital good and therefore most often
investigated within provisioning services (followed by food
production), using such indicators as groundwater recharge
(Haase 2009), the relation of demand and provisioning
(Fitzhugh
and
Richter
2004),
and
evapotranspiration
(Schetke and Haase 2008). Because these ecological indi-
cators reveal environmental outputs and functioning as
well
as
human
well-being
(Millennium
Ecosystem
Assessment 2005a), research linking ecological and cul-
tural services via an interdisciplinary approach is crucial
(McMichael 2008).
Methods for assessing socio-cultural indicators and
values take into account socio-cultural perceptions of ES in
terms of their importance to human well-being. They are
mainly used for ES that are not valued within markets
(Chan et al. 2012 for a theoretical explanation; Ambrey and
Fleming 2011; Calvet-Mir et al. 2012 for case studies). As
one can see from Fig. 5, surveys and other qualitative
means to elucidate socio-cultural values were found in far
less studies than those using biophysical and monetary
methods to capture ES values. Qualitative and quantitative
social research such as questionnaires, focus groups and
interviews capturing non-monetary values, were most often
used with cultural ES (Chiesura 2004; Maas et al. 2006;
Ma¨kinen and Tyrva¨inen 2008), a result that is not sur-
prising considering the highly subjective, intangible and
incommensurable nature of cultural services (Chan et al.
2012). Nevertheless, some studies used socio-cultural
methods to assess other ES. In some cases, this assessment
was performed to attain information on the complexity of
land management and implications for the provision of ES
(Barthel et al. 2005) or assess concepts of land managers
(Niemela¨ et al. 2010). Others used a combination of socio-
cultural and ecological methods to assess the effects of land
management practices on regulating or supporting services
(Florga˚rd 2000) or to compare ES with the perception of
well-being and recreational opportunity (Fuller et al. 2007;
Rall and Haase 2011). Although socio-cultural methods
and indicators are important for obtaining stakeholder
values, they are also time-intensive and costly. It remains
to be seen whether more sophisticated socio-cultural
measures that account for the complexity of multiple per-
spectives while incorporating UES trade-offs can be
developed.
Approaches to economic valuation have the common
characteristic of using monetary units as an indicator.
Nevertheless, this indicator can be derived by different
methods. Provisioning UESs, consisting of directly mar-
ketable goods, such as drinking water, food, and raw
materials, are directly valued through market observations
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
421
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en
123

----- Page 10 (native) -----
of reference prices (Tong et al. 2007). By contrast, studies
that examined regulating UESs used revealed preference
methods to derive UES values based on secondary markets.
Among the monetary approaches used in the reviewed
studies, revealed preference was the most common. These
studies evaluated indicators such as the replacement cost of
seed dispersal (Hougner et al. 2005) and the abatement cost
of air pollution (Jim and Chen 2008). The UFORE/iTREE
model (Nowak and Crane 1998), which was applied in
various studies (McPherson et al. 1999a, b; Soares et al.
2011), also determines the monetary values of regulating
UESs by urban forests via revealed preference approaches.
Due to the data requirements of this approach, UFORE/
iTREE is usually applied to a single UES or several closely
related UESs.
Hedonic pricing methods are often used to determine the
value of cultural UESs, such as the esthetic of green areas
(Tyrva¨inen 2001). They derive the monetary values of
particular ecosystem characteristics from comparisons of
market prices (Boyer and Polasky 2004) that usually rely
on real estate markets. A major difﬁculty in the application
of hedonic methods is the limitation to the assessment of
use values, such as those provided by cultural services and
some regulating services, depending on the scale. Hedonic
methods require large data sets and complex methods of
data analysis, e.g., regression analysis. Another monetary
valuation approach is contingent valuation (Boyd and
Banzhaft 2007; Tong et al. 2007), which does not rely on
existing markets. It uses stated preferences collected
through surveys. This approach is, in that aspect, closely
related to socio-cultural valuation methods. To obtain
socio-cultural values, methods are needed that often
demand the use of holistic approaches that may include
qualitative measures, constructed scales, and narration
(Patton 2001; Chan et al. 2012). In some cases, translating
these values into quantitative metrics is difﬁcult or sense-
less. However, scientists have developed toolsets to mea-
sure
values
such
as sense
of
place
(Williams and
Roggenbuck 1989; Shamai 1991) and traditional ecological
knowledge (Gomez-Baggethun et al. 2010) using con-
structed scales when appropriate. Additional sets of values
that can be labeled as socio-cultural include sense of
community, social cohesion, and spiritual values (Gomez-
Baggethun et al. 2013). Contingent valuation allows for
simultaneous accounting of multiple ES. However, in a
complex policy setting involving multi-dimensional sce-
narios, respondents may not be able to accurately state their
preferences (Nijkamp et al. 2008). Although temporal and
spatial value transfers are often conducted (Kreuter et al.
2001; Zhao et al. 2004; Troy and Wilson 2006), monetary
values are generally highly context dependent (Ma¨ler et al.
2008) with regard to socio-ecology, politics, and econom-
ics at any given time. Monetary valuation approaches can
provide relevant information for policy decisions affecting
ecosystems and the services they provide (Costanza et al.
1997). However, in practice, their focus tends to be too
narrow to encompass the total complexity of socio-eco-
logical systems (Chee 2004). The integrated assessment
(Brouwer and Van Ek 2004) of monetary values in an
urban context is strongly needed.
Our review ﬁnds that a broad number of different cri-
teria, indicators and methods have been used to determine
UES values whereas a large gap between the approaches
and the underlying disciplines lies in the coherent deﬁ-
nition of UES, functions, beneﬁts, and values. Links
between these concepts are only established for economic
Fig. 5 Models used to analyze and assess UES demand and provisioning (% of 217 entries)
422
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
123
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en

----- Page 11 (native) -----
methods (De Groot et al. 2002), and a similar approach is
lacking for non-economic values. Because many studies
focus on a single or limited number of UESs, the existing
research is unable to account for value pluralism and UES
trade-offs. Integrated valuation methods, such as multi-
criteria analysis and institutions through which integrated
values can be articulated, are sorely needed to make UES
valuation applicable for local and regional planners
(Brouwer and Van Ek 2004; Rodrı´guez et al. 2006).
Further, evaluations of the use and implementations of the
concept of UESs by urban planning authorities in different
geographic and political contexts would also be helpful
(Niemela¨ et al. 2010). Finally, there is a need for com-
parative testing of applied methods, which is often
insufﬁciently
reported
or
completely
absent
in
the
literature.
Data and Models of UES Quantiﬁcation
Quantitative modeling plays a major role in assessing
UESs. Because the urban ecological system is very dif-
ferent from non-urban ecological systems (Gomez-Bagge-
thun et al. 2013), models used for urban valuation need to
be adjusted to the complex, multi-functional urban envi-
ronment (Pataki et al. 2011). Various models are used to
value ES demand and provisioning, including biophysical,
empirical, GIS-based, statistical and survey-based models
and less widely applied approaches such as qualitative
studies, causal loops and look-up tables (Fig. 5). In addi-
tion, monetary modeling approaches use the identiﬁcation
and valuation of ES as input to cost-beneﬁt analyses (CBA)
or willingness-to-pay (WTP) analyses. The quantitative
review shows that modeling approaches often value the
provision of provisioning ES (provisioning of 368 ES were
modeled) rather than demand (demand for 113 ES were
modeled). Overall, the supply side has been investigated
more often than the demand side. Provisioning studies use
empirical (80), GIS-based, (65), bio-physical (61) or sta-
tistical (53) approaches, whereas demand is modeled
through look-up tables (19) and statistical (17), GIS-based
(17) and other (24) approaches.
Bio-physical evaluation models are able to analyze
complex ecological systems and impacts but are limited in
that they tend to focus on provisioning services. With
respect to indicators and service providing units, these
models tend to focus on the potential for forests to reduce
air pollution (Jim and Chen 2009). One paper used a causal
loop method to model demand and the provisioning of ES
studying wetland biodiversity responses to land use chan-
ges (Eppink et al. 2004).
A large number of studies use empirical methods or
models to quantify the provision of ES (70). Most of these
analyze the potential for urban green infrastructure to pro-
vide regulating services such as air pollution and local cli-
mate regulation (23 out of 70). A number of empirical
studies examine the provision of biodiversity (9) and carbon
sequestration and storage by trees (11). Some empirical
studies use a combination of quantitative and qualitative
assessment data, utilizing land cover data and GIS (Burk-
hard et al. 2009, 2011).
GIS-based models have been used to assess and ana-
lyze the provision of UES and, to a lesser degree, have
also assessed or analyzed the demand for these services
(26). GIS-based models are useful for demand and pro-
vision analyses because spatial data, such as land cover
and land use data, can serve as a basis for estimating
quantities of the particular UESs associated with vege-
tation types, soil and other landscape features. Moreover,
spatial dynamics can reveal heterogeneity and trends in
the distribution of UESs over urban landscapes, which
can be of importance for urban sustainability planning.
Other studies have quantiﬁed spatial variation in UES
values using a hedonic price model and analyzed spatial
relations among biodiversity features to assess habitat
supply (Angold et al. 2006).
Look-up tables were generally used to transfer results
from previous studies to current studies of interest. Some
studies derived monetary values (US$) for speciﬁc land use
categories (Kreuter et al. 2001) or applied urban tree
beneﬁts, such as carbon sequestration and air quality reg-
ulation (Brack 2002). Others utilized online mapping tools
such as i-Tree (Abd-Elrahman et al. 2010), developed
toolkits (Alberti 1999; Troy and Wilson 2006), performed
cost-beneﬁt analyses (McPherson 1992; McPherson et al.
1997, 1999a, b) and conducted aerial and satellite photo-
graph analyses (McPherson et al. 2003; Zhao et al. 2004).
Studies have applied economic valuation (prices) to exist-
ing provisioning of ESs and, to a lesser degree, the demand
for ESs. Regression models are often used to analyze and
calculate UESs to value provisioning and demand. Most of
the reviewed articles examine the city and urban region
scales, whereas the neighborhood scale seems to be
underrepresented, with studies performed in Shanghai (Yin
et al. 2011) and Chicago (Coley et al. 1997).
Using qualitative techniques, studies have explored links
between UESs, human behavior and values. Studies using
qualitative analysis and survey instruments designed to
understand both how human behavior affects the provision
of UESs and how people respond to and value ESs allow
for a deepened understanding of the linkages between
social and ecological dynamics in an urban context. Sur-
veys are often conducted to analyze the recreational
potential of urban green areas. They include quantitative
questionnaire
surveys,
which
can
examine
the
use,
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
423
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en
123

----- Page 12 (native) -----
perception (Ma¨kinen and Tyrva¨inen 2008; Chiesura 2004)
and possible health impacts (Maas et al. 2006) of urban
parks. Willingness-to-pay analyses based on survey data
are also used to determine the demand side of ecological
valuations. For instance, willingness-to-pay analysis was
applied to urban forestry (Abd-Elrahman et al. 2010) and
an urban gardening project (Barthel et al. 2010).
This review demonstrates that a large number of indi-
cators and models are used for the assessment of UESs, but
‘‘[…]practical applications, appropriate methods for iden-
tiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of individual services, suitable
models, indicators and the integration of system compo-
nents are still needed’’ (Burkhard et al. 2010). Most case
studies valued ES without detecting temporal changes. In
addition, approaches focusing across cities or neighbor-
hoods are almost missing. One way to better explore and
use locally existing data for UES assessment is ‘‘Virtual
Globes’’—that is ‘‘… technologies offering capabilities to
annotate, edit and publish geographic information to a
world-wide audience and to visualise information provided
by the public and private sectors, as well as by citizens who
volunteer new data’’ (Blaschke et al. 2012, p. 373).
The Practical Dimension: Implementation of UES
Research is crucial to gain knowledge on ES and to
develop approaches for their management. However, the
ﬁndings need to be effectively transferred from the scien-
tiﬁc sphere into policy making to mitigate biodiversity loss
and ecosystem degradation. Of the 217 studies examined in
this quantitative review, we found 48 studies that address
implementation in urban policy making and planning
(Fig. 6). Implementation included awareness raising and
communication, strategic planning, and the development of
tools and toolkits.
Even though the awareness raising and communication
of research may be considered a basic step toward
implementation, the overwhelming majority of articles
included only short, general recommendations for stake-
holders, if at all. Only nine studies included more detailed
recommendations (i.e., longer than one paragraph). Of
these, a few delivered highly technical recommendations
(e.g., to optimize vegetative plantings for carbon seques-
tration; Jo and McPherson 1995) or suggested engineering
solutions for freshwater provision and ﬂood mitigation.
More often, recommendations were directed generally at
land management (e.g., strategies for more efﬁcient nature
preservation; Breuste 2004) but without specifying relevant
stakeholders, plans and policies. Although general recom-
mendations for land management and planning can be
applicable at multiple scales, they are unlikely to help
foster change if the results are not communicated directly
to stakeholders. Stakeholder communication was found in
only nine studies, six of which were not linked to the
development of strategies, plans or tools but rather served
to exchange relevant information used in model develop-
ment (McPherson 1998; Mcpherson and Simpson 2003) or
to obtain contextual information about land management
practices (Barthel et al. 2005; Andersson et al. 2007). Only
in three cases was it stated that the results of the study were
directly communicated to stakeholders (McPherson et al.
2003; Li et al. 2005; Schetke et al. 2012). However, with
the exception of a review of a manuscript draft in one case
(Mcpherson and Simpson 2003), the exact form of com-
munication was left unmentioned.
Looking for plans, strategies, frameworks or guidelines
to integrate ES in planning and policymaking, we found
that, in most studies, links between research and planning
were quite limited. Where statements regarding imple-
mentation were made, they did not provide detailed rea-
soning about how and under what circumstances the
approach could be implemented. However, some papers
highlighted the importance of reﬁnement or adjustment of
the approach, their limitations and the complementary
measures needed for successful implementation (Hong
et al. 2009; Dobbs et al. 2011). Two strands of studies
addressing planning and strategies were examined: (i) the
development of new approaches for the assessment of
UESs for planning or the improvement of existing
approaches by incorporating the concept of UESs (Cook
2002) or underlying ecological processes (Lundberg et al.
2008) and (ii) research that generated new knowledge for
enhanced recognition of UESs in planning processes
(McPherson et al. 1994; Dixon et al. 2006; Paoletti 2009).
The two studies that were classiﬁed as having a high
degree of implementation were both involved in planning
processes (Li et al. 2005; Nuissl et al. 2009). The study by
Li et al. (2005) was initiated by the Beijing Municipal
Institute of City Planning and Design, and the results were
also discussed with planners and government ofﬁcials. In
Fig. 6 Stakeholders involved in UES analysis and assessment (% of
217 entries)
424
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
123
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en

----- Page 13 (native) -----
the study by Nuissl et al. (2009), the resulting assessment
of the effects of land use changes on landscape functions
was used in the city planning process. Not surprisingly,
these studies targeted city authorities, who are usually the
main actors in strategy development and land use plan-
ning. Indeed, most of the studies in which plans or
strategies were developed took place at the city level.
Those operating at larger scales often addressed multiple
UESs.
Tools and toolkits for measuring and assessing ES were
designed to support decision making and policy develop-
ment. Most of these tools and toolkits were developed and
tested by scientists without the involvement of stakehold-
ers. Some authors state that speciﬁc tools, such as CITY-
green
(http://ebmtoolsdatabase.org/tool/citygreen),
have
been used in practice but do not describe whether the tools
were developed in cooperation with stakeholders.
Only three studies involving tools included a level of
implementation which was designed to support planning
practitioners at site scale or for speciﬁc projects. In an inte-
grated socio-ecological impact assessment of alternative
ﬂood control policies in the Netherlands, Brouwer and van
Ek (2004) provided a cost-beneﬁt analysis and multi-criteria
assessment as part of a decision support system for planning.
The results were discussed with an administrative steering
group. Multiple UESs were included in a sustainability
assessment tool for planning the interim use of brownﬁelds
(Rall and Haase 2011), where stakeholder interviews are
used to inform study results and produce recommendations
for the application of the tool. The highest level of imple-
mentation was found in Schetke et al. (2012), who developed
a multi-criteria assessment and decision support system to
evaluate the sustainability, resource efﬁciency and recrea-
tional beneﬁts of the development of greenﬁeld and inﬁll
sites. The development of the tool was stakeholder driven,
involving planners and decision makers in the selection,
weighting and testing of indicators.
Although the concept of ES is nascent and basic research
is still needed, a surprisingly large proportion of the studies
reviewed included little or no information on implementa-
tion. More research is needed to better address the question
of whether implementation was simply not elaborated in the
papers or not included in the study design. There may have
been more communication with stakeholders during the
research, but the authors of the reviewed papers gave the
issue of communication little attention. Therefore, we con-
clude that the general level of implementation is low. If the
results of ES research are to inﬂuence the appreciation and
management of ES in urban areas, the transfer of knowledge
and methods gained from ES research into planning and
policy making needs to be improved (Seppelt et al. 2011),
which means not only developing strategies and tools that
can be understood, accepted and applied by stakeholders but
also effectively communicating the results to speciﬁc user
groups and considering when and if to actively involve
stakeholders in the development process. Some models and
tools used in the research may be too complex for use by
stakeholders. However, their basic assumptions and limita-
tions can still be shared with relevant stakeholders along with
the results. In other cases, scientiﬁcally derived models and
tools can be used or may even be explicitly designed for use
by stakeholders. Here, exchanges between scientists and
stakeholders in the development process can create new
insights and enhance the usability, transparency and accep-
tance of tools and models.
The Participatory Dimension: Stakeholder
Involvement
Stakeholder involvement is generally recognized as being a
fundamental element of the ES research agenda (De Groot
et al. 2010b; Seppelt et al. 2011; Daniel et al. 2012).
Although the involvement of stakeholders within environ-
mental research is not without caveats—for example, the
reservations of planners to work with models and uncer-
tainties and arrogance of science against practitioners—and
requires careful planning (Seppelt et al. 2011), it has the
potential to illuminate understanding of land use impacts,
trade-offs and possible management options and pave the
way for more effective decision making (Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment 2005a).
Despite the high level of importance of stakeholder
involvement discussed in the general literature, only 24 of
the 217 studies (11 %) under review involved stakeholders
(e.g., planners, forest managers, farmers, land owners). In
terms of scale, the overwhelming majority of studies
involving stakeholders were focused at the local and
regional levels. Approximately half of the studies con-
centrated on cultural services, whereas few focused on
provisioning and supporting services (Fig. 7).
Fig. 7 Methods of implementation of UES valuation (% of 217 entries)
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
425
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en
123

----- Page 14 (native) -----
Three
purposes
of
stakeholder
involvement
were
detected in terms of the nature of involvement: (1) deter-
mining the understanding and planning relevance of the
concept of ES, (2) the development of a framework and
selection of relevant ES and indicators, and (3) data col-
lection and the assessment of ES. The majority of papers
used stakeholders to assess ES through surveys, workshops
or interviews. A few studies concentrated on the effects or
costs of management decisions for assessing regulating
(Escobedo et al. 2008), supporting (Florga˚rd 2000), or
multiple types of ES (Barthel et al. 2005; Rall and Haase
2011; Schetke et al. 2012). Most examined cultural ES
exclusively (Kliskey 2000; Chiesura 2004; Fuller et al.
2007; Ma¨kinen and Tyrva¨inen 2008) where information
was obtained from city residents or users of various urban
green spaces about such aspects as motivations for use,
perceptions, values, and physical and psychological well-
being. This result mirrors the ﬁndings from others (Daniel
et al. 2012) that qualitative methods are the primary means
used to assess cultural ES.
This review revealed a number of gaps related to
stakeholder involvement, particularly in three key areas.
Countries outside of the EU and US were underrepresented
in terms of stakeholder involvement, but even within the
EU and US studies, stakeholder involvement was mostly
limited to one scale or one type of stakeholder. This ﬁnding
stands in contrast to recommendations from TEEB (2011)
and others (De Groot et al. 2010b; Mu¨ller et al. 2010) who
argue that to adequately analyze the effects and trade-offs
of land use decisions, all relevant scales and associated
stakeholders should be taken into account because stake-
holder interests vary considerably across scales. Involve-
ment beyond government administrators, policy makers
and private developers has also been recommended by
many (Florga˚rd 2000; Barthel et al. 2005; Colding et al.
2006) because a signiﬁcant portion of green space in cities
is owned or managed by individuals or local user groups
(Colding et al. 2006; Goddard et al. 2010).
Most of the reviewed studies that addressed stakeholder
engagement did not include participatory methods, instead
carrying out ES analysis in a top-down manner where
potential consequences for stakeholders were outlined,
often without linking study ﬁndings to speciﬁc planning
and policy mechanisms. Turner and Daily (2008) argue that
limited practical know-how of institutional design and
implementation processes is a major hurdle to imple-
menting the ES framework and propose that ES research
should address every stage in the decision making process,
which suggests that bottom-up research approaches are
helpful not only for identifying all relevant institutional
groups and structures but also to more fully integrate
research into decision making, including selecting and
weighting relevant ES and developing and evaluating
management options. However, top-down approaches also
have value, and a merging of bottom-up and top-down
approaches has been suggested to more thoroughly apply
the UES approach (Mu¨ller et al. 2010).
We found poor communication of research results and
the exact nature of stakeholder involvement. Many papers
included recommendations without any indication of the
intended receivers. Additionally, none of the papers
reviewed indicated how the results were fed back to the
respondents or implemented in urban planning or green
area management.
Integration of UES Synergies and Trade-offs
Ecosystems deliver multiple services and can involve
trade-offs that increase the provisioning of one service
while reducing the provisioning of another. For example,
carbon sequestration through afforestation or forest pro-
tection may enhance timber production but reduce water
supplies. Such trade-offs occur if ES respond differently to
changes due to temporal or spatial relationships (Seppelt
et al. 2011). On the contrary, synergies between UESs
entail their parallel increases or decreases (Haase et al.
2012). Often, trade-offs or synergies between ES occur
unintentionally or go unnoticed (Rodrı´guez et al. 2006),
and, when they are considered, they are frequently based
on assumptions rather than ﬁndings (Carpenter et al. 2009).
Integrating the assessment of multiple UESs into land
management can inform decisions, making trade-offs and
synergies between ES explicit and highlighting potential
conﬂicts or win–win situations. Thus, it is very important
to assess trade-offs and synergies not only to understand
the system under study but also to inform policy and
planning to enhance quality of life.
Of all the studies under review, 23 (10 %) considered
synergies in their analysis, and 43 (20 %) mentioned trade-
offs. The review analyzed trade-offs among ecosystem ser-
vices and between UESs and a variety of other system
components, such as land use and economic aspects. The
majority of trade-offs mentioned consider the mutual rela-
tionship between UESs and land use (18). The remaining
studies addressing trade-offs study trade-offs among ES (8),
between ES and economic aspects (5), between ES and
quality of life (2), and other trade-offs (10).
The importance of considering multiple ES as a way to
address trade-offs and synergies for the purposes of
planning and decision making is increasingly acknowl-
edged, even if not often in the UES context (Buckland
et al. 2005; Weber et al. 2006; Tallis and Polasky 2009;
Hepcan and Ozkan 2011). Multi-criteria analysis (MCA)
has been proposed as one useful methodology to analyze
trade-offs and synergies. MCA is a decision support
concept
and
methodology
that
enables
analysis
of
426
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
123
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en

----- Page 15 (native) -----
multiple variables, which are often characterized by lim-
ited comparability (Martinez-Alier 1998). The ﬂexibility
to analyze multiples variables under the framework of
MCA makes it useful for understanding and operational-
izing the evaluation of social–ecological issues. MCA has
been applied widely in environmental decision making
(Martinez-Alier 1998). From a technical perspective,
MCA methods require the scaling and ranking of vari-
ables and aggregating through weighted optimization
procedures. Although there is little agreement on methods
and tools for determining ranking and weighting proce-
dures in ES MCA, there is a growing understanding that
such methods are essential.
The majority of studies do not include trade-offs or
synergies, although both are highly relevant for assessing
different land management options and informing policy.
So far, the focus has been on bio-physical science aspects,
such as the relationship between land use and UESs or
among multiple UESs. Particularly undervalued are trade-
offs and synergies involving cultural ESs because they are
subjective and difﬁcult to quantify (Daniel et al. 2012).
CONCLUSION
This review shows that studies dealing with the temporal and
spatial dynamics of UESs are still rare despite their impor-
tance for urban planning. The selection of papers represents a
cross-section of studies investigating ES in cities although
there is more literature on non-urban ES had been published
(see other ES reviews in the Electronic Supplementary
Material). This review is indicative of the current state of this
area. We conclude that there is a lack of both historic studies
and future-oriented studies systematically analyzing the
dynamics of UESs. There is also a paucity of studies based on
a deep understanding of the dynamics of urban ecosystems at
a more detailed level, e.g., accounting for the change of
character and functionality of existing green spaces within
the urban fabric. With respect to the types of ES studied,
regulating, and cultural and, to a lesser degree, provisioning
services were clearly emphasized. Moreover, even when
several ES were studied, synergies and trade-offs between
these services were not explored. Despite these limitations,
current approaches to the assessment of ES dynamics include
a rich array of different methodological approaches and
demonstrate how these approaches can be applied to differ-
ent issues relevant for urban decision making.
This review leads to a list of conclusions that are rele-
vant for future analyses and the implementation of UES
assessments. Overall, we suggest that more systematic
approaches to the comprehensive assessment and evalua-
tion of ES with a temporal dimension need to be developed
both for application in retrospective studies for monitoring
purposes and for future-oriented studies, in particular to
support strategic planning. Future research toward inte-
grating spatial UESs and identifying trade-offs and syner-
gies should foster the following.
Process Understanding, Especially the Temporal
Scales
The parallel investigation of different UESs, their trade-offs
and synergies, requires understanding of the processes in the
system under study. A simple parallel investigation might
imply statistical relationships that are merely correlations
rather than causalities. Because trade-offs and synergies may
vary across temporal scale, both the short-term and long-
term effects of land use decisions should be evaluated and
monitored to further understand the system processes and
develop successful strategies (Rodrı´guez et al. 2006).
A Framework to Link UES with Economic Aspects
and Quality of Life
The implications of UESs for humankind manifest them-
selves either as synergies and trade-offs with economic
aspects or with quality of life. Thus, a framework to better
link UESs, economic aspects and quality of life is needed,
which requires an interdisciplinary approach. There are a
few frameworks available for analyzing the trade-offs of
multiple ESs, but these take place at a landscape or smaller
scale. Scales appropriate for urban ecosystem analysis need
to be developed. There is still a great need for standardized
approaches for both provisioning-side and demand-side
assessments. The demand side remains largely unstudied;
indicators, proxies and methods are needed. Indicators for
the demand side will always include socio-economic data
and are highly sensitive to demographic and population
changes as well as to urban–rural mobility patterns.
The Usage of Multi-criteria Assessment as a Tool
Many methods and models exist that can be used to inte-
grate trade-off evaluations of ES. In particular, visualiza-
tion, participatory and multi-criteria evaluation methods
are promising tools for analyzing trade-offs for ecosystem
services, which may include less quantiﬁable (especially
cultural) services.
Involving Stakeholders and Society with Different
Viewpoints
An integrative view of UESs might also be fostered by
involving stakeholders with different perspectives. Overall,
more research is needed on how social–ecological systems
generate UESs and how changes in social–ecological
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
427
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en
123

----- Page 16 (native) -----
systems over space and time affect the provision of UESs.
To make real contributions toward society and produce
policy-relevant research results, knowledge about ES and
values should be clearly communicated to policy makers,
planners and the public. Likewise, improving UES research
requires a clear and transparent presentation of participa-
tory research methods, especially if a set of best practices
for stakeholder involvement is to be developed.
Completeness of the Regional Picture
Most of the UES studies have been undertaken in the
developed West or China. Thus, there is a need to expand
UES research to other parts of Asia (South Asia in par-
ticular)
and
South American and
African
countries.
Because the African continent currently has the fastest
urban growth rates, the utilization and conservation of
UESs will be crucial for sustainably managing growth.
Emphasizing the Concept of Ecosystem Disservices
in an Urban Context
Although this review did not address disservices, and dis-
services were rarely addressed in the examined papers,
understanding this topic could enrich our understanding of
UESs and quality of life. Disservices imply a trade-off
between ecosystems and quality of life. However, these
trade-offs should be understood and evaluated within a
local context and with a variety of stakeholders because
disservices are highly subjective and variable across dif-
ferent environments.
Emphasizing Spatially Explicit Approaches to UES
Assessment and Valuation
Due to the well-known social and ecological heteroge-
neity in cities, spatially explicit UES valuation at a
relatively high resolution will be critical for incorpo-
rating UES values into urban policy, planning, and
management so that decisions, policies, and plans can
be prioritized at the neighborhood or lot scale. Addi-
tionally, incorporating social–ecological systems theory
into the application of UES valuation methods will be
important for expanding our understanding of cultural
services and the demand for UESs in cities, at both the
local and regional scales. Given the current weak
incorporation of ES into urban policy and planning in
most cities, advancing spatially explicit tools in com-
bination with multi-criteria analysis should be priori-
tised in UES assessment and valuation.
In closing, the concept of ES calls for an integrative
assessment of the various ES that can be provided by urban
nature. Furthermore, trade-offs and synergies between UES
should be analyzed, and the costs and beneﬁts of certain
processes of urbanisation should be evaluated.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank all colleagues
in the BiodivERsA URBES project (http://urbesproject.org/) for a
great collaboration and many discussions on urban ecosystem ser-
vices. Moreover, we wish to thank all national funding bodies con-
tributing to the ERANET fund.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, dis-
tribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
author(s) and the source are credited.
REFERENCES
Abd-Elrahman, A.H., M.E. Thornhill, M.G. Andreu, and F. Escobedo.
2010. A community-based urban forest inventory using online
mapping services and consumer-grade digital images. Interna-
tional Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinforma-
tion 12: 249–260. doi:10.1016/j.jag.2010.03.003.
Alberti, M. 1999. Modeling the urban ecosystem: a conceptual
framework. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design
26: 605–630. doi:10.1068/b260605.
Ambrey, C.L., and C.M. Fleming. 2011. Valuing scenic amenity
using life satisfaction data. Ecological Economics 72: 106–115.
doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2011.09.011.
Andersson, E., S. Barthel, and K. Ahrne´. 2007. Measuring social–
ecological
dynamics
behind
the
generation
of
ecosystem
services. Ecological Applications 17: 1267–1278.
Angold, P.G., J.P. Sadler, M. Hill, O. Pullin, S. Rushton, K. Austin, E.
Small, et al. 2006. Biodiversity in urban habitat patches. The
Science of the Total Environment 360: 196–204. doi:10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2005.08.035.
Barthel, S., J. Colding, T. Elmqvist, and C. Folke. 2005. History and
local management of a biodiversity-rich, urban cultural land-
scape. Ecology and Society 10: 10.
Barthel, S., C. Folke, and J. Colding. 2010. Social–ecological
memory in urban gardens: Retaining the capacity for manage-
ment of ecosystem services. Global Environmental Change 20:
255–265.
Beza´k, P., and J. Lyytima¨ki. 2011. Complexity of urban ecosystem
services in the context of global change. Ekolo´gia 30: 22–35.
Blaschke, T., K. Donert, F. Gossette, S. Kienberger, M. Marani, S.
Qureshi, and D. Tiede. 2012. Virtual globes: serving science and
society. Information 3: 372–390. doi:10.3390/info3030372.
Bossel, H. 1999. Indicators for sustainable development: theory,
method, applications. Winnipeg: International Institute for
Sustainable Development.
Boyd, J., and S. Banzhaft. 2007. What are ecosystem services? The
need for standardized environmental accounting units: Discus-
sion paper. Ecological Economics 63: 616–626.
Boyer, T., and S. Polasky. 2004. Valuing urban wetlands: a review of
non-market valuations studies. Society of Wetland Scientist 24:
744–755.
Brack, C.L. 2002. Pollution mitigation and carbon sequestration by an
urban forest. Environmental Pollution 116: 195–200.
Breuste, J.H. 2004. Decision making, planning and design for the
conservation of indigenous vegetation within urban develop-
ment. Landscape and urban Planning 68: 439–452.
Brouwer, R., and R. Van Ek. 2004. Integrated ecological, economic
and social impact assessment of alternative ﬂood control policies
in the Netherlands. Ecological Economics 50: 1–21.
428
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
123
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en

----- Page 17 (native) -----
Buckland, S.T., A.E. Magurran, R.E. Green, and R.M. Fewster. 2005.
Monitoring change in biodiversity through composite indices.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London.
Series B, Biological sciences 360: 243–254.
Burkhard, B., F. Kroll, F. Mu¨ller, and W. Windhorst. 2009.
Landscapes’ capacities to provide ecosystem services: a concept
for land-cover based assessments. Landscape Online 15: 1–22.
Burkhard, B., I. Petrosillo, and R. Constanza. 2010. Ecosystem services:
Bridging ecology, economy and social sciences. Ecological
Complexity 7: 257–259.
Burkhard, B., F. Kroll, S. Nedkov, and F. Mu¨ller. 2011. Mapping
ecosystem service supply, demand and budgets. Ecological
Indicators. doi:10.1016/j.ecolind.2011.06.019.
Calvet-Mir, L., E. Gomez-Baggethun, and V. Reyes-Garcı´a. 2012.
Beyond food production: ecosystem services provided by home
gardens. A case study in Vall Fosca, Catalan Pyrenees,
Northeastern
Spain.
Ecological
Economics
74:
153–160.
doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2011.12.011.
Cardinale, B.J., E. Duffy, A. Gonzales, D.U. Hooper, C. Perrings, P.
Venail, A. Narwani, G.M. Mace, et al. 2012. Biodiversity loss
and its impact on humanity. Nature 486: 59–67.
Carpenter, S.R., E.M. Bennett, and G.D. Peterson. 2006. Scenarios for
ecosystem services: An overview. Ecology and Society 11: 29.
Carpenter, S.R., H.A. Mooney, J. Agard, D. Capistrano, R.S. Defries, S.
Dı´az, T. Dietz, et al. 2009. Science for managing ecosystem
services: Beyond the millennium ecosystem assessment. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 106: 1305–1312. doi:10.1073/pnas.0808772106.
Chan, K.M.A., T. Satterﬁeld, and J. Goldstein. 2012. Rethinking
ecosystem services to better address and navigate cultural values.
Ecological Economics 74: 8–18.
Chapin III, F.S., E.S. Zavaleta, V.T. Eviner, R.L. Naylor, P.M.
Vitousek, H.L. Reynolds, D.U. Hooper, et al. 2000. Conse-
quences of changing biodiversity. Nature 11: 234–242.
Chee, Y.E. 2004. An ecological perspective on the valuation of
ecosystem services. Biological Conservation 120: 549–565.
Chiesura, A. 2004. The role of urban parks for the sustainable city.
Landscape and urban Planning 68: 129–138.
Clergeau, P., J.-P. Savard, G. Mennechez, and G. Falardeau. 1998.
Bird abundance and diversity along an urban-rural gradient: A
comparative study between two cities on different continents.
The Condor 100: 413–425.
Colding, J., J. Lundberg, and C. Folke. 2006. Incorporating green-area
usergroups inurbanecosystemmanagement.AMBIO35:237–244.
Coley, R.L., W.C. Sullivan, and F.E. Kuo. 1997. Where does
community grow?: The social context created by nature in urban
public housing. Environment and Behavior 29: 468–494.
Cook, E. 2002. Landscape structure indices for assessing urban
ecological networks. Landscape and Urban Planning 58: 269–
280.
Costanza, R., R. D’Arge, R. de Groot, S. Farber, M. Grasso, B.
Hannon, K.E. Limburg, et al. 1997. The value of the world’s
ecosystem services and natural capital. Nature 25: 253–260.
Costanza, R., W.J. Mitsch, and J.W. Day. 2012. A new vision for New
Orleans and the Mississippi Delta: Applying ecological eco-
nomics and ecological engineering. Ecological Engineering 4:
465–472.
Cowling, R.M., B. Egoh, A.T. Knight, P.J. O’Farrell, B. Reyers, M.
Rouget, D.J. Roux, A. Welz, et al. 2008. An operational model
for mainstreaming ecosystem services for implementation.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 105: 9483–9488.
Daily, G.C., S. Polasky, J. Goldstein, P.M. Kareiva, H.A. Mooney,
L. Pejchar, T.H. Ricketts, J. Salzman, et al. 2009. Ecosystem
services in decision making: time to deliver. Frontiers in
Ecology and the Environment 7: 21–28. doi:10.1890/080025.
Daniel, T.C, A. Muhar, A. Arnberger, O. Aznar, J.W. Boyd, K.M.A.
Chan, R. Costanza, et al. 2012. Contributions of cultural services
to the ecosystem services agenda. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1–8.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1114773109.
De Groot, R.S., M.A. Wilson, and R.M.J. Boumans. 2002. A typology
for the classiﬁcation, description and valuation of ecosystem
functions, goods and services. Special issue: The dynamics and
value of ecosystem services: integrating economic and ecolog-
ical perspectives. Ecological Economics 41: 393–408.
De Groot, R.S., R. Alkemade, L. Braat, L. Hein, and L. Willemen.
2010a. Challenges in integrating the concept of ecosystem
services and values in landscape planning, management and
decision making. Ecological Complexity 7: 260–272. doi:10.
1016/j.ecocom.2009.10.006.
De Groot, R.S., B. Fisher, M. Christie, J. Aronson, L. Braat, J.
Gowdy, R. Haines-Young, E. Maltby, et al. 2010b. Integrating
the ecological and economic dimensions in biodiversity and
ecosystem service valuation. In The economics of ecosystems
and biodiversity TEEB ecological and economic foundations, ed.
P. Kumar. TEEB.
Dixon, T.H., F. Amelung, A. Ferretti, F. Novali, F. Rocca, R. Dokka,
G. Sella, S.-W. Kim, et al. 2006. Subsidence and ﬂooding in
New Orleans. Nature 441: 587–588. doi:10.1038/441587a.
Dobbs, C., F.J. Escobedo, and W.C. Zipperer. 2011. A framework for
developing urban forest ecosystem services and goods indicators.
Landscape and Urban Planning 99: 196–206.
Elmqvist, T., C. Alfsen, and J. Colding. 2008. Urban systems. In
Encyclopedia of Ecology, ed. S.E. Jorgensen, and B.D. Fath,
3665–3672 pp. Oxford: Elsevier.
Eppink, F.V., J.C.J.M. Van den Bergh, and P. Rietveld. 2004.
Modelling biodiversity and land use: urban growth, agriculture
and nature in a wetland area. Ecological Economics 51: 201–
216.
Escobedo, F.J., and D.J. Nowak. 2009. Spatial heterogeneity and air
pollution removal by an urban forest. Landscape and Urban
Planning 90: 102–110.
Escobedo, F.J., J.E. Wagner, D.J. Nowak, C. Luz De la Maza, M.
Rodriguez, and D.E. Crane. 2008. Analyzing the cost effective-
ness of Santiago, Chile’s policy of using urban forests to
improve air quality. Journal of Environmental Management 86:
148–157.
Escobedo, F.J., T. Kroeger, and J.E. Wagner. 2011. Urban forests and
pollution mitigation: Analyzing ecosystem services and disser-
vices. Environmental Pollution 159: 2078–2087.
Fisher, B., R. Turner, and P. Morling. 2009. Deﬁning and classifying
ecosystem services for decision making. Ecological Economics
68: 643–653.
Fitzhugh, T.W., and B.D. Richter. 2004. Quenching urban thirst:
Growing cities and their impacts on freshwater ecosystems.
BioScience 54: 741–754.
Florga˚rd, C. 2000. Long-term changes in indigenous vegetation
preserved in urban areas. Landscape and Urban Planning 52:
101–116.
Folke, C., S. Carpenter, B. Walker, M. Scheffer, T. Elmqvist, L.
Gunderson, and C.S. Holling. 2004. Regime shifts, resilience,
and biodiversity in ecosystem management. Annual Review of
Ecology Evolution and Systematics 35: 557–581. doi:10.1146/
annurev.ecolsys.35.021103.105711.
Fuller, R.A., K.N. Irvine, P. Devine-Wrigth, P.H. Warren, and K.J.
Gaston. 2007. Psychological beneﬁts of greenspace increase with
biodiversity. Biology Letters 3: 390–394.
Goddard, M.A., A.J. Dougill, and T.G. Benton. 2010. Scaling up from
gardens:
biodiversity
conservation
in
urban
environments.
Trends in Ecology & Evolution 25: 90–98.
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
429
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en
123

----- Page 18 (native) -----
Gomez-Baggethun, E., S. Mingorrı´a, V. Reyes-Garcı´a, L. Calvet, and
C. Montes. 2010. Traditional ecological knowledge trends in the
transition to a market economy: Empirical study in the Don˜ana
natural areas. Conservation Biology 24: 721–729.
Gomez-Baggethun, E., A˚ . Gren, D.N. Barton, J. Langemeyer, T.
McPherson, P. O’Farrell, E. Andersson, Z. Hamsted, et al. 2013.
Urban ecosystem services. In Urbanization, biodiversity and
ecosystem services: challenges and opportunities. A global
assessment, ed. T Elmqvist, T., M. Fragkias, J. Goodness, B.
Gu¨neralp, P.J. Marcotullio, R.I. McDonald, S. Parnell, M.
Schewenius, et al., 175–251 pp. Dordrecht: Springer. From
http://link.springer.com/book/10.1007%2F978-94-007-7088-1.
Grimm, N.B., S.H. Faeth, N.E. Golubiewski, C.L. Redman, J. Wu, X.
Bai, and J.M. Briggs. 2008. Global change and the ecology of
cities. Science 319: 756–760.
Haase, D. 2009. Effects of urbanisation on the water balance: A long-
term trajectory. Environmental Impact Assessment Review 29:
211–219.
Haase, D. 2014. The nature of urban land use and why it is a special
case. In Rethinking global land use in an urban era, ed. K. Seto,
and A. Reenberg. Stru¨ngmann Forum Reports, vol. 14. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Haase, D., A. Haase, N. Kabisch, S. Kabisch, and D. Rink. 2012.
Actors and factors in land-use simulation: The challenge of
urban shrinkage. Environmental Modelling and Software 35: 92–
103. doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2012.02.012.
Hepcan, C.C., and M.B. Ozkan. 2011. Establishing ecological
networks for habitat conservation in the case of C¸ es¸me-Urla
Peninsula, Turkey. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment
174: 157–170.
Herna´ndez-Morcillo, M., T. Plieninger, and C. Bieling. 2013. An
empirical review of cultural ecosystem services indicators.
Ecological Indicators 29: 434–444.
Hong, B., K.E. Limburg, J.D. Erickson, J.M. Gowdy, A.A. Nowosiel-
ski, J.M. Polimeni, and K.M. Stainbrook. 2009. Connecting the
ecological-economic dots in human-dominated watersheds: Mod-
els to link socio-economic activities on the landscape to stream
ecosystem health. Landscape and Urban Planning 91: 78–87.
Hougner, C., J. Colding, and T. So¨derqvist. 2005. Economic valuation
of a seed dispersal service in the Stockholm National Urban
Park, Sweden. Ecological Economics 9: 364–374.
Hubacek, K., and J. Kronenberg. 2013. Synthesizing different
perspectives on the value of urban ecosystem services. Land-
scape and Urban Planning 109: 1–6.
Imhoff, M.L., L. Bounoua, R. DeFries, W.T. Lawrence, D. Stutzer,
C.J. Tucker, and T. Ricketts. 2004. The consequences of urban
land transformation on net primary productivity in the United
States. Remote Sensing of Environment 89: 434–443.
Jansson, A., and S. Polasky. 2010. Quantifying biodiversity for
building resilience for food security in urban landscapes: Getting
down to business. Ecology and Society 15(3): 20.
Jim, C.Y., and W.Y. Chen. 2008. Assessing the ecosystem service of
air pollutant removal by urban trees in Guangzhou (China).
Journal of Environmental Management 88: 665–676.
Jim, C.Y., and W.Y. Chen. 2009. Ecosystem services and valuation of
urban forests in China. Cities 26: 187–194.
Jo, H., and G. McPherson. 1995. Carbon storage and ﬂux in urban
residential greenspace. Journal of Environmental Management
45: 109–133.
Kliskey, A.D. 2000. Recreation terrain suitability mapping: a spatially
explicit methodology for determining recreation potential for
resource use assessment. Landscape and Urban Planning 52:
33–43.
Kremen, C. 2005. Managing ecosystem services: what do we need to
know about their ecology?. Ecology Letters 8: 468–479.
Kreuter, U.P., H.G. Harris, M.D. Matlock, and R.E. Lacey. 2001.
Change in ecosystem service values in the San Antonio area,
Texas. Ecological Economics 39: 333–346. doi:10.1016/S0921-
8009(01)00250-6.
Kroll, F., F. Mu¨ller, D. Haase, and N. Fohrer. 2011. Rural–urban gradient
analysis of ecosystem services supply and demand dynamics. Land
Use Policy 29: 521–535. doi:10.1016/j.landusepol.2011.07.008.
Lal, R. 2004. Soil carbon sequestration to mitigate climate change.
Geoderma 123: 1–22.
Layke, C. 2009. Working Paper Measuring Nature’s Beneﬁts: A
Preliminary Roadmap for Improving Ecosystem Service Indicators.
Li, F., R. Wang, J. Paulussen, and X. Liu. 2005. Comprehensive
concept planning of urban greening based on ecological
principles: a case study in Beijing, China. Landscape and Urban
Planning 72: 325–336.
Lovasi, G., J.W. Quinn, K.M. Neckerman, M.S. Perzanowski, and A.
Rundle. 2008. Children living in areas with more street trees
have lower prevalence of asthma. Journal of Epidemiology and
Community Health 62: 647–649.
Lundberg, J., E. Andersson, G. Cleary, and T. Elmqvist. 2008.
Linkages beyond borders: targeting spatial processes in frag-
mented urban landscapes. Landscape Ecology 23: 717–726.
doi:10.1007/s10980-008-9232-9.
Lundy, L., and R. Wade. 2011. Integrating sciences to sustain urban
ecosystem services. Progress in Physical Geography 35: 653–
669. doi:10.1177/0309133311422464.
Maas, J., R.A. Verheij, P.P. Groenewegen, S. de Vries, and P.
Spreeuwenberg. 2006. Green space, urbanity, and health: how
strong is the relation? Journal of Epidemiology and Community
Health 60: 587–592. doi:10.1136/jech.2005.043125.
Ma¨kinen, K., and L. Tyrvainen. 2008. Teenage experiences of public
green spaces in suburban Helsinki. Urban Forestry and Urban
Greening 7: 277–289.
Ma¨ler, K.-G., S. Aniyar, and A˚ . Jansson. 2008. Accounting for
ecosystem services as a way to understand the requirements
for sustainable development. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 105:
9501–9506.
Martinez-Alier, J. 1998. Weak comparability of values as a foundation
for ecological economics. Ecological Economics 26: 277–286.
McMichael, A.J. 2008. Environmental change, climate and popula-
tion health: a challenge for inter-disciplinary research. Environ-
mental Health and Preventive Medicine 13: 183–186. doi:10.
1007/s12199-008-0031-3.
McPherson, E.G. 1992. Accounting for beneﬁts and costs of urban
greenspace. Landscape and Urban Planning 22: 41–51.
McPherson, E.G. 1998. Atmospheric carbon dioxide reduction by
Sacramento’s urban forest. Journal of Arboriculture 24: 215–
223.
McPherson, E.G., and R.A. Rowntree. 1993. Energy conservation
potential of urban tree planting. Journal of Arboriculture 19:
321–331.
McPherson, E.G., and J.R. Simpson. 2003. Potential energy savings in
buildings by an urban tree planting programme. Urban Forestry
and Urban Greening 2: 73–86.
McPherson, E.G., D.J. Nowak, and R.A. Rowntree. 1994. Chicago’s
urban forest ecosystem: Results of the Chicago urban forest
climate project.
McPherson, E.G., D. Nowak, G. Heisler, S. Grimmond, C. Souch, R.
Grant, and R. Rowntree. 1997. Quantifying urban forest
structure, function, and value: the Chicago urban forest climate
project. Urban Ecosystems 1: 49–61.
McPherson, G.E., J.R. Simpson, P.J. Peper, and Q. Xiao. 1999a.
Beneﬁt-cost analysis of modesto’s municipal forest. Journal of
Arboriculture 25: 235–248.
430
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
123
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en

----- Page 19 (native) -----
McPherson, E.G., E. Gregory, J.R. Simpson, and R. James. 1999b.
Carbon dioxide reduction through urban forestry: Guidelines for
professional and volunteer tree planters. USDA.
McPherson, E.G., J.R. Simpson, P.J. Peper, Q. Xiao, S.E. Maco, and
P. Hoefer. 2003. Northern Mountain and Prairie community tree
guide: Beneﬁts, costs and strategic planting.
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005a. Ecosystems and human
well-being:
Synthesis.
Washington,
DC:
World
Resources
Institute.
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005b. Ecosystems and human
well-being: Biodiversity synthesis. Washington, DC: World
Resources Institute.
Mitchell, R., and F. Popham. 2008. Effect of exposure to natural
environment on health inequalities: An observational population
study. Lancet 372: 1655–1660.
Morani, A., D.J. Nowak, S. Hirabayashi, and C. Calfapietra. 2011.
How to select the best tree planting locations to enhance air
pollution removal in the MillionTreesNYC initiative. Environ-
mental Pollution 159: 1040–1047.
Mu¨ller, F., R. De Groot, and L. Willemen. 2010. Ecosystem services
at the landscape scale: the Need for integrative approaches.
Landscape Online 23: 1–11.
Niemela¨, J., S.-R. Saarela, T. So¨derman, L. Kopperoinen, V. Yli-
Pelkonen, S. Va¨re, and D.J. Kotze. 2010. Using the ecosystem
services approach for better planning and conservation of urban
green spaces: a Finland case study. Biodiversity Conservation
19: 3225–3243.
Nijkamp, P., G. Vindigni, and P.A.L.D. Nunes. 2008. Economic
valuation of biodiversity: A comparative study. Ecological
Economics 67: 217–231.
Nowak, D.J., and D.E. Crane. 1998. The Urban Forest Effects
(UFORE) Model: Quantifying urban forest structure and func-
tions. Integrated Tools Proceedings, 714–720 pp.
Nuissl, H., D. Haase, M. Lanzendorf, and H. Wittmer. 2009. Environ-
mental impact assessment of urban land use transitions. A context-
sensitive approach. Land Use Policy 26: 414–424.
Paoletti, E. 2009. Ozone and urban forests in Italy. Environmental
Pollution 157: 1506–1512.
Pataki, D.E., M.M. Carreiro, J. Cherrier, N.E. Grulke, V. Jennings, S.
Pincetl, R.V. Pouyat, T.H. Whitlow, et al. 2011. Coupling
biogeochemical cycles in urban environments: ecosystem ser-
vices, green solutions, and misconceptions. Frontiers in Ecology
and the Environment 9: 27–36. doi:10.1890/090220.
Patton, M.Q., 2001. Qualitative research and evaluation methods.
SAGE.
Rall, E.L., and D. Haase. 2011. Creative intervention in a dynamic
city: A sustainability assessment of an interim use strategy for
brownﬁelds in Leipzig, Germany. Landscape and Urban Plan-
ning 100: 189–201.
Ricketts, T.H., J. Regetz, I. Steffan-Dewenter, S.A. Cunningham, C.
Kremen, A. Bogdanski, B. Gemmill-Herren, et al. 2008.
Landscape effects on crop pollination services: are there general
patterns? Ecology Letters 11: 499–515.
Rodrı´guez, J.P., T.D. Beard, E.M. Bennett, G.S. Cumming, S.J. Cork, J.
Agard, A.P. Dobson, and G.D. Peterson. 2006. Trade-offs across
space, time, and ecosystem services. Ecology and Society 11: 28.
Schetke, S., and D. Haase. 2008. Multi-criteria assessment of socio-
environmental aspects in shrinking cities. Experiences from
eastern Germany. Environmental Impact Assessment Review 28:
483–503.
Schetke, S., D. Haase, and J.H. Breuste. 2010. Green space
functionality under conditions of uneven urban land use
development. Journal of Land Use Science 5: 143–158.
Schetke, S., D. Haase, and T. Ko¨tter. 2012. Towards sustainable
settlement
growth:
A
new
multi-criteria
assessment
for
implementing environmental targets into strategic urban plan-
ning. Environmental Impact Assessment Review 32: 195–210.
Schwarz, N., S. Lautenbach, and R. Seppelt. 2011. Exploring
indicators
for
quantifying
surface
urban
heat
islands
of
European
cities
with
MODIS
land
surface
temperatures.
Remote Sensing of Environment 115: 3175–3186. doi:10.
1016/j.rse.2011.07.003.
Seppelt, R., C.F. Dormann, F.V. Eppink, S. Lautenbach, and S. Schmidt.
2011. A quantitative review of ecosystem service studies:
approaches, shortcomings and the road ahead. Journal of Applied
Ecology 48: 630–636. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2664.2010.01952.x.
Shamai, S. 1991. Sense of place: an empirical measurement.
Geoforum 22: 347–358.
Shashua-bar, L., and M.E. Hoffman. 2000. Vegetation as a climatic
component in the design of an urban street An empirical model
for predicting the cooling effect of urban green areas with trees.
Energy and Buildings 31: 221–235.
Soares, A.L., F.C. Rego, E.G. McPherson, J.R. Simpson, P.J. Peper,
and Q. Xiao. 2011. Beneﬁts and costs of street trees in Lisbon,
Portugal. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening 10: 69–78. doi:10.
1016/j.ufug.2010.12.001.
Sparks, T.H., S.H.M. Butchard, A. Balmford, L. Bennun, D. Stanwell-
Smith, M. Walpole, N.R. Bates, et al. 2011. Linked indicator sets
for addressing biodiversity loss. Oryx 45: 411–419.
Tallis,H., andS.Polasky.2009.Mappingandvaluingecosystemservices
as an approach for conservation and natural-resource management.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1162: 265–283.
TEEB. 2011. TEEB manual for cities: Ecosystem services in urban
management.
Tong, C., R. Feagin, J. Lu, X. Zhang, X. Zhu, W. Wang, and W. He.
2007. Ecosystem service values and restoration in the urban
Sanyang wetland of Wenzhou, China. Ecological Engineering
29: 249–258. doi:10.1016/j.ecoleng.2006.03.002.
Troy, A., and M.A. Wilson. 2006. Mapping ecosystem services:
Practical challenges and opportunities in linking GIS and value
transfer. Ecological Economics 60: 435–449.
Turner, R.K., and G.C. Daily. 2008. The ecosystem services
framework and natural capital conservation. Environmental &
Resource Economics 39: 25–35.
Turner, R.K., S. Georgiou, and B. Fisher. 2008. Valuing ecosystem
services: The case of multi-functional wetlands. London.
Tyrva¨inen, L. 2001. Economic valuation of urban forest beneﬁts in
Finland. Journal of Environmental Management 62: 75–92.
United Nations. 2012. World urbanisation prospects the 2011
revision. World Urbanisation Prospects, Department of Eco-
nomic and Social Affairs.
Upmanis, H., and D. Chen. 1999. Inﬂuence of geographical factors
and meteorological variables on nocturnal urban-park tempera-
ture differences: A case study of summer 1995 in Go¨teborg,
Sweden. Climate Research 13: 125–139.
Wallace, K.J. 2007. Classiﬁcation of ecosystem services: Problems
and solutions. Biological Conservation 139: 235–246.
Weber, T., A. Sloan, and L. Wolf. 2006. Maryland’s green infrastruc-
ture assessment: Development of a comprehensive approach to
land conservation. Landscape and Urban Planning 77: 94–110.
Williams, D.R., and J. W. Roggenbuck. 1989. Measuring place
attachment: some preliminary results. Paper presented at the
NRPA Symposium on Leisure Research, San Antonio, TX.
Winkler, R. 2006. Valuation of ecosystem goods and services: Part 2:
Implications of unpredictable novel change. Ecological Eco-
nomics 59: 94–105.
Yin, S., Z. Shen, P. Zhou, X. Zou, S. Che, and W. Wang. 2011.
Quantifying air pollution attenuation within urban parks: An
experimental approach in Shanghai, China. Environmental
Pollution 159: 2155–2163.
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
431
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en
123

----- Page 20 (native) -----
Zerbe, S., U. Maurer, S. Schmitz, and H. Sukopp. 2003. Biodiversity
in Berlin and its potential for nature conservation. Landscape
and Urban Planning 62: 139–148.
Zhao, B., U. Kreuter, B. Li, Z. Ma, J. Chen, and N. Nakagoshi. 2004.
An ecosystem service value assessment of land-use change on
Chongming Island, China. Land Use Policy 21: 139–148. doi:10.
1016/j.landusepol.2003.10.003.
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
Dagmar Haase (&) is a land use and environmental scientist
working on land use change, urban ecosystem services, and urban
modeling at the Humboldt Universita¨t zu Berlin and the Helmholtz
Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ in Leipzig, Germany.
Address: Humboldt Universita¨t zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
Address: Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ,
Leipzig, Germany.
e-mail: dagmar.haase@ufz.de; dagmar.haase@geo.hu-berlin.de
Neele Larondelle is a natural resource management scientist and
landscape ecologist working on urban ecosystem services at the
Humboldt Universita¨t zu Berlin, Germany.
Address: Humboldt Universita¨t zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
e-mail: neele.larondelle@geo.hu-berlin.de
Erik Andersson is an ecologist working at the Stockholm Resilience
Centre, Stockholm, Sweden, on ecosystem services and green infra-
structure.
Address: Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm, Sweden.
e-mail: erik.andersson@stockholmresilience.su.se
Martina Artmann is a geographer and urban ecologist working on
land management and urban systems at the Paris Lodron University of
Salzburg, Austria.
Address: Paris Lodron University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
e-mail: Martina.Artmann@sbg.ac.at
Sara Borgstro¨m is an ecologist working at the Stockholm Resilience
Centre, Stockholm, Sweden, on nature conservation and climate
change impacts.
Address: Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm, Sweden.
e-mail: sarab@ecology.su.se
Ju¨rgen Breuste is a geographer and urban ecologist working on
urban ecology theory and practice, urban land management and urban
green infrastructure at the Paris Lodron University of Salzburg,
Austria.
Address: Paris Lodron University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
e-mail: juergen.breuste@sbg.ac.at
Erik Gomez-Baggethun is an ecologist and environmental scientist
working on the valuation of urban ecosystem services at the Uni-
versita´ Autonoma´ de Barcelona, Spain.
Address: Universita´ Autonoma´ de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
e-mail: erik.gomez@uam.es
A˚ sa Gren is an ecologist working on the quantiﬁcation of ecosystem
services in an urban landscape context at the Beijer Institute of
Ecological Economics in Stockholm, Sweden.
Address: Beijer Institute of Ecological Economics in Stockholm,
Stockholm, Sweden.
e-mail: asa.gren@beijer.kva.se
Zoe´ Hamstead is an urban researcher working on urban ecosystems
and ecosystem services at the Milano School of International Affairs,
Management and Urban Policy, The New School, New York, USA.
Address: Milano School of International Affairs, Management and
Urban Policy, The New School, New York, NY, USA.
e-mail: hamsz235@newschool.edu
Rieke Hansen is a planner working on urban land and green infra-
structure planning and management at the Technical University of
Munich, Germany.
Address: Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
e-mail: hansen@tum.de
Nadja Kabisch is a social geographer and land use scientist working
on demography and population dynamics of cities and cultural urban
ecosystem services at the Humboldt Universita¨t zu Berlin and the
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ in Leipzig,
Germany.
Address: Humboldt Universita¨t zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
Address: Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ,
Leipzig, Germany.
e-mail: nadja-kabisch@geo.hu-berlin.de
Peleg Kremer is an urban land use researcher with focus on remote
sensing and GIS working at the Tishman Environment and Design
Center, The New School, New York, USA.
Address: Tishman Environment and Design Center, The New School,
New York, NY, USA.
e-mail: kremerp@newschool.edu
Johannes Langemeyer is a geographer working on the valuation of
urban ecosystem services at the Universita´ Autonoma´ de Barcelona,
Spain.
Address: Universita´ Autonoma´ de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
e-mail: johannes.langemeyer@googlemail.com
Emily Lorance Rall is a research scholar working on urban systems,
green infrastructure, and cultural ecosystem services at the Technical
University of Munich, Germany.
Address: Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
e-mail: e.rall@tum.de
Timon McPhearson is an urban research scholar working on urban
ecology, urban ecosystem services, and land use management at the
Tishman Environment and Design Center, The New School, New
York, USA.
Address: Tishman Environment and Design Center, The New School,
New York, NY, USA.
e-mail: mcphearp@newschool.edu
Stephan Pauleit is an urban planner and urban ecologist working on
urban land and green infrastructure planning and management at the
Technical University of Munich, Germany.
Address: Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
e-mail: pauleit@wzw.tum.de
Salman Qureshi is an urban ecologist working at the Humboldt
Universita¨t zu Berlin on urban green spaces and the valuation of
urban ecosystem services.
Address: Humboldt Universita¨t zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
e-mail: salman-qureshi@geo.hu-berlin.de
432
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
123
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en

----- Page 21 (native) -----
Nina Schwarz is an environmental scientist working on urban form
issues, the urban heat island, and energy provision in cities at the
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ in Leipzig,
Germany.
Address: Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ,
Leipzig, Germany.
e-mail: nina.schwarz@ufz.de
Annette Voigt is a geographer and urban ecologist working on land
management and urban systems at the Paris Lodron University of
Salzburg, Austria.
Address: Paris Lodron University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
e-mail: Annette.Voigt@sbg.ac.at
Daniel Wurster is a geographer and urban ecologist working on land
management and urban systems at the Paris Lodron University of
Salzburg, Austria.
Address: Paris Lodron University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
e-mail: daniel.wurster@gmx.at
Thomas Elmqvist is an urban ecologist working at the Stockholm
Resilience Centre, Stockholm, Sweden, on urban resilience and sus-
tainability.
Address: Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm, Sweden.
e-mail: thomase@ecology.su.se
AMBIO 2014, 43:413–433
433
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
www.kva.se/en
123