

----- Page 1 (native) -----
This is a repository copy of A review on selective laser sintering/melting (SLS/SLM) of 
aluminium alloy powders: Processing, microstructure, and properties.
White Rose Research Online URL for this paper:
http://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/90338/
Version: Accepted Version
Article:
Olakanmi, EO, Cochrane, RF and Dalgarno, KW (2015) A review on selective laser 
sintering/melting (SLS/SLM) of aluminium alloy powders: Processing, microstructure, and 
properties. Progress in Materials Science, 74. 401 - 477. ISSN 0079-6425 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmatsci.2015.03.002
© 2015, Elsevier. Licensed under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
eprints@whiterose.ac.uk
https://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/
Reuse 
Unless indicated otherwise, fulltext items are protected by copyright with all rights reserved. The copyright 
exception in section 29 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 allows the making of a single copy 
solely for the purpose of non-commercial research or private study within the limits of fair dealing. The 
publisher or other rights-holder may allow further reproduction and re-use of this version - refer to the White 
Rose Research Online record for this item. Where records identify the publisher as the copyright holder, 
users can verify any specific terms of use on the publisher’s website. 
Takedown 
If you consider content in White Rose Research Online to be in breach of UK law, please notify us by 
emailing eprints@whiterose.ac.uk including the URL of the record and the reason for the withdrawal request.

----- Page 2 (native) -----
1 
 
 
Number of manuscript folios: One hundred and ninety-two (192) pages. 
Number of figures: Sixty-two (62). 
Number of tables: Ten (10). 
Short running title: A review on selective laser sintering/melting (SLS/SLM) of aluminium 
alloy powders: Processing, microstructure, and properties. 
Name of the corresponding author: Dr. Eyitayo Olatunde Olakanmi 
Full mailing address: 58A, Second Avenue, Westdene, Johannesburg 2092, South Africa. 
(e.o.olakanmi@gmail.com) (+27(0)710389307).

----- Page 3 (native) -----
2 
 
 
A review on selective laser sintering/melting (SLS/SLM) of aluminium alloy powders: 
Processing, microstructure, and properties 
E. O. Olakanmia, b; R. F. Cochranea; K. W. Dalgarnoc 
aInstitute for Materials Research, University of Leeds, United Kingdom. 
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Federal University of Technology, Minna. Niger 
State. Nigeria. 
cSchool of Mechanical and Systems Engineering, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, United Kingdom.

----- Page 4 (native) -----
3 
 
 
A review on selective laser sintering/melting (SLS/SLM) of aluminium alloy powders: 
Processing, microstructure, and properties 
 
Abstract  
Manufacturing businesses aiming to deliver their new customised products more quickly and 
gain more consumer markets for their products will increasingly employ selective laser 
sintering/melting (SLS/SLM) for fabricating high quality, low cost, repeatable, and reliable 
aluminium alloy powdered parts for automotive, aerospace, and aircraft applications. However, 
aluminium powder is known to be uniquely bedevilled with the tenacious surface oxide film 
which is difficult to avoid during SLS/SLM processing. The tenacity of the surface oxide film 
inhibits metallurgical bonding across the layers during SLS/SLM processing and this 
consequently leads to initiation of spheroidisation by Marangoni convection. Due to the paucity 
of publications on SLS/SLM processing of aluminium alloy powders, we review the current state 
of research and progress from different perspectives of the SLS/SLM, powder metallurgy (P/M) 
sintering, and pulsed electric current sintering (PECS) of ferrous, non-ferrous alloys, and 
composite powders as well as laser welding of aluminium alloys in order to provide a basis for 
follow-on- research that leads to the development of high productivity, SLS/SLM processing of 
aluminium alloy powders. Moreover, both P/M sintering and PECS of aluminium alloys are 
evaluated and related to the SLS process with a view to gaining useful insights especially in the 
aspects of liquid phase sintering (LPS) of aluminium alloys; application of LPS to SLS process; 
alloying effect in disrupting the surface oxide film of aluminium alloys; and designing of 
aluminium alloy suitable for the SLS/SLM process. Thereafter, SLS/SLM parameters, powder

----- Page 5 (native) -----
4 
 
 
properties, and different types of lasers with their effects on the processing and densification of 
aluminium alloys are considered. The microstructure and metallurgical defects associated with 
SLS/SLM processed parts are also elucidated by highlighting the mechanism of their formation, 
the main influencing factors, and the remedial measures. Mechanical properties such as hardness, 
tensile, and fatigue strength of SLS/SLM processed parts are reported. The final part of this 
paper summarises findings from this review and outlines the trend for future research in the 
SLS/SLM processing of aluminium alloy powders.  
Keywords: Selective laser sintering/melting (SLS/SLM); Liquid phase sintering (LPS); 
Spheroidisation; Powder Metallurgy (P/M); Microstructural evolution, Mechanical 
properties. 
 
Outline 
1. Introduction 
2.  Variants of SLS/SLM Processing of Aluminium Alloys 
3. Relevance of Powder Metallurgy, and Pulsed Electric Current Sintering (PECS) to SLS 
Process of Aluminium Alloys 
3.1 Powder Metallurgy (P/M) Liquid Phase Sintering (LPS) 
3.2 Application of Liquid Phase Sintering (LPS) to SLS Process 
3.3 Oxide Disruption in Pulsed Electric Current Sintering (PECS) Processed Aluminium 
Alloy Powders

----- Page 6 (native) -----
5 
 
 
3.4 Alloy Design for SLS Process 
4. Effects of Processing Parameters and Powder Properties on the SLS/SLM Processing and 
Densification of Powders 
 4.1 SLS/SLM Processing Windows of Aluminium Alloy Powders 
 4.2 Effects of SLS/SLM and Powder Parameters on the Densification Mechanism 
    4.2.1 Scan Line Spacing, Scanning Speed, Laser Power, Layer Thickness, and Energy 
Density on Densification 
     4.2.2 Effects of Scanning Strategy on the Densification Mechanism 
     4.2.3 Effects of SLS/SLM Atmospheres on the Densification Mechanism 
4.3 Effects of Powder Properties on the Densification of Mechanism  
4.3.1 Effect of Particle Size and Distribution on the Densification Mechanism  
4.3.2 Effect of Particle Shape on the Densification Mechanism  
4.2.3 Effect of Alloying Addition and Oxidic Constitution on the Densification 
Mechanism  
4.4 Effects of Laser Types on the Processing and Densification of Metal Powders 
5. Microstructure and Metallurgical Defects in SLS/SLM Fabricated Parts 
5.1 Microstructure of SLS/SLM Fabricated Parts 
   5.1.1 Epitaxial Solidification and SLM

----- Page 7 (native) -----
6 
 
 
   5.1.2 Effects of Processing Conditions on the Microstructure of SLS/SLM Fabricated 
Parts 
    5.1.3 Effects of Powder Properties on the Microstructure of SLS/SLM Processed 
Components 
           5.1.3.1 Effect of Particle Size on the Microstructure of SLS Processed Components 
           5.1.3.2 Effect of Alloying on the Microstructure of SLS Fabricated Components 
5.2 Metallurgical Defects in SLS/SLM Processed Aluminium Alloy Parts 
5.2.1 Porosity 
5.2.2 Cracking 
5.2.3 Oxide Inclusions 
5.2.4 Loss of Alloying Elements 
6. Mechanical Properties of SLS/SLM Fabricated Parts 
6.1 Hardness and Wear Resistance 
6.2 Tensile Strength 
6.3 Fatigue Strength 
7. Perspectives on SLS/SLM Processing of Aluminium Alloy Powders 
8. Future Research Interests 
9. Conclusions 
Acknowledgements

----- Page 8 (native) -----
7 
 
 
References

----- Page 9 (native) -----
8 
 
 
1. Introduction 
Aluminium (Al) alloys; the second most used metal surpassed only by steel; are categorised 
into heat treatable, non-heat treatable and casting alloys [1-4]. Commercial heat treatable Al 
alloys are 2000 (Al-Cu or Al-Cu-Mg), 6000 (Al-Mg-Si), and 7000 (Al-Zn-Mg) series alloys 
whose strength and other properties are enhanced by various heat treatment processes whereas 
non-heat-treatable Al alloys include 1000, 3000, 4000 containing only Si, and 5000 series alloys 
which are strengthened by mechanical deformation processes [1-4]. They are increasingly 
employed in automotive, aerospace, and aircraft applications because of their recyclability, 
excellent strength-to-weight ratio, thermal and electrical conductivity, corrosion resistance, 
formability, and attractive appearance.  
 
Engineering parts made in aluminium alloys have been fabricated by traditional 
manufacturing processes such as casting, forging, extrusion, and powder metallurgy (P/M). 
However, these traditional manufacturing processes have resulted in parts having coarse grain 
structures with the attendant poor mechanical properties as a consequence of low cooling rates 
associated with these processes [5, 6]. Moreover, the adoption of tooling for making Al alloy 
parts through these traditional manufacturing routes increases the cost of production and the lead 
time. Therefore, for manufacturing businesses engaging in the fabrication of aluminium parts and 
aiming to deliver their new customised products more quickly and gain more consumer markets 
for their products, selective laser sintering/melting (SLS/SLM) has become a promising 
manufacturing route for such businesses. This is because SLS/SLM, a layer manufacturing (LM) 
technique, allows parts to be fabricated without any part-specific tools being required; shortens

----- Page 10 (native) -----
9 
 
 
the design and production cycle; and promises to revolutionise the traditional manufacturing 
processes by engendering significant time and cost savings [7, 8].  
 
(A) 
 
 
(B) 
 
Fig. 1. (A) A layered manufacturing (LM) paradigm (B) Generic fixturing [9]. 
 
SLS/SLM creates 3-D parts through the application of laser energy to powder beds via the 3-D 
CAD description of the part geometry from which it derives a 2-D stack of layers which 
represent the part (Fig. 1A). Each layer is then created by scanning a laser spot over the required 
cross-sectional area, and using the laser to melt, sinter and bond particles together in a thin

----- Page 11 (native) -----
10 
 
 
lamina. By spreading a further layer of powder on top of the previously processed layer and 
repeating the scanning process; subsequent layers are created and simultaneously bonded to 
already existing layers until such time as the entire stack of 2-D layers has been created and 
bonded together to form the geometry described by the original 3-D CAD solid model (Fig. 1B). 
Functional graded materials [10], rapid tooling [6, 11] and satellite technology [12] have been 
identified as promising areas for the application of SLS/SLM; Calignano et al. [13] fabricated 
mechanisms for machine and robotic designs via SLS; Das and co-investigators [14, 15] 
demonstrated the feasibility of fabricating components for defence applications by the selective 
laser sintering/hot isostatic pressing (SLS/HIP) technique; Stoodley et al. [11], Hayashi et al. 
[17], Hollander et al. [18], Kanazawa et al. [19] and Wauthle et al. [20] employed SLS/SLM to 
process implants for medical purposes while Vasquez et al. [21] recently developed new SLS 
materials for snowboarding applications. Ardila et al. [22] and Seyda et al. [23] also highlighted 
another important advantage of SLS/SLM in that it allows an efficient use of the material, due to 
the possibility to recycle and reuse un-melted metal powder. They established that after recycling 
powders between 12 to 14 times, there were no significant changes in powder and test parts 
properties (Fig. 2), hence, validating powder recycling methodology for its use in SLS/SLM 
manufacturing. Other outstanding ecological performing indicators of SLS/SLM process include 
reduction in emissions because fewer raw materials need to be produced, design for light-weight 
structuring with a weight reduction and design for performance and indirect usage of toxic 
chemicals like lubricant or coolant in any measurable amount [24, 25].

----- Page 12 (native) -----
11 
 
 
(A) 
 
(B) 
 
Fig. 2. Results from (A) porosity and (B) Charpy impact measurements performed over 
manufactured samples. Each point represents the average % porosity or impact energy 
determined for six samples fabricated in five particular iterations. Red bars indicate standard 
deviation from the average values of porosity and impact energy. The dashed line represents an 
average porosity or impact energy obtained from these five values [22]. 
 
With the expected rapid development and improvement in process capabilities of SLS/SLM in 
the next decade, these examples buttress the fact that SLS/SLM remains the technology of the 
future as human lives continue to depend upon the quality and ease of use of its products in the 
manufacturing, transportation, medicine, sports and electronics sectors.  
 
However, the main drawbacks of SLS/SLM techniques are poor surface quality, and 
dimensional accuracy, as well as material properties (microstructure and mechanical strength) 
that do not meet the pre-requisite for industrial applications. To address these demerits, post-
processing treatments like polishing, painting, heat-treatment, and furnace-infiltration e.t.c. have 
been employed [26]. Again, these post-processing treatments also introduce the burden of 
elongating the production cycle and increasing the cost of production. Meanwhile, investigation 
of appropriate process and material parameters required for obtaining improved surface finish,

----- Page 13 (native) -----
12 
 
 
dimensional accuracy, and mechanical strength of SLS/SLM fabricated parts is also being 
undertaken with a view to eliminating these post-processing steps in order to shorten the lead 
time and reduce production costs.  
 
Recently, SLS/SLM processing of aluminium alloy powders and their composites [24, 27-43, 45] 
has been undertaken with a view to gaining an understanding of laser processability. 
Furthermore, in similarity to laser welding of aluminium alloys, the effectiveness of SLS/SLM 
processing had been found to be a function of physical properties (Table 1) such as low 
absorptivity to the laser beam, tenacious oxide films, low boiling point elements, high thermal 
conductivity, high co-efficient of thermal expansion, relatively wide solidification temperature 
ranges, high solidification shrinkage, a tendency to form low melting constituents, low viscosity, 
and high solubility of hydrogen in liquid state [4, 30, 31, 32, 44, 45]. Meanwhile, in similarity to 
other metallic powders, SLS/SLM of aluminium alloy powders can be bedevilled with 
complications such as balling, porosity, layer distortion, cracking, poor dimensional accuracy 
and surface roughness, and loss of alloying elements [45]. These complications occur because of 
the oxide contamination; development of non-uniform thermal gradients across the processed 
parts; Marangoni convection which inhibits successful melt pool to substrate bonding in SLM or 
inter-particulate bonding in SLS across the layers; and high power density employed for 
SLS/SLM processing [8, 45-47]. It had also been established that these difficulties result in 
components with undesirable microstructures giving rise to poor physical and mechanical 
properties.

----- Page 14 (native) -----
13 
 
 
Table 1 
Properties of pure and alloyed aluminium at its melting point [44] 
Properties (Unit) 
Pure Al 
Ionisation energy (Ev) 
6 
Specific heat (J/kg/K) 
1080 
Specific heat of fusion (J/kg) 
4 x 105 
Melting point (K) 
933 
Boiling point (K) 
2603 
Viscosity (kg/m/s) 
0.0013 
Surface tension (N/m) 
0.84 
Thermal conductivity (W/m/K) 
94.03 
Thermal diffusivity (M2/s) 
3.65 x 10-5 
Expansion co-efficient (1/K) 
24 x 10-6 
Density (kg/m3) 
2385 
Elastic modulus (N/m3) 
7.1 x 1010 
 
 
The focus of this review is to understand the variants of SLS/SLM process, as applicable to 
aluminium alloys, in order to establish the science base of SLS/SLM process for their reliable 
fabrication of parts. Available literature on conventional powder metallurgy (P/M) sintering, and 
pulsed electric current sintering (PECS) of aluminium and its alloys are also evaluated and 
related to the SLS process with a view to gaining useful insights especially in the aspects of 
liquid phase sintering (LPS) of aluminium alloys; application of LPS to the SLS process;

----- Page 15 (native) -----
14 
 
 
alloying effect in disrupting the surface oxide film of aluminium alloys; and designing of 
aluminium alloy suitable for the SLS/SLM process. Moreover, SLS/SLM processing parameters, 
including the process and the laser type; as well as the material-related variables; and their 
effects on the processing and densification of SLS/SLM fabricated parts are presented with a 
view to gaining an understanding of how to mitigate the deleterious effect of oxidation and 
ensuring good wetting and successful layer-by-layer consolidation of SLS/SLM processing of 
aluminium alloys.  
 
 
Due to the paucity of publications on SLS/SLM processing of aluminium alloy powders, 
we review the current state of research and progress mainly from the perspectives of the 
SLS/SLM of ferrous (e.g. alloyed steels), non-ferrous alloys (e.g. titanium alloys), and composite 
powders. Meanwhile, ferrous, non-ferrous, and aluminium alloy powders are being considered 
together in this review because they are very reactive and form very stable oxides. Therefore, 
they all require the use of high vacuum or high-purity inert gas atmosphere for their processing. 
It is expected that insights to be gained from how SLS/SLM processing and material parameters 
promote mechanism of oxide disruption for achieving good microstructural and mechanical 
properties in ferrous, and non-ferrous powders could be helpful in understanding the disruption 
mechanism of aluminium oxides as well as the effect of processing and material parameters 
during laser processing. Thereafter, metallurgical microstructures, and processing defects found 
in SLS/SLM fabricated parts are discussed. The mechanical properties of SLS/SLM processed 
powders are also reported in this article. The final part of this paper explores the developments in

----- Page 16 (native) -----
15 
 
 
the field of SLS/SLM processing of metallic and composite powders as related to aluminium 
alloy powders, and outlines the trend for future research.  
 
2 Variants of SLS/SLM Processing of Aluminium Alloys 
 
It was initially thought that the ease of manufacture by low cost conventional techniques 
such as casting and machining had made the application of SLS/SLM to aluminium alloys 
unattractive [48]. However, other reasons why there had not been much progress reported in the 
SLS/SLM of aluminium alloy powders include:  
 
 the problem of the oxide film present on the surface of the metal powder, the 
thermodynamic stability of aluminium sesquioxide making it difficult to remove 
or avoid, and  
 the relatively low melting point of aluminium which makes it difficult to find a 
suitable lower melting point binder material that belongs to the group of light 
metals in order to generate sufficient amount of liquid phase for binary liquid 
phase SLS processing.  
 
In order to gain the basic understanding of SLS/SLM of aluminium alloy powders with a view to 
overcoming these challenges, the variants of SLS/SLM processing of aluminium alloy powders 
are hereby described as found in the available literature.

----- Page 17 (native) -----
16 
 
 
According to Kruth et al. [49], variants of SLS/SLM are indirect SLS which incorporates 
polymeric binding and debinding stages followed by infiltration; binary liquid phase SLS or 
direct SLS which combines a structural material remaining solid throughout the process and a 
binder material being liquefied with the structural and binder materials occurring in the form of 
coated grains, composite grains, and separate grains; partial melting SLS which occurs in a 
mixture of different powders (multiple phases) having no distinct binder and structural materials, 
bimodal powders, or single phase material; SLM which is able to achieve full melting in single 
component, single material powder; single component, alloyed powder particles; and fusing 
powder mixture; and laser initiated chemically binding mechanisms. It is pertinent to note that 
each SLS/SLM binding or consolidation mechanism culminates in the formation of final parts 
having significantly different microstructure upon comparison with the starting material via the 
manipulation of the SLS/SLM process parameters and the original powder properties presented 
in Table 2. 
 
An extensive search through the available literature reveals the reservation associated with use of 
terminologies for describing SLS/SLM among researchers. For example, Uzunsoy & Chang [51] 
agreed with Simchi et al. [52] in regarding indirect SLS as sintering the base metal powder 
mixed with a polymeric binder with a low energy laser beam to produce a green part. After the 
sintering stage, the polymer is debinded and post-processed via infiltration in a furnace with a 
low–melting point alloy in order to enable the component produced attain full density.

----- Page 18 (native) -----
17 
 
 
Table 2 
SLS/SLM process parameters and material variables influencing the processing and densification 
mechanism of fabricated parts [50]. 
SLS/SLM Processing Parameters 
Material properties 
Laser power 
Viscosity 
Scan rates 
Surface tension 
Atmospheric control 
Particle size and distribution 
Gas flow 
Particle shape 
Heaters (bed temperature) 
Absorptivity/reflectivity 
Laser type 
Thermal conductivity 
Scan radius 
Specific heat 
Scan vector length 
Emissivity 
Scan spacing 
Melting temperature. 
Thickness of layers 
Component ratio 
Machine (specific type) 
Chemical composition. 
 
Sercombe & Schaffer [53] also demonstrated indirect SLS of aluminium alloys (Fig. 3) 
involving the formation of an unconstrained, resin-bonded aluminium powder part, covering the 
part in a magnesium/alumina blanket, burnout of the resin, partial transformation of the 
aluminium into a rigid aluminium nitride skeleton by reaction with nitrogen atmosphere and the 
subsequent infiltration with a second aluminium alloy. Prior to post-processing, the parts 
obtained were characterised with low tensile strength as a consequence of the absence of any 
strengthening mechanism for the pure Al matrix.

----- Page 19 (native) -----
18 
 
 
 
            (A)                                         (B)                                            (C) 
Fig. 3. The microstructural development in indirect SLS of aluminium alloys. (A) green part 
(nylon binder in black, not visible); (B) aluminium nitride skeleton surrounding the aluminium 
grains; (C) infiltrated part [53]. 
 
As noted earlier on, coated grain, composite grain, and separate grain variants have been 
described as binary liquid phase SLS or direct SLS (Fig. 4). This involves the use of a powder 
blend consisting of two or more immiscible alloys of different melting point. In coated grains, a 
structural material is coated with the low melting point binder phase such that the binder material 
is preferentially melted by the impinging laser beam and eventually binds the structural particles 
together (Fig. 4A). Composite grains [39] are obtained via mechanically alloying consisting of 
the binder and the structural material within each individual powder grain with powder particles 
repeatedly milled, fractured and welded together (Fig. 4B).

----- Page 20 (native) -----
19 
 
 
(A)
 (B)   
 (C)     
 
Fig. 4. Variants of binary liquid phase SLS or direct SLS (A) coated grains, (B) composite 
grains, and (C) separate grains [54]. 
 
The separate grain variant of the binary liquid phase SLS or direct SLS consists of blends of the 
larger particle sized structural material of higher melting point and the smaller particle sized 
lower melting point binder material (Fig. 4C). The binder particles are preferentially melted in 
order to bind the high melting point structural particles together. The preferential binder melting 
may be counteracted by higher reflectivity or lower laser absorption of the metallic binder 
material as compared to the structural material) with the combination of small binder particles 
and larger structural particles providing the benefit of better packing with small pores thereby 
favouring fast spreading of the molten binder via capillary forces and fast rearrangement of the 
particles [47]. Laoui et al. [55] employed a separate grain variant of the binary liquid phase SLS 
in which a mixture of ceramic particles (WC) remained solid throughout the production cycle 
and the metal particles (Co) were melted by the laser beam. Parts obtained via binary liquid 
phase SLS could not attain full density because adequate quantity of liquid phase for filling up 
the inter-particulate pores could not be formed (Fig. 5A). Consequently, post-infiltration of 
porous green parts with a low melting point material was incorporated into the process in order 
to enhance the dimensional stability, densification, and mechanical properties of parts (Fig. 5B).

----- Page 21 (native) -----
20 
 
 
(A) 
  (B) 
 
Fig. 5. LPS of WC-Co powder mixture; (A) before infiltration (grey portion: non-molten WC 
particle, white portion: molten Co, dark portion: porosity); (B) after infiltration with low melting 
point material (copper) [55]. 
 
 
Furthermore, partial melting variant of SLS also occurs in a mixture of different powders 
(multiple phases) having no distinct binder and structural materials; bimodal or multimodal 
powders; and single phase material [28, 29]. The partial melting variant of SLS was established 
in bimodal hypoeutectic Al-Si powders by blending the low melting point binder +45-75 ȝm 
AlSi12 powder with higher melting point structural pure aluminium powders with varying 
particle size distribution, component ratio, and chemical composition [29]. Partial melting SLS 
occurred with the melting of the large sized binder AlSi12 particles which bound together the 
smaller sized particles of the structural components. The low melting point AlSi12 powders 
improved the energy efficiency of the partial melting SLS process when added to pure 
aluminium powder because it lowers the melting point of pure aluminium, thus requiring lower 
laser energy density. Furthermore, the addition of 9wt%Si is thought to have reduced the surface 
tension of the melt, thereby resulting in improved wetting behaviour. Because all the SLS 
processed blended hypoeutectic Al-Si powdered particles did not melt, therefore, the process

----- Page 22 (native) -----
21 
 
 
could not be described as “full melting” or SLM; hence, the name “LPS or partial melting” or 
SLS is preferred. 
 
 
Dewidar et al. [56], while agreeing with Simchi and co-investigators [52] as well as 
Uzunsoy & Chang [51] on the definition of indirect SLS, approached SLM by directly heating a 
base-metal powder particles with the laser beam and thereafter infiltrated it with a lower melting 
point alloy in order to enhance the mechanical properties of the components. In assessing the 
work of Dewidar et al. [56], it may be argued that full melting was not achieved since infiltration 
of the porous SLS processed part with with a lower melting point alloy was carried out to 
achieve full densification. Rather, the study of Dewidar et al. [56] could only be described as 
direct SLS since partial melting must have been attained due to the choice of low laser power 
and low scanning speeds used during processing. Analysis of the cited literature on the SLS 
variants confirms that the amount of available liquid phase in the sintering pool controls the 
densification mechanism and the resultant microstructure of the SLS processed parts by altering 
the thermo-kinetic and thermocapillary properties such as viscosity, wettability, and rheological 
properties. 
 
 
However, in agreement with Tang et al. [57]; Kruth et al. [49] described SLM as sintering 
the metal powder directly by the high-energy laser beam to achieve 100% density in a single step 
as opposed to direct or indirect SLS. A study of various SLM literature shows that it requires 
careful process control in order to avoid difficulties such as part distortion, balling and dross

----- Page 23 (native) -----
22 
 
 
formation in the melt pool that cause poor surface quality [47]. Meanwhile, apart from the 
properties of a material system, the choice of process parameters and the types of lasers used for 
consolidation could also determine whether SLS or SLM would be obtained for a typical 
material system. This could be attributed to the duration of the laser-material interaction which 
controls the degree of consolidation that may be obtained in a material system. High laser powers 
combined with low scanning rates would generate SLM whereas; high or low laser powers 
coupled with higher scanning rates would result in SLS. For instance, Olakanmi [40, 45] scanned 
single layers of Al, Al–Mg and Al–Si powders with a CO2 laser (600µm beam diameter) by 
using combinations of laser powers and scanning speeds. The outcome of the study revealed that 
energy densities in the range of 12 to 16J/mm2 were found to be the threshold below which SLS 
(at 100 – 240 mm/s and 50 – 150 W) was predominant and above which SLM (at 50 – 150 mm/s 
and 100 – 240 W) occurred. In contrast, Louvis et al. [27] obtained SLM for aluminium alloys by 
reducing the laser power required and increasing the laser scanning rates, while still producing 
components with a high relative density when they employed MCP realiser fibre laser. 
Furthermore, Burchibender et al. [24] achieved increased high build rate application of selective 
laser melting (SLM) of aluminium by using a new prototype machine tool including a 1 kW fibre 
laser and a multi-beam system.  
 
 
Laser-induced in-situ chemical reactions have also been employed to fabricate Al/Fe2O3 
and Al/TiO2/B4C metal matrix composites (MMCs) [31, 32, 43]. In this process, the laser ignites 
and provides sufficient thermal energy to overcome the activation energy barrier of the reactants 
(Al/Fe2O3 or Al/TiO2/B4C) thereby yielding adequate thermal energy to form chemical

----- Page 24 (native) -----
23 
 
 
compounds. In addition, this technique is preferred to the two-component powder method as a 
result of its inherent benefits in giving rise to fine and uniform distribution of compounds, 
improved consolidation and the release of exothermic energy that promotes the SLS/SLM 
response of the reactants [31, 32, 43]. In-situ chemical reaction synthesis combined with SLM 
opens a new door of opportunity to extend the capabilities of binary liquid phase SLS to process 
high melting point ceramic and intermetallic materials. There exists an optimal blending ratio of 
constituent materials in the newly developed MMCs and an optimal set of processing parameters 
for which the release of large amount of thermal energy and the in-situ chemical reaction are 
controllable with the attendant benefits of reducing the price and running expenditure of an SLM 
machine, thereby widening its versatility. Composite fabrication via SLS/SLM combined with 
in-situ chemical reaction processing is gaining wide acceptance because the processing speed is 
fast, the technology is simple, the time and energy of the preparation are saved and 
manufacturing cost is low. 
 
Although, SLM employs a laser beam to consolidate metallic powders in an attempt to 
achieve 100% density (SLM) in one step, its demerit include the occurrence of balling which 
inhibits inter-particulate melting as a consequence of the presence of the surface oxide film on 
the surface of powder particles which prevent wettability of the liquid metal with its solid form 
due to the initiation of Marangoni convection [47, 49]. Another setback to SLM is the occurrence 
of part distortion or layer delamination due to high temperature gradients [47, 49]. In assessing 
the different approaches of SLS/SLM elucidated earlier on in this section, it is clear that some 
approaches have been developed from a desire to produce a specific material system. According

----- Page 25 (native) -----
24 
 
 
to Dalgarno & Wright [58], the desire to process materials using direct SLS/SLM approach is 
because such materials may be difficult and expensive to process conventionally. Moreover, the 
feasibility of fabricating aluminium alloy parts in direct SLS/SLM will make realisable the 
benefits of time saving, and cost reduction over the indirect SLS with a polymer binder by not 
requiring de-binding and post-processing steps. Although, the possibility of fabricating parts in 
SLS/SLM depends on fundamental material issues, the processing conditions which allow direct 
SLS/SLM, and the size of the component which is to be fabricated; however; indirect SLS with a 
polymer binder is likely to continue to offer the processing of widest range of materials, because 
it concentrates on only using laser scanning to generate shape, with a wide range of subsequent 
processes available to generate strength and consolidate the part [58]. Moreover, binary phase 
SLS appears promising for the processing of composites being one of the methods to build near 
net shape parts of 3D complexity. From the point of view of the quality of part produced, the 
main drawback of the technique resides in the inherent high level of residual porosity which 
requires a post treatment such as re-sintering or infiltration. Additionally, the surface finish 
obtained is rougher compared to parts obtained by powder compaction. Future work needs to 
concentrate on developing a better understanding of processes such as SLS/SLM-induced in-situ 
chemical reactions in producing nanocrystalline aluminium alloy-ceramic composites with a 
view to improving the density and mechanical properties of parts.

----- Page 26 (native) -----
25 
 
 
3 Relevance of Powder Metallurgy, and Pulsed Electric Current Sintering (PECS) to SLS 
Process of Aluminium Alloys 
 
 
At present, very little work has been reported on the SLS/SLM of aluminium alloy parts. 
This section will only relate conventional powder metallurgy (P/M) and pulsed electric-current 
sintering (PECS) of aluminium alloy powders to the SLS process, with a view to gaining relevant 
insights into liquid phase sintering (LPS) of aluminium alloys; application of LPS to the SLS 
process; alloying effects in disrupting the surface oxide film of aluminium alloys; and designing 
of aluminium alloys suitable for the SLS/SLM process.  
 
3.1 Powder Metallurgy (P/M) Liquid Phase Sintering (LPS)  
 
 
The adoption of liquid phase sintering (LPS) in the SLS processing has the benefits of low 
sintering temperature, fast densification, homogenisation, high final densities, and 
microstructures that often possess improved mechanical and physical properties. With regards to 
SLS, an essential requirement for the effective liquid phase sintering is the transient wetting 
liquid (formation of sufficient liquid phase within short durations varying between 0.5 to 5ms) 
which promotes metallurgical bonding or inter-particulate melting across the layers of sintered 
components. German [59] considered the schematic binary phase diagram shown in Fig. 6 and 
suggested the key features of an ideal liquid phase sintering system to be:

----- Page 27 (native) -----
26 
 
 
(1) The additive A should have a lower melting point than the base B. The alternative is a 
low melting point eutectic which does not form liquid phase on spontaneous heating. 
(2)The solubility of the additive A in the base B should be low for the additive to remain 
segregated to particle boundaries. This increases the liquid + solid range and the volume of 
liquid for a given amount of the second added component. 
(3) The base should be soluble in the liquid and it should also have a high diffusivity in the 
liquid in order to ensure high rates of mass transport and therefore rapid sintering. 
 
 
Fig. 6. Phase diagram of an ideal system for LPS [60].

----- Page 28 (native) -----
27 
 
 
 
Fig 7. A schematic diagram contrasting the effects of solubility on densification or swelling 
during LPS [60]. 
 
 
Solubility of the solid in the liquid is a necessary pre-requisite for successful LPS with 
regard to systems having more than 65vol% solid [60]. Solubility promotes re-precipitation and 
increased efficiency in particle arrangement thereby leading to increased sintered density. As 
noted earlier on, solubility of the liquid in the solid is not preferred due to swelling as the liquid 
which diffuses into the solid grains leads to formation of porosity which is difficult to remove 
upon subsequent sintering. Fig. 7 suggests that transient liquid phase can be controlled to 
produce desirable properties as exemplified in Cu-Sn and Cu-Zn systems. The solubility 
parameter (S), which determines whether swelling or shrinkage occurs during LPS, is the ratio of 
the solid solubility (SB) in the liquid to the liquid solubility in the solid (SA). Table 3 presents the 
solubility effects on densification in LPS for various material systems.

----- Page 29 (native) -----
28 
 
 
Table 3 
Solubility effects on densification in LPS [60]. 
Base 
Additive 
Solubility 
ratio,  
(at.%) 
Behaviour 
Al 
Zn 
0.004 
Swell 
Cu 
Al 
0.1 
Swell 
Cu 
Ti 
4 
Shrink 
Fe 
B 
7 
shrink 
Fe 
Cu 
0.07 
Swell 
W 
Fe 
5 
Shrink 
 
 
In regards to SLS processing, the actual amount of dimensional change is a function of the 
processing conditions. Phase diagrams are useful in identifying solubility parameters and other 
features that promotes LPS [60]. A study of an ideal phase diagram for LPS (Fig. 6) reveals that 
a deep eutectic is preferred due to significant reduction in sintering temperature with the 
formation of liquid phase. The formation of intermediate compound is generally unfavourable. 
High-temperature phases can reduce diffusion rates, while brittle intermetallic phases that form 
during cooling can degrade mechanical properties.  
 
 
Fig. 8. Typical microstructure of a LPS system with the phase diagram characteristics shown in 
Fig. 6 [60].

----- Page 30 (native) -----
29 
 
 
 
Furthermore, a phase diagram reveals the tendency of alloying elements and impurities to 
segregate to the interfaces with a downward sloping liquidus and solidus indicating a propensity 
for solute segregation and lower surface energies [60]. Therefore, a sintering temperature just 
above the eutectic temperature is optimal for a composition in the L + ȕ region. A typical LPS 
microstructure is shown in Fig. 8 which consists of relatively large, rounded grains suspended in 
a liquid matrix, with the degree of grain contact governed by the dihedral angle. In a system that 
lacks solubility of the solid in the liquid phase, a rigid skeletal structure is expected with 
densification controlled by solid state diffusion. Use of extremely fine starting powders or 
segregating activators that promote solid-state sintering in the presence of the liquid ensures high 
sintered densities are obtained. 
 
 
Schaffer and co-workers [61] examined the behaviour of a number of likely candidate 
alloys and discovered that Al-Sn, which follows very closely the ideal characteristics described 
in Fig. 6, had a much more desirable sintering response than either Al-Cu or Al-Zn, both of 
which have at least one ideal characteristic. On this premise, they designed the Al–Sn–Mg 
system for uncompacted sintering and were able to achieve near full theoretical density. 
However, the tensile strength of the Al–Sn system was poor because tin could not provide much 
strengthening whereas Mg addition in the Al–Sn–Mg system improved tensile strength. This 
confirms the potency of Mg in disrupting the surface oxide film of aluminium, thus, promoting 
metal/metal bonding. Meanwhile, it is hereby speculated that the addition of tin could have 
reduced the strengthening effect of magnesium in the Al-Sn-Mg powder.

----- Page 31 (native) -----
30 
 
 
 
P/M aluminium alloys can be improved without recourse to hot working or master alloy 
powders if their design is based on an understanding of the underlying sintering processes and 
the characteristics of an ideal liquid phase sintering system [61]. However, this idea can be 
applied to the design of suitable aluminium alloys for the fabrication of parts in SLS process with 
a view to ensuring that the oxide phase of the aluminium powders is disrupted in order to make 
allowance for effective inter-particle bonding/melting across the layers so as to achieve the 
production of full density parts. This entails the determination of the appropriate chemical 
composition of aluminium alloys that make allowance in their thermal cycle for the transient 
nature of the adequate liquid phase during SLS in addition to the alloying elements contained in 
them effectively disrupting the surface oxide of the aluminium powder. Furthermore, designing 
such SLS processable aluminium alloys necessitates that the mechanism of disruption of their 
surface oxide film need to be understood. Therefore, an investigation is necessary to ascertain if 
alloys of the same composition as those employed in the press and sinter technique could give 
equivalent or a better sintering response during SLS without the application of hot working 
processes. If this is not the case, alloys that would give desirable response to SLS need to be 
designed.  
 
3.2 The Application of Liquid Phase Sintering (LPS) to SLS Process 
 
According to Agarwala et al. [50], the most applicable of all the binding mechanisms to 
SLS is the liquid phase sintering/partial melting (LPS) which incorporates the melting of the 
binder material of lower melting point thereby binding together the particles of the structural

----- Page 32 (native) -----
31 
 
 
components of the system. Moreover, the improvement obtained in the mechanical and 
microstructural properties of SLS processed components depends on the success or otherwise of 
the LPS with regard to the amount of liquid phase present. Powder properties such as the size 
distribution and shape of the powder particles, as well as particle arrangement play an important 
role in determining the ideal SLS liquid phase condition. If the processing and powder 
parameters are poorly controlled, difficulties such as balling, microstructural agglomeration, 
layer delamination and porosity are bound to be encountered during the SLS of metals due to the 
initiation of Marangoni convection, and uneven thermal gradient on the powder bed. These 
problems may also arise as a result of improper arrangement of the powder particles on the 
sintering bed. While the role of component ratio of binder material in the SLS of metals will be 
presented in this section, the roles of processing parameters as well as powder properties will be 
discussed in Section 4.2.1. 
 
 
An appropriate choice of the amount (measured in weight percentage) of binder materials 
(which represents the amount of liquid phase formed if complete melting of the binder is 
assumed) has been shown to overcome some of the SLS challenges highlighted in the preceding 
paragraph. Gu & Shen [62-65] demonstrated that there exist optimal component ratios; for each 
of WC-Co particulate reinforcing Cu matrix composites; multi-component Cu-based metal 
powder; and sub-micron W-Cu / micron Cu powder mixture systems. At the binder’s optimal 
component weight ratio, high densification and homogeneous sintered microstructure are 
obtainable as a consequence of favourable viscosity of liquid-solid mixture and the sufficient re-
arrangement of binder and structural particles. However, they noted that when binder content

----- Page 33 (native) -----
32 
 
 
falls below its optimal component weight ratio for each of these systems, severe particulate 
aggregation occurs due to limited liquid formation and the resulting high liquid viscosity due to 
high solid fraction and reduced Marangoni effect.  
 
 
Fig. 9. Optical images of the polished sections of the laser sintered multi-component Cu-based 
metal powder with varying contents (wt%) of binder CuSn in the samples (a) 20 (b) 35 (c) 50 
and (d) 65 [63]. 
 
With the binder content increasing beyond its optimal component ratio, the laser sintered 
densities of the parts made in each of these powder systems deteriorates because of the initiation 
of the balling phenomenon and uneven thermal gradient. Experimental evidence has revealed 
that the fractional amount of liquid phase yielding optimal densification and homogeneous 
microstructure (Fig. 9) for the SLS of various powder systems are as shown in Table 4. In 
conclusion, all these studies attest to the fact that the determination of the optimal liquid phase

----- Page 34 (native) -----
33 
 
 
amount for SLS, for which a pore-free microstructure is obtainable, is complex and significantly 
influenced by chemical composition and component ratio which in turn is affected by the 
packing density of the blended powder bed as well as the viscosity of the laser sintered powders 
powder systems. 
Table 4 
Fractional amount of liquid phase generated in various SLS processed metal systems. 
Material 
Binder material 
Fractional 
liquid phase. 
Ref. No. 
Multi-component 
Cu-
based metal powder 
 
CuSn 
0.5 
[63] 
Sub-micron WC-Cop / 
Cu bulk metal matrix 
composites 
 
Cu 
0.7 
[64] 
Sub-micron 
W-Cu 
/ 
micron 
Cu 
powder 
mixture 
Micron Cu powder 
0.6 
[65] 
Fe-Cu system 
Cu 
0.3 
[66] 
 
It is now evident that the fraction of liquid phase available in the sintering pool of SLS of metals 
determines the densification and microstructure of the laser processed parts by influencing the 
thermo-kinetic and thermocapillary properties such as viscosity, wettability and rheological 
characteristics [50]. Table 4 suggests that provided appropriate SLS processing parameters are 
used, the optimal liquid fraction existing at the binder‘s optimum component ratio is dependent 
on the energy gain of the powder and is partly controlled by the weight fraction of the binder in 
the powder mixture.

----- Page 35 (native) -----
34 
 
 
3.3 Oxide Disruption in Pulsed Electric Current Sintering (PECS) Processed Aluminium Alloy 
Powders 
 
 
Xie et al. [67] studied the behaviour of oxide films at the interface between pure Al 
powdered particles in pulse electric-current sintering (PECS) and its effect on the properties of 
the sintered specimens. It was shown that the occurrence of direct metal/metal bonding interfaces 
increases the mechanical properties of the sintered aluminium powder whereas the metal oxide 
film layer/metal bonding interfaces produced contrary effect on its mechanical properties. This 
finding established that by increasing the loading pressure at high sintering temperatures, or 
increasing the sintering temperature under loading pressure, the breakdown of the oxide film was 
promoted. Moreover, Xie et al. [68] investigated the reduction mechanism of the surface oxide 
film and microstructure of interfaces between powder particles in Al-Mg alloy specimens 
sintered by pulse electric-current (PECS) process. They established that nano-sized crystalline 
precipitates, which may be MgAl2O4, MgO, or both, were formed by the reduction reaction by 
magnesium and were observed in all of the Al-Mg alloy specimens which they studied. They 
attributed the type of crystalline precipitates formed to the variation in the Mg content in the 
alloy powder and the sintering temperature.  
 
 
Furthermore, Liu et al. [69] showed that particle shape seems to be a significant factor 
controlling the P/M sintering response of uncompacted aluminium powder. In addition, they 
suggested that the differential thermal expansion between the aluminium particle and its oxide 
film may cause the oxide skin to fracture and that the fracture characteristics differ as a

----- Page 36 (native) -----
35 
 
 
consequence of powder morphology. It was elucidated that the oxide shell in irregularly shaped 
particles tend to crack and heal more frequently than in smooth, spherical shaped particles 
because of the tendency of the irregular particles to scavenge more oxygen during heating than 
spherical particles. It was also posited that this eventually resulted in greater weight gain 
observed in the sintered irregular powder particles than the spherical particles due to outer layers 
made from irregular particles providing a more effective autogenous gettering zone than outer 
layers made up of spherical particles. Therefore, it can be inferred that the sintering mechanism 
of aluminium powders can differ on the basis of the sintering technique adopted, chemical 
composition, and particle surface morphology. Moreover, it is evident from the cited literature 
that oxide cleanliness is important in order to achieve inter-particulate bonding if parts having 
structural integrity will be fabricated via SLS/SLM. Therefore, a mechanism elucidating the 
reduction of the surface oxide film during SLS/SLM processing of aluminium powders need to 
be proposed as well as the associated factors that aid or inhibit its occurrence in practice.  
 
3.4 Alloying Design for the SLS Process  
 
 
To fabricate components using the binary liquid phase SLS process, sintering from a low 
green density to a high final density is required. To achieve this aim, the use of additives that 
promote the formation of liquid phase and improve wettability is a simple and inexpensive 
technique that is feasible. Many researchers have expended significant efforts in attempting to 
increase densification by improving the wettability in SLS. Among numerous approaches 
adopted by various research groups are the use of in-situ deoxidiser or fluxing agent, and

----- Page 37 (native) -----
36 
 
 
alloying additions. This section is devoted to a review of the literature on the use of fluxing 
agents and alloying additions to enhance the densification mechanism in SLS processed 
powders. 
 
 
Fluxing agents which are used in brazing and soldering can improve wetting effectively 
during sintering due to their ability to de-oxidise and reduce the surface tension of the solid-
liquid-vapour interface [70]. Agarwala et al. [50] examined the role of phosphorus in SLS of 
bronze (Cu-10wt%Sn)-nickel powder. They were able to determine an optimum processing 
window for which a density of around 70% was obtained without any significant balling or 
spheroidisation. Zhu et al. [71] found the formation of Cu2O in a copper-based powder (Cu-
40%wtSCuP) to be sensitive to the scan spacing as a consequence of a lack of Cu3P protection 
under the re-heating condition if a small scan spacing was used. Moreover, they discovered that 
atomic diffusion was the densification mechanism at fast scan speed and high scan spacing 
whereas solute-reprecipitation was noted to be the predominant mechanism for densification at 
low scan rates and small scan spacings. Although, Zhu and co-workers [71] did not elaborate on 
the role of Cu3P in improving wetting between sintered layers and enhancement of densification, 
Zhu et al. [70] investigated the influence of varying contents of brazing flux on the wettability 
and densification in the direct laser sintering of Cu-based metallic powder (Cu-40%wt.SCuP). 
Their findings revealed that small amount of flux increased the densification and sinterability. A 
large amount of flux additive had a negative effect, however, with balling taking place and a 
residual covering of flux on the surface leading to a deterioration of adhesion between the 
sintered layers [70].

----- Page 38 (native) -----
37 
 
 
 
On the basis of the characteristics of phase diagrams of ideal sintering systems, alloying 
elements have been used to enhance the sintering behaviour of metallic systems (see Fig. 6 in 
Section 3.1). In these systems, the mechanism of enhancement is the formation of eutectic liquid 
phase and, since the solubility of the additive in the structural metallic component is low, the 
liquid remains segregated to particle boundaries. Sercombe [72] added boron to maraging steels 
with the aim of producing high hardness rapid tooling. His findings showed that the reaction of 
0.4% boron with the alloying elements in the maraging steel resulted in the formation of Mo- and 
Ti- rich borides, thereby providing a liquid phase for enhanced sintering to produce a near full 
density component. Chen et al. [73] also found that the inclusion of titanium in steel samples 
improved the bonding of the sample to the substrate and reduced the extreme hardness of the 
material. A search of the literature on the effect of alloying elements on the densification 
mechanisms of SLS processed aluminium powders has yielded no result. Hence, in order to gain 
an understanding of the role that alloying additions play in the sintering/melting of aluminium 
powders, results from conventional powder metallurgy must be considered. 
 
 
It is an established fact that trace elements facilitate the sintering of aluminium and its 
alloys by the formation of liquid phase. This initiates a change from the solid state to liquid 
phase sintering with corresponding increase in sintering rates. Sercombe & Schaffer [74, 75] had 
observed that trace additions (0.1 wt%) of Sn, Pb, Bi, and Sb enhanced densification during 
sintering of aluminium alloys and dramatically improved their tensile properties. This 
observation could be attributed to the high vacancy binding energy of the trace elements used as 
well as their insolubility. Schaffer et al. [76] proposed a mechanism by which as little as

----- Page 39 (native) -----
38 
 
 
0.07wt% lead, tin, or indium promotes sintering in an Al-Zn-Mg-Cu alloy. They stated that the 
sintering enhancement was as a result of the segregation of the micro-alloying additions to the 
liquid-vapour interface thereby lowering the effective surface tension of the oxides. McPhee et 
al. [77] discovered that the segregation of iron into the inter-granular liquid pools retards the 
liquid film migration rate in aluminium alloys while alloys with low iron levels develop few 
intergranular pools and have higher sintered densities. Delgardo et al. [78] examined the effect of 
the second liquid phase coming from the addition of eutectic Al-Si on the super solidus liquid 
phase sintering (pre-alloyed powder) and liquid phase sintering (pre-mixed powders) of Al-Cu 
2XXX series. Their result showed an improvement in AA2014 (Al-4.4wt%Cu-0.7wt%.Si-
0.4wt%Mg) densification and mechanical properties but the product was noted to have been 
bedevilled with porous microstructure while Alumix 123 (Al-4.4%wt.Cu-0.6%wt.Si-
0.5%wt.Mg) densification and microstructure improved by having lower amount of porosity but 
had lower bending strength. MacAskill et al. [79] studied the effects of magnesium and tin on the 
sintering response of air atomized aluminum powder by considering nature of the raw powders 
and their concentrations. MacAskill and co-investigators [79] established that magnesium 
additions improved the sintering response of the aluminum powder and increased the propensity 
for reaction with gaseous nitrogen while tin dampened this effect. They concluded that the most 
desirable sintering response was obtained for Al–1.5Sn–1.5Mg alloy. Moreover, Gökçe et al. 
[80] reported on the sintering kinetics of aluminum powder pre-mixed with copper and 
magnesium powders at both macro- and micro-level respectively with a view to producing light 
and strong Al-based powder metallurgy alloys. They discovered that high strength Al-based 
powder metallurgy alloys were developed with good microstructure from the pre-mixed

----- Page 40 (native) -----
39 
 
 
elemental Al5Cu and Al5Cu0.5Mg compositions with the transverse rupture strength value after 
sintering of the base Al powder increasing five times from 84 MPa to 466 MPa.  
 
 
The foregoing discussion shows that the sintering mechanism of various aluminium alloys 
differ depending on specific micro-alloying elements and, sometimes, the bulk alloy 
composition. The insight gained from the powder metallurgy (P/M) studies on the effect of trace 
elements on the densification of aluminium alloys could be useful in the SLS/SLM processing of 
aluminium alloys. This could be applied by investigating the effect of alloying elements on the 
sintering mechanisms of various aluminium alloys under the SLS/SLM processing conditions. 
This investigation is very important because the SLS/SLM processing technique differs 
significantly from the conventional sintering process. Furthermore, from the available literature, 
no in-situ-deoxidiser or fluxing agents has been developed for aluminium alloys such that it 
could promote wettability between the various layers thus improving densification. The 
requirement for such an in-situ-deoxidiser or fluxing agent should be such that it would not leave 
any residue on the layers which could impair the coherence of the layers of the components 
being formed.

----- Page 41 (native) -----
40 
 
 
4 Effects of Processing Parameters and Powder Properties on the SLS/SLM Processing and 
Densification of Powders  
 
 
Metallic powders have a higher degree of contamination by moisture, organics, adsorbed 
gases, oxide and nitride films on particle surfaces due to their much higher surface area per unit 
volume when compared to cast or wrought components [46]. These contaminants not only inhibit 
successful wetting, which promotes interlayer bonding and densification of the melted powder, 
but also degrade the mechanical properties and part geometry of the consolidated component 
during SLM [46]. SLM of metals is considered to be far more difficult than the laser sintering of 
polymers, direct or indirect SLS of metals because of the oxidation, balling and uneven thermal 
gradients across the layers which may cause poor interlayer bonding, low density, weak strength 
and rough surface of the SLM processed part [8, 46, 57, 81]. For this reason, findings from 
several studies have described SLS/SLM as a very complicated process, and suggested that 
several parameters influence the densification mechanism and the attendant microstructural 
features of materials processed by SLS/SLM. The main process parameters that determine the 
processing as well as the quality characteristics of a component fabricated by SLS/SLM 
technique are as listed in the first column of Table 2 whereas the characteristics of powder 
material which are of special concern are listed in its second column. 
 
 
In an attempt to mitigate the deleterious effect of oxidation as well as ensuring good 
wetting and successful layer- by-layer consolidation in direct laser sintering of metals, various 
approaches have been adopted by SLM investigators: sintering in an inert atmosphere like argon,

----- Page 42 (native) -----
41 
 
 
neon, and nitrogen which renders the oxidation process inactive or slows it down; disruption of 
the surface oxide film by alloying addition; determining the optimal processing parameters that 
allows minimal balling; re-melting of the underlying substrate in order to break down the surface 
contaminants to ensure a clean surface at the atomic level between the solid and the liquid; and 
incorporation of fluxing additives [5, 45, 46, 61, 71, 76, 81-85]. The objective of this section is to 
determine from the available literature, the possible effects of the SLS/SLM parameters and 
powder properties on the processing and densification phenomena of components produced from 
aluminium alloys. Where literature on SLS/SLM processing of aluminium alloy powders are not 
readily available to elucidate their SLS/SLM response, studies on ferrous (e.g. steel, iron) and 
non-ferrous (e.g. titanium e.t.c.) powders have been employed to achieve the aim of this section. 
As noted earlier on, these alloyed powders are being considered together in this section because 
they are very reactive and form very stable oxides. Therefore, they all require the use of high 
vacuum or high-purity inert gas atmosphere for their processing. It is expected that insights to be 
gained from how processing and material parameters promote mechanism of oxide disruption for 
achieving good microstructural and mechanical properties in these powders could be helpful in 
understanding the disruption mechanisms of aluminium oxides as well as how processing and 
materials parameters favour this during laser processing. 
 
4.1 SLS/SLM Processing Windows of Aluminium Alloy Powders 
 
 
In order to gain an in-depth understanding of the consolidation behaviour of SLS/SLM 
processed aluminium alloys, it is important that the processing windows which allow for the

----- Page 43 (native) -----
42 
 
 
construction of continuous surfaces devoid of balling phenomenon in order to build multiple 
layers must be established. The processing windows for pure- Al, pre- alloyed Al-Mg, and 
AlSi12 powders were investigated by employing laser power and scanning speeds in the range of 
20-240W and 20-250mms-1 respectively at a constant scan spacing of 0.1mm [40, 45]. Four 
regions of behaviour identified for all powders were: no marking, partial marking, good 
consolidation, and excessive balling (Fig. 10). The processing windows (Fig. 10A to E) show 
similar trends for all powders investigated, although, there were differences in the location of 
boundaries of the different regions between powders. The region of partial marking, even though 
coherently bonded, was characterised by the occurrence of very low strength single layer 
samples which could not be held by hand without fracture occurring; whereas the region of good 
consolidation consists of coherently bonded layers having high strength which enables the 
samples to be held by hand. The area of good consolidation should be a favourable region for the 
construction of multiple layers in SLS/SLM while the region of excessive balling which is 
undesirable is characterised by the formation of large size melt pools which hinder the 
construction of subsequent layers.

----- Page 44 (native) -----
43 
 
 
(A) 
 (B) 
 (C) 
  
(D) 
 (E) 
 
1: No marking; 2: Partial Marking; 3: Good Consolidation 4: Excessive Balling 
Fig. 10. Processing window for single layer parts made in (A) air atomised pure aluminium (AL-1) (B) gas atomised pure aluminium 
(AL-2) (C) water atomised Al-5.6Mg (AL-3) (D) water atomised Al- 6Mg (AL-4) and (E) gas atomised Al-12Si AL-5 powders (AL-
5) (Note: Reciprocals of slopes f-a, f-b, and f-c, were computed and multiplied by the reciprocal of scan spacing (0.1 mm) in order to 
obtain the applied energy density). Processing conditions are laser powers (20-240W), scan rates (20-250mms-1), and scan spacing 
0.1mm [40].

----- Page 45 (native) -----
44 
 
 
 
1: No marking; 2: Partial Marking; 3: Good Consolidation 4: Excessive Balling 
Fig. 11. Relationship between the various regions of processing map and the surface morphology 
of SLS/SLM processed aluminium powder at a laser power of 150 W, scan spacing of 0.1 mm, 
and varying scanning rates [40].  
 
Fig. 11 depicts the relationship between the various regions of processing map and the surface 
morphology at a laser power of 150 W, scan spacing of 0.1 mm, and varying scanning rates for 
aluminium alloy powders when its single layer coupons were produced on the powder bed 
substrate. At scanning rates below 80mm/s, the pores appeared to be large in size and the inter-
agglomerates were fully dense as the laser increases. This corresponds to the excessive balling 
region of the processing map. Further increment in the range of scanning rates between 80mm/s 
to 150 mm/s when laser power varies between 120 W to 240 W, resulted in formation of fairly 
dense structures consisting of small closed pores (region of minimal balling). As the laser power 
varies from 50 W to 240 W at high scanning rates (150 to 240 mm/s), surface morphology

----- Page 46 (native) -----
45 
 
 
appeared smooth, but less dense while it was characterised with lateral pores (region of partial 
marking). These observations conform to the discoveries made by Niu & Chang [5] in their 
studies on the SLS of M2 high speed steels. An observation of the surface morphology of 
SLS/SLM processed samples revealed that the agglomerates were no longer seen in samples AL-
1, AL-2, AL-3, and AL-4 powders, but were replaced by a continuous skeleton structure. 
However, a fairly dense structure with closed pores whereas a relatively smooth and almost fully 
dense sintered surface was obtained for AL-5. This indicates that pre-alloyed elements in the 
aluminium powders influence the evolution of the nature of its surface morphology during 
SLS/SLM processing. 
 
Moreover, the existence of the observed regions in the processing windows with the associated 
surface morphologies could be attributed to the following reasons: 
  The existence of the region of “no marking” (Fig. 10) is affected by the extremely short 
duration of laser-material interaction/lowest energy density (less than 3.2 J/mm2) which 
permits no inter-particulate bonding to take place due to the adoption of scanning 
velocities above 50mm/s at laser powers less than 80W during SLS process.  
 The formation of the “partial marking” region (Fig. 10) in which the morphology of laser 
sintered surfaces is characterised by a network of agglomerates with a large amount of 
small, open, and deep pores (Fig. 11) could be explained by the generation of lower 
energy density (3.3 to 10 J/mm2) resulting from the adoption of laser powers ranging 
from above 80 to 240 W at scan rates varying between 80 to 250 mm/s. This condition

----- Page 47 (native) -----
46 
 
 
leads to the generation of inadequate liquid phase that consequently produce low inter-
particulate bonding evident in Fig. 11. 
 
 The attainment of the region designated “good consolidation” (Fig. 10) which is 
characterised by almost or fairly (i.e. 60 to 80%) dense structures consisting of closed 
pores (Fig. 11) could be ascribed to the adoption of higher energy densities in the range 
of 12 to less than 30 J/mm2 which leads to the formation of adequate amount of liquid 
phase that promotes full melting. This outcome is in agreement with findings from Khan 
& Dickens [86]. The energy densities resulting in the formation of “good consolidation 
region” are derivable from laser power ranging between 100 to 240 W and scan rates 
varying between 80 mm/s to 200 mm/s. It is believed that energy densities in the range of 
12 to less than 30 J/mm2 increase the powder bed temperature, while reducing the 
viscosity of molten pool of the SLM processed powders, thereby facilitating more 
efficient densification with the solid powdered particles as elucidated by Khan & Dickens 
[86].  
 
 Furthermore, the occurrence of rough and 100% dense structures (Fig. 11) associated 
with the region of “excessive balling” (Fig. 10) could be ascribed to the highest range of 
energy densities resulting from the combined effect of higher laser powers at the lower 
scan rates (80 mm/s or less). Similar to findings from Zhang et al. [87], energy densities 
from 30 J/mm2 or more generated at this instance is believed to have led to the formation 
of excess amount of liquid phase that resulted in the formation of balling (Fig. 11).

----- Page 48 (native) -----
47 
 
 
 
From the foregoing discussion, an energy density in the range of 12 to 16 J/mm2 was found 
to be the threshold below which SLS was predominant and above which SLM of aluminium 
powders occurred. This implies that the occurrence of various regions (Fig. 10) in the SLS/SLM 
processing window as well as the attendant microstructure is dependent on the laser energy 
density (see Eq. (1)) that generates a varying amount of liquid phase for inter-particulate 
bonding/melting, rather than laser power or scanning rate in isolation.  
ɗ ൌ PȀuh                                                                                                    (1) 
where ɗ is the specific laser energy input,  P is the laser power (W), u is the scan rate (mm/s); 
and h is the scan spacing (mm). 
Finally, the four regions identified in Olakanmi’s [40] study are similar to the regions reported 
for direct SLS/SLM processing maps studies on gold, and Mg-9Al powders by Khan and 
Dickens [86]; and Zhang et al. [87] respectively. 
 
 
Further comparison of the SLS/SLM processing windows for AL1, AL-2, AL-4 and AL-5 
(Fig. 10A, B, D, and E) reveals that they are all identical as exemplified by the occurrence of the 
region of good consolidation for all the powders when scanning rates were varied between 80 
mm/s to 200 mm/s when laser power in the range of 100 to 240 W were applied. This behaviour 
could be attributed to the powders’ tapping densities (Fig. 12) which are similar to one another 
and influence their thermal conductivities. Although, oxide content (Table 5) in AL-1 (15.9wt %) 
is higher than that of AL-2 (6.5wt %), AL-4 (4.6wt%), and AL-5 (2.8wt%) while the powder 
densities (Fig. 12) for all the powders are similar. This implies that predominant differences in

----- Page 49 (native) -----
48 
 
 
the oxide contents of pure aluminium powders AL-1, AL-2, AL-4, and AL-5 appear to have little 
or no effect on the nature of processing maps obtained for them. The processing map for AL-3 
(Fig. 10C) reveals significant differences in its features when compared with other powdered 
samples as illustrated in the processing condition for the region of good consolidation: scan rates 
varying between 80 mm/s to 150 mm/s for AL-3 at the instance when the applied laser power 
was between 120 to 240W. A cursory look through the powder properties shows substantial 
differences in the powder densities, but similar oxide and magnesium contents (Table 5) for AL-
3 and AL-4 powders (Fig. 12). Since the differences in oxide contents of the powders have little 
or no influence on the processing maps of powders, it may be suggested that the similarity in the 
oxide and magnesium contents of AL-3 and AL-4 has little or no influence of their processing 
maps. 
 
 
Fig. 12. Apparent, Tapping, and Bed densities of the aluminium powders [40]. 
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
1.80
2.00
AL-1
AL-2
AL-3
AL-4
AL-5
Average powder density (g/cm3) 
Powder 
Apparent  Density
Tapping  Density
Bed  Density

----- Page 50 (native) -----
49 
 
 
Table 5 
Elemental Composition of the Powdered Samples by Semi-quantitative EDS Analysis (weight 
%) [40, 45]. 
Powdered Samples        Aluminium         Magnesium         Silicon                  Oxygen 
AL-1                                      84.1                       -                      -                              15.9 
AL-2                                      93.5                      -                       -                               6.5 
AL-3                                      89.3                      5.7                   -                                5.0 
AL-4                                      89.4                      6.0                   -                                4.6 
AL-5                                      85.1                       -                    12.1                             2.8 
 
 
Therefore, significant differences noted in the processing maps of AL-3 when compared 
with other powders could be attributed to the variations encountered in their tapping densities. 
As such, the degree of sphericity of AL-3 particles is significantly lower than that of other 
powders (Fig. 12). In line with German’s [89] observation that irregularly shaped particles 
characterised by high surface area per unit volume have the tendency to absorb more thermal 
energy during P/M sintering. Therefore, it is evident that higher content of irregular particles in 
AL-3, than is found in other powders is responsible for the occurrence of the good consolidation 
region at lower boundary of the scan rates (80mm/s to 150 mm/s) as the nature of its particle 
morphology requires more laser energy density for its melting. Moreover, the similarities 
existing in the processing maps of AL-1, AL-2, AL-4 and AL-5 as a consequence of similarities 
in their tapping densities suggest that alloying additions of magnesium and silicon to aluminium 
powders have no predominant effect on the processing map boundaries of these powders. Rather,

----- Page 51 (native) -----
50 
 
 
alloying addition has a significant effect on the nature of the evolved surface morphology of 
SLS/SLM processed aluminium powders in their processing windows. 
 
Dadbakhsh et al. [33] also examined the role of Fe2O3 additives in the development of the 
SLM processing window of pure aluminium powder. They reported that in-situ material reaction 
between Al and Fe2O3 powder released extra heat and energy which promoted the formation of a 
molten pool and improved the SLM processability over a wide range of SLM parameters. The 
released energy (which is proportional to Fe2O3 content) is capable of manipulating the visual 
surface profile and roughness. Higher amounts of Fe2O3 additive were found not to have 
provided a positive effect on the part density as inclusions suppress fluidity, which presumably is 
more effective than that of extra heat to increase fluidity. However, irrespective of the negative 
influence of increasing content of Fe2O3 on density, hardness significantly increases with higher 
Fe2O3 content because of the superior microstructural features of a particle reinforced matrix.  
 
The processing windows (Fig. 13) plotted on the basis of surface roughness, density, and 
hardness confirm that different ranges of laser powers and scanning speeds are required for 
fabricating composite samples, as Fe2O3 content varies in the aluminium matrix. The study 
carried out by Dadbakhsh et al. [33] establishes the important role of Fe2O3 additive in 
expanding the processing windows and stabilising SLM processing of pure aluminium powders 
to scanning rates greater than 500 m/s in comparison to the outcome of Olakanmi [40] in which 
the highest scanning rates for good consolidation of aluminium alloy powders was 200 mm/s.

----- Page 52 (native) -----
51 
 
 
This is beneficial in the sense that higher production rates and reduced energy consumption for 
SLM production are achieved.  
 
(A) 
  
(B) 
 
(C) 
 
Fig. 13. SLM processing windows for the SLM parts fabricated from (A) Al/5wt.% Fe2O3, 
(B) Al/10wt.% Fe2O3 and (C) Al/15wt.% Fe2O3 powder mixture [33].

----- Page 53 (native) -----
52 
 
 
When developing processing maps for aluminium alloy powders with a view to 
fabricating multi-layer parts, there are many factors (especially powder thermal properties) that 
play significant roles in the determination of resultant properties of fabricated parts (see Table 2). 
Some of these factors will be discussed in the remaining part of this section; however these are 
not exhaustive, and it is expected that further issues will be uncovered as development in 
SLS/SLM processing of aluminium alloy powders advances. To date, only two papers cited 
earlier in this section addressed the development of processing maps for aluminium alloys. It is 
unclear at this stage, as a result of the paucity of publications concerning SLS/SLM processing 
maps of aluminium alloy powders if the processing issues will be applicable to other aluminium 
powders which have not been investigated. However, this is unlikely to occur going by the 
findings from Olakanmi [40] and Dadbakhsh et al. [33] where variation in the processing maps 
of investigated powders had been reported.  
 
4.2: Effects of SLS/SLM and Powder Properties Parameters on the Densification Mechanism  
 
4.2.1: Effects of Laser Power, Scanning Speed, Scan Spacing, Layer Thickness, and Energy 
Density on Densification  
 
Ghosh et al. [43] investigated an in-situ multi-component reinforced aluminum based metal 
matrix composite, consisting of different mixtures of Al, TiO2 and B4C powders, fabricated by 
the combination of self-propagating high-temperature synthesis and SLS processes as layer 
thickness, laser power, scanning speed, hatching distance or scan spacing and powder

----- Page 54 (native) -----
53 
 
 
composition were varied in an attempt to optimise for higher density, lower porosity via Taguchi 
design of experiments (DOE). Their results, reproduced in Fig. 14, established that the density of 
the specimen mainly depends upon the scan spacing, composition and layer thickness; whereas; 
scan spacing, layer thickness and laser power are the significant parameters which influence the 
porosity. Nevertheless, this outcome is contrary to Read et al. [41] who reported that laser power, 
scan speed, and the interaction between the scan speed and scan spacing have major influence on 
the porosity development in the SLM processed AlSi10Mg alloy builds. The variation in how the 
processing parameters influence the densification behaviour of the materials may possibly be 
attributed to different mechanisms of SLS/SLM arising from the chemical composition of the 
primary alloys and the additives. Fig. 15 shows the effect of SLS laser processing parameters on 
the sintered density of multiple layer parts made in AlSi12 powder as investigated by Olakanmi 
and co-investigators [28]. At constant laser power (P=240 W), an increase in scan line spacing 
decreased the part’s density (Fig. 15A). When scan line spacing was held constant (h=0.3mm), 
the sintered density reduced with increasing scan velocity or decreasing laser power (Fig. 15B). 
Using increasing layer thickness resulted in a lower attainable density (Fig. 15C). It was inferred 
that intensifying the laser energy input (increasing laser power, decreasing scan velocity, a 
thinner layer thickness, and overlapping of scan lines) leads to higher densification with a scan 
velocity of 120mm/s found to be a critical speed, above which a sound part was not obtained. 
Analysis of the findings by Ghosh et al. [43] and Read et al. [41] shows that the use of Taguchi 
design of experiments (DOE) allows a systematic planning of experiments which provides a 
more detailed understanding of the factors which control the SLS/SLM process in addition to

----- Page 55 (native) -----
54 
 
 
highlighting the relevant contribution of each factor to the successful consolidation of SLS/SLM 
processed specimens in comparison to one-by-one variable test adopted by Olakanmi et al. [28]. 
 
(A) 
 
(B) 
 
Fig. 14. Effect of SLS processing conditions on the density of an in-situ multi-component 
reinforced aluminum based metal matrix composite: (A) Main plots for density and (B) Main 
plots for porosity [43].

----- Page 56 (native) -----
55 
 
 
(A)
 
(B)
 
(C)
 
Fig. 15. (A) Variation of the density of SLS processed AlSi12 powder with scan spacing at fixed 
laser power (240 W); (B) Variation of the density of SLS processed AlSi12 powder with 
scanning rates at different laser powers. and layer thickness (0.25 mm); and (C) Variation of the 
density of SLS processed AlSi12 powder with layer thickness at fixed laser power (240 W), 
scanning rate (120 mm/s); scan spacing (0.1 mm) [28].

----- Page 57 (native) -----
56 
 
 
Furthermore, of much importance is the need to identify, categorise and prioritise the influencing 
SLS/SLM parameters and their interdependencies in order to ensure high process stability and 
reproducibility while reducing resource consumption and minimising uneconomic application of 
these processes as pointed out by Krol et al. [90]  who developed procedure models (Fig. 16A) 
for an efficient and target figure dependent analysis of a high amount of different process 
parameter constellations via simulation models (Fig. 16B).  
 
 
Meanwhile, the assertion by Olakanmi et al. [28] that densification is improved as the laser 
power increases and as the scan speed, layer thickness and scan spacing decrease is also found to 
be true for other materials such as Ni-Sn and Cu-Solder (Pb-Sn) [50], and Ni-alloy-Cu and Fe-Cu 
[91]. The implications of these findings with regard to how variation in processing parameters 
influences the occurrence of densification mechanism either through full melting (SLM), partial 
melting or  binary liquid phase sintering (SLS) of metals (see Table 6) will now be considered. 
Similar to the P/M sintering process, it is an established fact that high temperature in SLS/SLM 
leads to a low contact angle and viscosity and high Marangoni flow thus improving densification 
[59]. Marangoni flow (Fig. 17) can be described as the initiation of thermocapillary forces for 
fluid flow as a consequence of the temperature gradient in the melt pool which gives rise to a 
corresponding differential surface tension between the edge and center of the melt pool [5, 56, 
92-94]. Several researchers [5, 28, 41, 43, 56, 71, 85, 92-94] have related this fact to the volume 
fraction of the liquid phase formed during SLS/SLM processing as shown in the next paragraph.

----- Page 58 (native) -----
57 
 
 
(A) 
 
(B) 
 
Fig. 16: (A) Procedure for a target dependent database. (B) Correlation and prioritisation matrix 
[90 ]

----- Page 59 (native) -----
58 
 
 
Table 6 
Summary of application of SLS/SLM to metal systems. 
Material 
Key findings 
Comments 
AlSi12 
Partial melting (SLS) 
Partial melting indicates the choice 
of energy density is not sufficient to 
cause full densification. 
High speed steels Partial 
melting 
(SLS) 
incorporated 
with 
post-
infiltration to achieve full 
densification. 
 
Partial melting indicates the 
choice of energy density is not 
sufficient to cause full densification. 
AlSi10Mg 
Full melting (SLM) resulted in 
densification. 
Applicable 
to 
single 
component, single material (e.g. 
AlSi10Mg) 
in 
which 
adequate 
energy density is supplied to the 
powder bed. 
 
Ni-Sn 
Binary 
liquid 
phase 
SLS 
employing 
high 
and 
low 
melting point materials to 
attain 
densification. 
Low 
melting point materials melt 
and bind the particles of the 
high melting point materials 
together. 
Applicable to two-component 
material system having different 
melting points. 
 
Cu-Solder 
Ni-alloy-Copper 
Fe-Cu 
Bronze-nickel 
Al-TiO2-B4C  
 
Fractograph 
suggests 
that 
bronze melts and wets the nickel 
particles which do not exhibit any 
melt. 
 
 
Fig. 17. A schematic illustration of Marangoni flow as applied to the direct SLS of W-Cu 2-
phase direct SLS [93].

----- Page 60 (native) -----
59 
 
 
 
It was noted that at processing parameters combining low scan speed and relatively low 
laser power, the resultant input energy is insufficient to generate adequate liquid phase that binds 
the particles together. Therefore, the outcome is partial melting (SLS) resulting in poor 
densification. As the laser power increases at low scan rates, the increasing incident laser energy 
increases the temperature of the powder bed thereby causing a significant amount of powder’s 
inter-particulate melting as a consequence of the occurrence of adequate liquid phase. This 
condition culminates in higher densification due to the instability of the liquid cylinder which 
occurs as the surface free energy is minimised. Therefore, it can be inferred that appropriate 
increments in the laser energy input leads to high working temperature which eventually reduces 
both melt viscosity and surface tensions. Furthermore, at high temperature, the material transport 
during the laser sintering process is enhanced as a consequence of the formation of connective 
streams within the molten pool during SLS. This results in the reduction of the amount and sizes 
of inter-agglomerate pores, thereby obtaining fully dense parts.  
 
 
Moreover, the wetting characteristics and the attendant forces for rearranging solid 
particles in the liquid phase increase as the amount of liquid phase increases provided the energy 
density increases appropriately. The implication of this finding as pointed out by Olakanmi et al. 
[28] is that there exists an optimal laser energy density combining relative high laser power with 
low scan speed, at which the solid-liquid wettability is most successful, such that the structural 
particles in the liquid are most suitably re-arranged with a view to achieving higher sintered 
density (Fig. 18). Further increment in laser energy density leads to reduced sintered density. In 
this condition, the higher laser power generates increased quantity of liquid phase, but the

----- Page 61 (native) -----
60 
 
 
reduced scan speed causes substantial increament in its lifetime, thereby promoting 
spheroidisation and breakdown in the melt pool. The reduced sintered density in this case is 
attributed to significant aggregation of the structural particles.  
 
 
Fig 18. Variation of the density of SLS processed AlSi12 powder with the applied energy 
density. Processing conditions: laser power (100–200 W), scan rate (80–200mms−1), scan 
spacing 0.1–0.3mm, and layer thickness 0.25–1.00mm [28]. 
 
 
Successful SLM processing of metals demands that an appropriate layer thickness is 
established for the other processing parameters which are employed. For instance, if the powder 
layer thickness is very high, complete melt down of particles will be impossible to achieve due to 
insufficient laser energy penetration into the powder bed. Consequently, large and interconnected 
pores are formed in the sintered structure which reduces the density of the SLM fabricated 
sample. During laser processing of AlSi12, Olakanmi and co-investigators [28] discovered that

----- Page 62 (native) -----
61 
 
 
there exists a critical value for layer thickness at which most of the gas bubbles in the powder 
bed are able to move up to the layer’s surface, and collapse when the molten liquid solidifies 
rapidly to form finer grains and produces a pore-free sintered part. This pore-free sintered sample 
obtained at the critical value of layer thickness was noted to possess excellent microstructural 
properties because the re-melting of the previously sintered layer was possible, thereby enabling 
the formation of coherently bonded layers with lesser degree of spheroidisation (see Fig. 19). 
 
(A). 
 (B) 
 (C) 
 
Fig. 19. Effect of variation in layer thickness on the microstructure of laser sintered AlSi12 
powder at laser power of 200 W, scan rates of 120 mm/s; and scan spacing of 0.1mm: (A) 
1.0mm, (B) 0.5mm and (C) 0.25mm [28]. 
 
 
It has also been proved that where re-melting of the substrate occurs, spheroidisation does 
not take place if there is wetting of the as-solidified material by the melt pool [46, 95, 96]. 
According to Agarwala et al. [50], the minimum possible layer thickness at which a pore-free 
structure is obtainable is determined by the maximum particle size of the powder deposited on 
the bed as well as the precision of the powder delivery mechanism employed in the sintering 
machine. Olakanmi and co-investigators [28] established that lowering the layer thickness below 
the minimal permissible layer thickness for a powder system would create complications in

----- Page 63 (native) -----
62 
 
 
spreading homogeneous layers of fresh powders with the previously laid layers being displaced 
and the surface roughness of the sintered samples exacerbated. This consequently hinders inter-
particulate bonding or melting.  
 
 
Furthermore, it must be emphasised that the most significant parameter SLS/SLM 
parameter influencing the densification of parts is the laser energy density which is defined by 
the relationship shown in Eq. (2). This shows that the energy density for the SLS/SLM process 
increases with increasing laser power, and decreasing scanning rates, scan spacing and layer 
thickness. 
ɗ ൌ PȀuhd                                                                                     ሺʹሻ 
where ɗ = Specific laser energy input (J/mm3); P = Power (W); u = Scanning rates (mm/s); h = 
scan spacing (mm); d = layer thickness (mm). 
Simchi & Pohl [94] and Sanz-Guerrero & Ramos-Grez [97] established that the resultant 
fractional sintered density of SLS/SLM processed parts is in direct relationship with the specific 
laser energy input incident on a powder bed. They pointed out that the fractional density, ȡ, of 
these powders is an exponential function of the specific laser energy input (ȥ) as shown in Eq. 
(3). 
)
exp(
2
1
ψ
ρ
K
C
C
 
 
−
−
=
                                                   3 
where C1, C2 and K (densification co-efficient) are material constants of the specific powders 
under investigation.

----- Page 64 (native) -----
63 
 
 
 
Fig. 20. Fractional density vs. the specific energy input (ȥ) for sintered iron using different 
processing parameters [94]. 
 
 
Fig. 21. SEM image of SLS/SLM processed iron powder at the excessive delivery of specific 
laser energy input of 0.8 kJ/mm3 showing the occurrence of layer delamination as a result of 
increased life time of the generated liquid phase [94].  
 
 
Fig. 20 illustrates that the fractional density increases with the specific laser energy input, 
for an iron powder, up to a maximum of 0.74 at the saturation specific laser energy input and at 
ȥ = 0, the density approaches the tap density of the powder material [94]. Moreover, when the

----- Page 65 (native) -----
64 
 
 
experiment data were fitted according to Eq. (3), C1=0.719, C2=0.214, and K=14.82 at a ȥ<0.8 
kJ mm−3. Beyond the saturation specific laser energy input of 0.8 kJ mm−3, the maximum 
fractional density remained constant irrespective of the amount of specific laser energy incident 
on the powder bed. Observations from Fig. 20 and 21 imply that excessive delivery of the energy 
density at very high laser power and low scan rates (i.e. above the saturation specific laser energy 
input) will result in complications such as balling and layer delamination due to increased life 
time of the generated liquid phase as noted earlier on in this section.  
 
 
In summary, at low scan speed, small scan spacing, and relatively high laser power, the 
amount of liquid phase generated is higher and sintering time is longer, thereby promoting higher 
densification. Meanwhile, at a low volume fraction of liquid and short sintering time obtainable 
by using a high scan speed and scan spacing and low values of laser power, the liquid phase is 
not enough or has not sufficient time to enhance wettability. There appears to be a maximum 
sintered density which may be achieved in SLS/SLM at a critical value of the specific laser 
energy input. Above this critical value, it is unable to increase densification further because the 
increased lifetime of the liquid phase promotes the balling phenomenon which inhibits 
densification. The only exception is when substrate wetting occurs. The effect of the scanning 
strategy on the processing and quality characteristics of SLS/SLM processed parts will be 
considered in the next section.

----- Page 66 (native) -----
65 
 
 
4.2.2: Effects of Laser Scanning Strategy on the Densification Mechanism 
 
Porosity, residual stresses, and cracking as a consequence of hot shortness, and poor 
surface finish are among the problems associated with the SLS/SLM process as a result of the 
generation of uneven thermal gradients in the parts [42, 56, 98-102]. To control the thermal 
gradient during powder heating and cooling and thereby fabricated unwarped and uncracked 
layers, various studies [42, 56, 98-102] have investigated the relationship between scanning 
strategies and the properties of SLS/SLM processed parts. For instance, Dewidar et al. [56] 
identified standard, diagonal and perimeter scanning strategies (Fig. 22) for producing single 
layers whereas Su et al. [98] tested the influence of four types of scanning patterns (Fig. 23) and 
various scan spacings on the building of overlapped beads of laser sintered specimens. Although 
Dewidar et al. [56] discovered that perimeter scan approach was less successful while the 
standard and the diagonal scan strategies gave very similar results for parts fabricated by direct 
SLS, Su and co-investigators concluded that the adoption of different scanning patterns 
culminated in different processing times which affected the nature of the microstructure obtained 
for the laser sintered parts. Hauser et al. [99] reported on the scanning routines for successful 
small scale direct SLS processing of parts at room temperature. It was established that the single 
layer shape affects warping but the heights of test samples do not.  
 
In order to avoid non-uniform distribution of energy input in SLM processed parts, Su & 
Yang [101] identified three types of overlapping regime namely: intra-layer overlapping regime, 
inter-layer overlapping regime and mixed overlapping regime with coexistence of the first two 
types (Fig. 24).

----- Page 67 (native) -----
66 
 
 
(A) 
 
(B) 
 
(C) 
 
Fig. 22. SLS/SLM scanning strategies (A) Standard (B) Diagonal and (C) Perimeter [56]. 
 
 
Fig. 23. Four different scanning strategies adopted in the direct laser sintering of tool steels using 
a Nd: YAG laser machine. The numbers indicate the scanning sequence while the arrows 
represent the scanning directions [98]. 
 
(A)
 
(B) 
 
(C) 
 
Fig. 24. Three types of overlapping regime under inter-layer stagger scanning strategy. (A) Intra-
layer overlapping regime. (B) Inter-layer overlapping regime. (C) Mixed overlapping regime 
[101].

----- Page 68 (native) -----
67 
 
 
Their study establishes that inter-layer overlapping regime could be obtained when the track 
space was smaller than 0.2 mm, which produced a resultant with high relative density at the 
specified process parameters. Meanwhile, Su & Yang [101] noted that their study was about 
track space without consideration of other process parameters, such as laser power, hence, 
further study including other factors is expected to reveal more understanding of the track 
overlapping regime during SLM process. Moreover, Kruth et al. [103] discussed how the 
temperature gradient induced internal stresses are dependent on the part geometry and the scan 
strategy being adopted. They observed that if the area to be scanned is small, a short scan length 
normally occurs thereby leaving little time for the surface to cool before the next track is 
scanned, thus resulting in high temperature. For larger areas, the laser beam travels a longer 
distance so that successively scanned tracks have more time to cool down resulting in a lower 
temperature over the scanned area. The consequent lower temperature of the scanned area results 
in poor wetting conditions causing reduction in the material density because of larger heat sink 
between the loose powder and the solidified material.  
 
Furthermore, Aboulkhair et al. [102] clarified how the design of the scanning strategy 
minimises porosity and amends defects in AlSi10Mg parts processed via SLM by considering 
the following scanning patterns: X (a unidirectional scan with a single scan per layer), 2X 
(similar to “X” but each layer is scanned twice), alternating (scanning each layer in a direction 
rotated by 90ƕto its precursor), X&Y 2HS (each layer was scanned twice having each scan 
perpendicular to the one before and with different hatch spacings for each scan), pre-sinter (first 
scan the layer with half the power followed by a second scan with full power), and overlap (each

----- Page 69 (native) -----
68 
 
 
layer was scanned twice with the second scan melting the overlap between each two adjacent 
melt pools).  
 
(A) 
 
(B) 
 
Fig. 25. (A) Porosity evolution in AlSi10Mg samples processed using different combinations of 
scan speeds and scan strategies, (B) Influence of scanning strategy on relative density [102].

----- Page 70 (native) -----
69 
 
 
They revealed that at a scanning speed of 500 mm/s, scanning each layer twice was effective in 
reducing the keyhole pores but pores still existed when scanning the layer once in alternating 
scan while the overlap scan reduced but could not eliminate the keyhole pores (Fig. 25A). In 
regards to the double scan per layer ( 2X, X&Y 2HS, pre-sinter, or overlap) the keyhole pores 
were significantly reduced even if not eliminated at all scanning speeds. Meanwhile, at slower 
scanning speeds, the dissipation of excessive energy resulted in extensive formation of 
metallurgical pores in SLM processed AlSi10Mg parts even though the keyhole pores were 
eliminated. In addition, employing double scans at scanning speeds of 500 and 1000 mm/s 
ensured that the the metallurgical pores were not significant as a result of lower energy density 
(Fig. 25A). Fig. 25B depicting the relative density of various SLM processed samples agrees 
with Fig. 25A thereby confirming that a relative density of 99.8% can be achieved using a double 
unidirectional scan with different laser powers for the two scans (pre-sinter) at the same speed. 
Hence, the work of Aboulkhair et al. [102] shows that achieving a near fully consolidated part 
using SLM requires the employment of compromise between the different parameters and scan 
strategies.  
 
 
Similar to the outcomes from the study carried out by Li et al. [42] on the SLM processing 
of Al85Ni5Y6Co2Fe2 bulk metallic glass composites, the authors also observed that double or 
multiple scanning of the build area on the powder bed was useful during SLS/SLM processing of 
aluminium alloy powders. This approach was adopted in instances when the dissipated laser 
energy density was not adequate to consolidate the aluminium parts, thereby necessitating an 
alteration in scan count. However, if the applied laser energy density is more than necessary, this

----- Page 71 (native) -----
70 
 
 
results in heat transfer to the powder bed, thereby melting neighbouring particles in addition to 
those being targeted. This usually results in accumulation of stress and distortion of parts. This 
challenge may be overcome by reducing the laser power when scanning each layer twice before 
re-coating with a new layer of powders [42]. This procedure ensures more energy diffuses into 
the particles consequent upon increased laser-material interaction attained at lower scanning 
speed rather than high laser power. This approach effectively minimises dimensional 
inaccuracies in the SLS/SLM parts.  
 
4.2.3: Effects of SLS/SLM Atmospheres on the Densification Mechanism 
 
During the SLS/SLM of metal powders, the presence of oxygen in the operating 
atmosphere and as a form of passive layer of oxide on the powder surfaces does exacerbate the 
balling phenomenon due to the initiation of Marangoni convection. The major concerns arising 
from this are the significantly high absorption of laser energy on the sintering/melt pool and the 
liquid-metal surface tension which increases the wetting angle between the solid and liquid 
phases that can inhibit inter-particulate bonding/melting between rastered lines and individual 
layers [38, 105]. Therefore, the use of controlled atmosphere during SLS/SLM processing of 
aluminium alloys is very important because it prevents undesirable reactions, sweeps deleterious 
reaction products from the sintering chamber, initiates desirable reactions as demonstrated in the 
use of nitrogen atmosphere to form AlN (aluminium nitride) which improves the dimensional 
stability of sintered aluminium parts, and reduces oxide present on the metal surfaces as 
exemplified in iron through dissociated ammonia [106].

----- Page 72 (native) -----
71 
 
 
 
From the available literature, very limited experimental evidence could be gathered on the 
effect of sintering atmosphere on the density of materials fabricated via SLS/SLM. Wu et al. 
[107] assessed the effect of the oxygen content on the microstructure of the burn-resistant alloys, 
Ti-25V-15Cr-2Al-0.2C (wt%), processed in air; using the argon carrier as protection, and in a 
glove box with an argon atmosphere with O2 <5ppm. They discovered that the microstructures 
obtained differed for each atmosphere with the alloy laser processed in air characterised by large 
titanium carbide dendrites while the carbides obtained in the argon processed atmosphere had 
finer and more uniformly distributed carbides. While Wu and co-investigators discovered that 
the atmosphere influences the microstructure obtained, they were not able to propose a 
mechanism responsible for this effect. Moreover, Das et al. [108] evaluated the effect of a wider 
range of atmospheres (rough vacuum of the order of 30mtorr, rough vacuum purged with argon, 
high vacuum < 5 x 10-5 torr, and high vacuum followed by argon-2% hydrogen backfill) on the 
fabrication of superalloy cermet abrasive turbine blade tips via the direct SLS process. Their 
results revealed that both rough vacuum and the purged argon contained sufficient oxygen to 
oxidize the molten superalloy matrix thereby causing balling, separation, and tearing due to 
surface tension effects. They concluded that a high vacuum atmosphere resulted in relatively 
uniform surface features, with no cracking, tearing, or separation when the investigation was 
conducted within an acceptable window of processing parameters. Meanwhile, only a study has 
detailed the effect of atmosphere on the densification of SLS/SLM of aluminium alloys as seen 
in Wang et al. [38] who investigated the role of argon, nitrogen and helium sintering 
atmospheres on the laser melting of Al12Si alloy powder. Their findings showed that laser 
melting under these atmospheres had no significant effect on densification as seen in Figure 26.

----- Page 73 (native) -----
72 
 
 
 
Fig. 26. Relative density of the SLM-produced Al–12Si samples in various atmospheres as a 
function of incident laser energy [38]. 
 
However, the outcome from Wang et al. Wang et al. [38] contradicts the findings from the 
studies carried out by Asgharzadeh & Simchi [6] and Simchi & Pohl [94] who reported that laser 
sintering of metal powders under argon atmospheres yielded better densification in comparison 
to nitrogen atmospheres especially at higher scan rates. The reported contradiction about the 
effects of processing atmospheres on the densification of SLM/SLS processed metal powders 
might have been possibly engineered by different mechanisms of chemical reactions occurring 
during laser processing of different materials. The exact nature of the chemical reactions and the 
associated mechanisms for various metallic powders need to be explored further in future 
studies. All the literature reviewed in this section so far are in concurrence with the observation 
made by Hauser et al [105] that the amount of oxygen present during heating, melting and fusing

----- Page 74 (native) -----
73 
 
 
of metal powder strongly inhibits the effectiveness of laser power and scanning rates for 
successful SLS processing.  
 
 
Since there is paucity of literature detailing the exact nature of chemical reactions and its 
associated mechanisms during SLS/SLM of aluminium alloys in processing atmospheres, it 
would seem, on the other hand, instructive to examine the effect of atmosphere on the sintering 
response of aluminium and its alloys in the powder metallurgy route. Schaffer et al. [106] carried 
out an extensive literature survey on the effect of atmosphere on the sintering of aluminium and 
its alloys. They identified nitrogen, vacuum, argon and hydrogen gases as atmospheres that had 
been utilised for the conventional sintering of aluminium and its alloys. The outcome of their 
review suggested the effects were quite complex. For instance, Martin & Castro [109] found that 
nitrogen was more effective than vacuum for an Al-1Mg-0.5Si-0.2Cu (wt%) alloy while an 
improved sintering response was obtained for Al-4.5Cu-0.5Mg-0.2Si (wt%) alloy under vacuum. 
They pointed out that the differences noted in the sintering responses of the alloys under the two 
atmospheres under consideration were a result of varying cooling rates after sintering. It is worth 
noting that Martin & Castro [109] had not investigated the effect of the varying chemical 
composition of the alloys independently of the sintering atmospheres. Schaffer & Hall [110] 
discovered that sintering of aluminium alloys under nitrogen resulted in the beneficial formation 
of aluminium nitride.

----- Page 75 (native) -----
74 
 
 
 
Other researchers have also presented evidence that sintering of aluminium alloys under 
nitrogen yielded aluminium nitride, which possibly promoted the disruption of the surface oxide 
film and facilitated diffusional processes as a consequence of the greater degree of stability of 
Al4N3 than Al2O3 [106]. The available literature presents, however, contradictory findings 
regarding the role of hydrogen in the sintering of aluminium and its alloys. While some 
investigators have claimed that hydrogen has little influence on the sintering of aluminium and 
alloys, others have shown that it has a deleterious effect on its sinterability with the explanation 
that water vapour associated with hydrogen acts as a stabiliser of hydrated alumina thus 
inhibiting shrinkage [106]. While no convincing inference could be drawn from the available 
literature on the effect of atmosphere on the sintering response of aluminium and its alloys, 
Schaffer and co-workers noted that anecdotal evidence from the industry indicates that nitrogen 
is always the preferred atmosphere for the sintering of aluminium and its alloys because of its 
low cost. Schaffer and co-investigators [106] examined the sintering of aluminium alloys of 
varying compositions in vacuum, argon, wet and dry nitrogen, nitrogen-5%hydrogen and argon-
5%hydrogen mixtures and proffered explanations as to why moisture is deleterious and the 
formation of aluminium nitride is essential. Fig. 27 presents the results of this investigation. The 
solid line represents no change in density between the green and sintered state. Hence, points 
above and below the line confirm the occurrence of net shrinkage and net expansion of the 
sintered parts respectively. It can be seen that shrinkage only occurs for all green densities under 
nitrogen atmosphere, whereas volumetric expansion of sintered parts occurred when 5% H2 was 
added to either a nitrogen or argon atmosphere.

----- Page 76 (native) -----
75 
 
 
 
Fig. 27. The effect of the sintering gas on sintered density for Al–3.8Cu–1Mg–0.7Si (wt%) 
samples were sintered for 1 h and air cooled [106]. 
 
 
Therefore, Schaffer et al. [106] showed that dry nitrogen is the most efficacious atmosphere 
for the sintering of aluminium alloys while hydrogen (moisture) is extremely prejudicial to 
sintered density. It was explained that aluminium nitride formation was beneficial in the 
reduction of the pressure in the pore spaces thereby inducing pore filling at particle sizes that are 
smaller than those required for the sintering in inert atmospheres. Since the processing conditions 
of conventional powder metallurgy sintering differ from that of the direct selective laser 
sintering, it will be good to explore whether changing from argon to nitrogen atmosphere 
enhances the sinterability of aluminium alloys other than AlSi12 powder in SLS/SLM.

----- Page 77 (native) -----
76 
 
 
4.3: Effects of Powder Properties on the SLS Densification Mechanism 
In SLM, the effect of powder particle size and distribution is considered to be of no 
importance because all particles undergo melting. Similar to the observation of German [111, 
112] for the P/M sintering process; chemical composition, particle shape, surface morphology, 
and the particle size distribution are among the factors that have tremendous influence on the 
SLS response of metallic powders. From the available literature, mean particle sizes of the bulk 
metallic powders that have been used in various SLS experiments vary from 0.6 µm up to 400 
µm and are more often produced by gas atomisation methods. This manufacturing technique 
yields spherical shaped particles with smooth surfaces and, when inert gases are employed, the 
powder often has low levels of residual oxygen and surface oxidation [113]. These 
characteristics provide for ideal flow properties and reduced surface contamination which are the 
main causes for concern during the selection of powder for SLS. Previous investigations on laser 
sintered powder have dwelt mainly on the influence of processing parameters on the functional 
properties of sintered material. Very few research groups have addressed the issue of the role of 
powder particle size and shape on the sintering behaviour. Consequently, to gain an insight into 
this, it is necessary once again to consult the P/M literature, this time to explain the effect of 
particle shape, size and distribution on the sintering response of various powders via the 
conventional powder metallurgy route.

----- Page 78 (native) -----
77 
 
 
4.3.1. Effects of Particle Size and Distribution on the SLS Densification Mechanism 
 
In a system having substantial solid solubility of the additive in the base metal and/or 
exhibiting preferential diffusive flow from the additive to the base metal during P/M sintering, 
Lumley & Schaffer [114] found that the use of fine additive powders resulted in a greatly 
reduced quantity of liquid phase formed whereas coarse powders increased the amount of liquid 
phase that formed and prolonged its existence. They concluded that where there is no mutual 
solid solubility, particle size is unimportant in liquid development for improving the 
densification mechanisms of parts. Although, Lumley & Schaffer [114] did not consider the 
effect of particles sizes and size distribution on the thermal conductivity of a packed powder 
since this is unlikely to be a significant factor in P/M sintering; however; this is an important 
consideration in SLS because it influences the amount of liquid formation in the laser sintered 
part. Lumley & Schaffer [115] also explored the nature of the influence of the additive particle 
sizes on the properties of sintered aluminium-copper alloys by demonstrating that bulk density 
and pore sizes might not be accurate indicators of the strength of sintered parts. They established 
that particles of intermediate size sintered at slow heating rates and fine particles sintered at fast 
heating rates with the resultant formation of an extensive, well distributed liquid phase, from 
which a well sintered matrix develops. 
 
 
In order to improve the packing density of the powder bed during SLS, it is necessary to 
blend together powders of different particle size distributions. It is clear, however, that the 
introduction of fine particles to a powder can be influential in increasing its sintering response. 
Furthermore, while the introduction of smaller particles into the interstices of larger particles

----- Page 79 (native) -----
78 
 
 
which also increases packing density could lead to enhancement of the sintering process, it must 
be noted that the addition of smaller particles could result in the formation of defects in the SLS 
processed samples. This could be ascribed to the sintering stress encountered by the small 
particles which is much higher than that experienced by the larger particles. This means the 
larger particles are able to constrain the shrinkage of the smaller particles, thus resulting in 
circumferential cracking defects around large particles [112, 116].  
 
 
Powder particle size and size distribution play a key role in the SLS densification 
mechanism given that chemical composition has a significant effect on the propensity of the 
resulting alloy to densify, and an appropriate component ratio of the powder blend is needed for 
a range of particle sizes, shapes, and surface morphology as demonstrated by Olakanmi et al. 
[29] in the laser sintering of blended Al-Si powders. Theoretically, there ought to exist a 
relationship between the sintered properties and the particle size distribution of a candidate 
powder for the SLS process. A comparison of the SLS process with the conventional P/M 
sintering process, suggests the following features of such a relationship: (1) smaller sized powder 
particles tend to sinter more quickly since the sintering stress is inversely related to particle 
diameter; (2) powder particle densification should take place through neck formation at points of 
contact between particles. The consequence of this is that with a higher packing density of 
similarly sized particles in a powder, the tendency should be for a faster sintering rate to be 
obtained [29].

----- Page 80 (native) -----
79 
 
 
Simchi [117] investigated the effect of powder particle size on the densification of SLS 
processed metal powder. It was discovered that the maximum attainable sintered density 
(saturation density), which was obtained at the optimal specific laser energy input, was for a 
mean particle size of 29.2 ȝm (Fig. 28A and B). It was then pointed out that fine powder with a 
narrow particle size distribution tended to agglomerate, whereas coarse powders with broad 
particle size distribution tended to segregate: reduced sintered density obtained in both cases. 
Furthermore, a material-dependent factor, K, (Fig. 29A and B) was defined using Eq. (3) and 
employed by Simchi in an attempt to explore the influence of particle sizes and oxygen content 
of the powders upon densification. It was established that this material-dependent factor K 
increases as the densification kinetics of the powders become poorer thereby confirming that the 
particle size of 29.2 ȝm is the most desirable for the chosen SLS process condition.  
(A)
(B)
 
Fig. 28. The variation of (A) fractional density with specific energy input (ȥ) for iron powders of 
varying particle sizes; (B) saturation density with the mean particle sizes of iron powders [117].

----- Page 81 (native) -----
80 
 
 
(A) 
(B) 
  
Fig. 29. The variation of (A) the densification (D) with the specific energy input (ȥ) for iron 
powders of different particle sizes; (B) the densification co-efficient (K) with the mean particle 
size of iron powders at different oxygen concentrations [117]. 
 
4.3.2 Effect of Particle Shape on the Densification Mechanism 
 
Liu et al. [69] discovered that particle size and size distribution, the tap density, the oxide 
film thickness, the surface chemistry, and impurity concentration had little effect on the P/M 
sintering behaviour of aluminium powders whereas particle shape was noted to have contributed 
significantly to differences in densification mechanism. They suggested that the differential 
thermal expansion between the aluminium particle and its oxide film might have caused the 
oxide to fracture and that the fracture characteristics are different for spherical and irregular 
particle shapes. Niu & Chang [83] explored the differences in the sintering response of both 
angular, water atomised and spherical, gas atomised powders. Their findings showed that SLS of 
gas atomised powder yielded a homogeneous, dense single layer. Agglomerates and inter-
agglomerate pores were obtained for water atomised powders which were believed to be caused

----- Page 82 (native) -----
81 
 
 
by a combination of irregular shape and high oxygen content in the powder particles. 
Furthermore, Olakanmi [40] explored the role of powder properties (alloying element, oxidic 
constitution, and particle shape) in the densification kinetics of pure and pre-alloyed aluminium 
powders selectively laser melted (SLM) at an energy density of 75 J/mm3. The densification 
kinetics of the powders was found to be primarily controlled by their oxide constitution (which is 
dependent on the alloying element) and partially dependent on the powder bed density and 
particle shape. However, Olakanmi et al. [29] established that powder properties such as 
apparent and tapping densities which determine the nature of heat transfer influencing the 
densification process on a powder bed could be controlled in blended bimodal and trimodal 
aluminium powders having different particle size and distribution, and particle shape in varying 
proportions. The outcome of the study revealed that blending of powders having appropriate 
particle size distribution, correct component ratios, and spherically shaped particles rather than 
irregular particles led to improvement in the thermal conductivity of the powder bed which 
consequently increased the sintered density of SLS processed parts (Fig. 30). It may be inferred 
that the exact influence of powder’s particle shape on the densification mechanism of SLS 
processed parts is still ambiguous. Meanwhile, further studies clarifying the amount as well as 
the nature of contribution of the particle shape to the densification behaviour of SLS processed 
parts need to be carried out.

----- Page 83 (native) -----
82 
 
 
 
Fig. 30. Comparison of the apparent, tapping, and sintered densities (laser power of 200W, scan 
speed of 65 mm/s, layer thickness of 0.25 mm, and a scan spacing of 0.1 mm) of bimodal with 
trimodal powders [29]. 
 
4.3.3 Effect of Alloying Elements and Oxide Constitution on the Densification Mechanism 
Zhang et al. [118] investigated the nature of influence of nickel addition on the 
densification behaviour of SLM processed tungsten powder blended with 10 wt.%, 20wt.% and 
40 wt. % nickel. The outcome of the study revealed that nickel addition enhanced the 
densification of SLM processed tungsten-nickel (W-Ni) parts and consequently reduced its 
viscosity via a combination of liquid phase sintering (LPS) and partial melting of W particles. 
Simchi [119] also explored the densification kinetics of SLS processed Fe, Fe–C, Fe–Cu, Fe–C–
Cu–P, 316L stainless steel, and M2 high-speed powders. When the empirical sintering rate data 
was related to the energy input of the laser beam according to the first order kinetics equation in

----- Page 84 (native) -----
83 
 
 
order to establish a simple sintering model, it was established that the “densification coefficient 
K”; a material dependent parameter varied with the chemical composition, and oxygen content of 
the powder material (Fig. 31).  
 
 
Fig. 31. The variation of the densification (D) with the specific energy input (ȥ) for iron-based 
powders of varying chemical composition under the same processing conditions [119]. 
 
Dadbakhsh & Hao [31] investigated the effects of various Al alloys (including pure Al, 
AlMg1SiCu, and AlSi10Mg), mixed with 15 wt% Fe2O3, on the selective laser melting (SLM) 
facilitated in-situ reaction and formation of Al metal matrix composite (MMC) components. 
Their findings showed that alloy composition directly influenced the SLM consolidation 
performance: with AlSi10Mg showing the best performance while AlMg1SiCu was more 
comparable to pure Al due to its lower content of alloying elements (Fig. 32). Moreover, inter-
solid regions in AlMg1SiCu derived SLM part appeared comparable to that in  pure Al derived

----- Page 85 (native) -----
84 
 
 
part, while AlSi10Mg improved the density and mitigated inter-solid porosity as a result of lower 
thermal conductivity and better SLM consolidation and oxide layers breakdown. 
 
 
Fig. 32. Density and relative density of the SLM parts. The density was measured by 
dimensional method while relative density was achieved according to CT scanning experiments 
[31]. 
 
Olakanmi [40] established that AlSi12 powder had the highest sintered density among air 
atomised pure aluminium (AL-1), gas atomised pure aluminium (AL-2), water atomised 
AlMg5.6 (AL-3), water atomised AlMg6 (AL-4), and gas atomised AlSi12 (AL-5) powders. 
Enhanced SLS/SLM densification behaviour of AlSi12 powder was attributed to pre-alloying 
silicon into aluminium powder which reduces its viscosity [120], and has no effect on the surface 
tension of the aluminium melt pool [121], whereas increasing content of magnesium in an

----- Page 86 (native) -----
85 
 
 
aluminium melt pool reduced the surface tension while increasing the melt viscosity [122] 
thereby reducing the sintered density. Furthermore, the improved densification kinetics of 
aluminium alloy powders evident by the disruption of the oxide film covering the aluminium 
particles which resulted in the promotion of inter-particulate melting across the layers was found 
to be favoured by a high degree of thermal mismatch between the oxide film and the parent 
aluminium particles as well as a uniform oxide layer thickness. According to Olakanmi [40], this 
was the case for AlSi12 parts, whereas SLM of pure aluminium and pre-alloyed Al-Mg powders 
resulted in reduced sintered density. A densification co-efficient K, determined for all the 
powders, affirmed that AlSi12 is the most suitable SLM powder as reflected by the lowest value 
of K (32), highest sintered density, and coherent microstructure when compared to the other 
powders investigated. It is now evident that the nature of the oxide constitution of adherent films 
covering the aluminium particles as well as the film thickness determines whether their 
SLS/SLM processing will be successful or not. Therefore, introducing alloying elements, by 
powder producers, which form oxide films having low circumferential stress as a consequence of 
the significant disparity in thermal expansion co-efficient of the oxide film and aluminium 
particle is important for the attainment of the cracking of the film as well as full melting of 
aluminium alloy particles [40, 123]. Finally, a value of film thickness of around 0.25 µm is the 
threshold above which thicker films would fracture whereas thinner films should just deform 
elastically during SLS/SLM processing of aluminium powders [40, 123].

----- Page 87 (native) -----
86 
 
 
4.4 Effects of Laser Types on the on the Processing and Densification of Metal Powders   
 
 
The type of laser (see Table 7) used for SLS/SLM processing has been identified as one of 
the factors affecting the properties of SLS/SLM fabricated components [50]. Two most common 
types of lasers often applied in SLS/SLM processing are carbon dioxide (CO2) and Nd:YAG. 
The CO2 laser is more popular due to its greater power output, higher efficiency, proven 
reliability and safety as well as its cost per watt output which is about 50 per cent that of 
Nd:YAG output [124]. With the development of high-output power, improvement in laser beam 
quality, and the possibility of glass fiber delivery, the Nd:YAG is increasingly used in various 
applications where the CO2 laser had previously held sway [44, 124]. The shorter wavelength 
Nd:YAG laser has higher absorptivity, hence less power is required with the Nd:YAG laser in 
comparison to the CO2 laser at the equivalent penetration depth and scanning speed [124-127]. 
According to Cao et al. [44], the shorter wavelength Nd:YAG laser beam allows light 
transmission via fibre optic cables rather than the articulated mirror delivery system for CO2 
laser. Therefore, this explains why a Nd:YAG laser beam is easier to manipulate and control 
such that the laser source may be remotely located from the SLS/SLM work station.  
 
 
Moreover, the light beam from a single laser source can be delivered to a number of laser 
processing work stations via fibre optic delivery [44]. Through multifiber beam delivery via 
power or time options, multiple processing operations can be simultaneously carried out by

----- Page 88 (native) -----
87 
 
 
employing a single Nd:YAG laser source [44]. A Nd:YAG laser beam will produce a slightly 
larger and more stable scan track than a CO2 laser beam SLS/SLM processing [7, 125, 127, 129]. 
 
Table 7 
Commercial Machines and Lasers for SLS/SLM of Metal Powders [128]. 
Machines 
Company 
Process 
Laser 
Power 
Sinter station 2000/2500 
 
DTM 
SLS 
CO2 
50 W 
EOSINT 250 
 
EOS 
SLS 
CO2 
200 W 
EOSINT 270 
EOS 
SLS 
Ytterbium 
fibre laser 
 
200 W 
LUMEX 25C 
MATSUURA 
 
SLM 
Pulsed CO2 
500 W 
TrumaForm LF 250 
TRUMPF 
 
SLM 
Disk laser 
250 W 
Realizer 
MCP 
SLM 
Fibre 
100 W 
 
Consequently, the wider Nd:YAG laser beam profile provides the ability to span large tracks 
while maintaining SLS/SLM build quality and speed, thus, leading to a more uniform scan track 
with little or no porosity [7, 129]. A Nd:YAG laser beam will operate at lower scanning speeds, 
in comparison to CO2 laser beam, as a result of the reduced interaction among beam, plasma, and 
powder bed, thereby allowing increased powder’s layer thickness to be melted [7, 129]. The 
reduced plasma effect allows argon to be used as a shielding gas for Nd:YAG laser processing 
while helium is suitable for CO2 laser processing.

----- Page 89 (native) -----
88 
 
 
 
Lauwers et al. [125] explored the comparative fabrication of components by CO2 and Nd: 
YAG lasers. They inferred that with the Nd: YAG laser, components of higher density, a deeper 
sintering depth, and a larger processing window are obtainable, given the same laser energy 
density for both laser types. Moreover, the studies of Hauser et al. [99, 105]; Niu & Chang [5, 
82]; and Dewidar et al. [56], have all used a CO2 continuous wave laser beam, which generated 
fairly high densities (about 55-75% of the theoretical density) for single layer tracks. However, 
O’Neill et al. [129] and Morgan et al. [7] utilised a Nd-YAG laser with Q-switched nanosecond 
pulsing for fabricating multiple layers. This pulsing generates high power densities which can 
lead to rapid vapourisation of the powder material, generating extreme pressures and a recoil 
effect which acts to flatten and widen the spherical melt bead, thereby improving the cohesive 
structure of layers. 
 
 
Fischer et al. [130] also compared the temperature measurements between continuous wave 
sintering and pulsed sintering by verifying the predicted difference of skin and average 
temperature upon pulsed interaction. It was discovered that the average laser power required to 
attain consolidation of the powder in pulsed sintering is 30% lower than that reported for 
continuous sintering. This implies that the consolidation of the powder particles due to melting is 
much more efficient and generates stronger inter-particulate bonding across the layers in the 
pulsed laser radiation at lower wave length (1ȝm) than in the continuous sintering operating at 
higher wave length (10ȝm). This observation has been attributed to the presence of the 
temporarily higher skin temperature which was attained through lower average laser power in the 
case of pulsed interaction. It was pointed out the area of the temperature elevation during

----- Page 90 (native) -----
89 
 
 
continuous sintering is much larger and the achieved peak temperature nearly 1000K higher than 
that during the pulsed interaction which scales quite well with the higher average power. 
Consequently, because no complete melting occurs during pulsed interaction, reduced thermal 
distortion, higher lateral precisions and low residual thermal stresses in the parts can be achieved. 
 
 
Abe et al. [131] also employed a dual laser scanning system combining a pulsed Nd: YAG, 
with a mean power of 50W and a maximum peak power of 3kW, and a CO2 laser, to fabricate 3-
D components from nickel, aluminium, iron, copper, stainless steel, chromium and nickel-base 
alloys. Their findings showed that reheating by CO2 after initial heating by Nd: YAG improved 
the material’s properties, the elimination of residual stress and ductility improvement being 
attributable to the reheating after melting. Steen [127] noted that in order to attain effective 
bonding between the layers, the depth of penetration should be of the order of the layer thickness 
with the aid of pulse lengths of a few milliseconds for layer thickness varying from 20 to 100 
ȝm. Meanwhile, Dalgarno & Wright [58] noted that proper controlling of the pulsing can result 
in densities of up to 90% of the theoretical density.  
 
 
The reported findings indicate that the type of laser employed for the SLS/SLM process 
determines to a very great extent, the behaviour of the powdered particles during SLS/SLM 
processing. The basis for these findings could be attributed to the dependence of the laser 
absorptivity of the investigated material on the wavelength of the laser type in use (Table 8), as

----- Page 91 (native) -----
90 
 
 
well as the resultant consolidation mechanism of metallic powders materials being a function of 
the energy density delivered as a consequence of laser type and the laser mode. 
Table 8 
Comparison of absorptance of single-component and two-component metallic powders using 
Nd:YAG and CO2 lasers [126]. 
Material 
Nd: YAG (Ȝ 
= 1.06ȝm) 
CO2 
(Ȝ 
= 
10.6ȝm) 
Cu 
0.59 
0.26 
Fe 
0.64 
0.45 
Sn 
0.66 
0.23 
Ti 
0.77 
0.59 
Pb 
0.79 
- 
Cu-10Al (wt.%) 
0.63 
0.32 
Fe-3C-3Cr-12V + 10TiC (wt.%) 
0.65 
0.39 
Fe-0.6C-4Cr-2Mo-1Si + 15TiC (wt.%) 
0.71 
0.42 
Fe-1C-14Cr-10Mn-6Ti + 66TiC (wt.%) 
0.79 
0.44 
 
The laser absorptivity and the applied energy density both determine the nature of the melt pool 
size. Table 8 reveals that the absorptance of metallic materials increases with decreasing 
wavelength which is in agreement with the findings from the literature on the SLS/SLM 
behaviour of metal powders when laser scanned with either CO2 or Nd:YAG lasers. 
 
 
Recently, a new generation of machines which employ lasers of enhanced beam quality are 
being developed [128]. Among such machines are EOSINT 270, TrumaForm LF 250, and 
Realizer. For example, Louvis and co-investigators [27] and Ahuja et al. [35] employed MCP 
and GmbH Realizer fiber lasers respectively at low laser powers (50 - 100W) and high scanning

----- Page 92 (native) -----
91 
 
 
rates to achieve SLM processing of 6061, AlSi12 and Al-Cu alloy powders. The outcome from 
these studies showed that with an optimum combination of process parameters maximum relative 
density varying between 89 – 99.9% was possible (Fig. 33). 
 
(A) 
 
(B) 
 
Fig. 33. (A) Effect of the main SLM parameters (laser scanning speed, hatch distance) on the 
resulting relative density of AlSi12 at 100 W [27]. (B) Relationship between Relative density in 
% and volumetric energy density in J mm-3 for AW-2618 processed with LBM machine system, 
Realizer SLM 50 [35].

----- Page 93 (native) -----
92 
 
 
The use of fibre laser in obtaining high density SLM processed aluminium alloy parts at low 
laser power and high scanning speeds is very promising for further development of multi 
additive layer manufacturing process. Machines using diode lasers are more cost effective than 
those employing CO2 or Nd: YAG lasers, but they have limitation of poor beam quality as a 
result of high beam divergence, which needs to be improved upon [128, 132]. Gisario et al. [133] 
explored the application of a continuous wave (CW) high power diode laser to modify the 
surface of porous substrates made from spherical particles in sintered bronze by considering the 
influence of laser power and interaction time. Findings from the study indicated that a 70% 
decrease in the surface roughness of the porous substrates in addition to an improvement in 
micro-hardness, scratch and wear resistance were achievable after laser treatments when high 
laser power was combined with high scan speed. Meanwhile, a comparative processing test 
would be necessary for CO2; Nd: YAG; fibre and diode laser machines in order to observe the 
sintering behaviour of aluminium alloys and make conclusions regarding any of the machines 
that may yield a more acceptable processing window and improved functional properties for 
processing aluminium alloys.

----- Page 94 (native) -----
93 
 
 
5 Microstructure and Metallurgical Defects in SLS/SLM Fabricated Parts  
 
5.1 Microstructure of SLS/SLM Fabricated Parts  
 
 
SLS/SLM possesses the capability to employ transient cooling patterns to control grain 
sizes and shapes, phase percentages, and phase compositions in order to promote desirable 
mechanical properties. For instance, Zhuoxing et al. [134] demonstrated the feasibility of SLS 
processed Cu-Sn-C system to produce intermetallics/phases such as Į-Cu, Cu31Sn8(į), Cu3Sn(İ) 
and Cu6Sn5(Ș) in Cu-Sn-C systems. The Cu-based alloy was found to have a more homogeneous 
distribution than conventionally sintered materials as a result of improved flowability of the melt 
brought about by a relatively high sintering temperature. Furthermore, in an attempt to provide 
the necessary fundamental understanding that will lead to the fabrication of large- size, crack-
free SLM processed Al86Ni6Y4.5Co2La1.5 metallic glass (MG) with high density, controllable 
microstructure and mechanical properties; Li et al. [36] reported that the morphology of the scan 
track of Al86Ni6Y4.5Co2La1.5 powder was influenced by the energy distribution of the laser beam 
and the heat transfer competition between convection and conduction in the melt pool. They 
attributed the fact that varying regions of the scan track were characterised by a gradient 
microstructure and mechanical properties consequent upon experiencing different thermal 
histories to the Gaussian distribution of laser energy and heat transfer process. They concluded 
that the thermal fluctuation at high laser power produced an inhomogeneous chemical 
distribution which gave rise to severe crystallization of the MG, despite the high cooling rate 
whereas the selection of an appropriate laser power resulted in crack-free scan tracks with no

----- Page 95 (native) -----
94 
 
 
crystallization. Meanwhile, an extensive search of the literature has revealed that an accurate 
interpretation of the complex microstructure of SLS/SLM processed samples requires knowledge 
of the thermal history during the process resulting from building a range of processing 
conditions. For example, the laser processing technique is capable of generating typical cooling 
rates ranging between 103 to 1011 K/s [127, 135-138], hence, the fine microstructure usually 
observed in materials processed by SLS/SLM is a consequence of the high cooling rate [127, 
136-138].  
 
 
The nature of the microstructure obtained when laser power, scanning rates, scan spacing 
and layer thickness are varied is dependent on the duration of the interaction between the powder 
and the laser beam. The relationship between energy density and duration of laser-material 
interaction defines the operational regime of the SLM process which results in a unique 
temperature gradient (G), solidification rate (R) and cooling rate (݀ܶ݀ݐ
ൗ
 = G.R). Steen [127] 
noted that increasing the ratio G/R results in a gradual change in the solidification regime from 
dendritic to cellular dendritic and consequently to planar front growth. Furthermore, higher 
cooling rate (G.R) promotes greater undercooling, thus producing finer grains. Hence, the 
parameters (G/R) and (G.R) control the type of microstructure and the scale of the 
microstructure, respectively [136, 137, 139, 140].  
 
 
Longer laser-material duration or a higher energy density during SLM as a consequence of 
lower scanning rates and/or higher laser power lead to the formation of a superheated melt pool

----- Page 96 (native) -----
95 
 
 
and high surface temperature [127, 135]. Under these conditions, it takes longer for the liquid to 
start solidifying and the temperature of the base material becomes higher, thus lowering both the 
temperature gradient at the interface and the cooling rate. A coarse microstructure may result in 
this case. When low laser power and/or faster scanning rates are employed, superheating is not 
pronounced and the average temperature gradient at the interface is sufficiently high to give a 
faster cooling rate thereby leading to the formation of finer microstructure. The geometry of the 
melt bead in the SLM process is dependent on the laser processing parameters. For example, 
provided the energy density is less than a critical value, when the heat input is just sufficient to 
melt the powder, this will result in the melt pool having a cylindrical geometry due to high 
surface tension. The contact area between two such layers will be smaller resulting in poor heat 
conduction and a low cooling rate. For a multiple-layer part fabricated by the SLM process, 
where the substrate layers are pre-heated or partially melted in the subsequent deposition, both 
the cooling rate and the microstructure are affected [127]. The degree of formation of the heat 
affected zone (HAZ) in the deposited layer is a function of laser processing parameters. This 
could be responsible for the observed variations between the morphology and microstructure of 
individual laser deposited layers.  
 
 
In order to present the background knowledge of the idea of remelting the underlying 
substrate with a view to weakening and/or disrupting surface contamination such as oxide films 
so as to provide a clean interface at the atomic level between the solid and the liquid, the 
principle of epitaxial solidification in SLM is highlighted by considering the work of Das [46] 
and other relevant fusion welding literature. Thereafter, we present various examples of how

----- Page 97 (native) -----
96 
 
 
varying SLS/SLM process parameters and powder properties affect the microstructure of laser 
sintered/melted metallic materials. Moreover, examples presented in these sections also 
demonstrated how inappropriate control of process parameters and powder properties may result 
in various metallurgical defects such porosity, microstructure coarsening, heterogeneity. Finally, 
remedial measures for the metallurgical defects are also presented. 
 
5.1.1 Epitaxial Solidification in SLM 
 
According to Nelson et al. [141] and Das [46], SLM of metals could be likened to fusion 
welding. In fusion welding, the base metal and the weld metal may have similar but not 
necessarily the same composition, while in SLM of monolithic metallic materials, the substrate 
layer and the new layer of metallic powder to be melted are the same in composition. 
Meanwhile, it has been established that dilution of the base metal occurs in all types of fusion 
welding. Dilution is the partial localised remelting of the base metal which provides a continuous 
interface free of oxide films or other contaminants between solidifying liquid weld metal and the 
base metal. Dilution is a pre-requisite for good weld integrity. During dilution, or “melt back”, 
grain growth occurs at the solid-liquid interface between the base metal and the liquid in contact 
with it. Due to the significant similarities between fusion welding and SLM, it is instructive to 
understand the implication of epitaxial solidification on SLM process control. 
 
 
In fusion welding, it is generally agreed that the liquid weld metal completely wets the 
partially melted substrate at the fusion boundary. Meanwhile, by likening the epitaxial

----- Page 98 (native) -----
97 
 
 
solidification mechanism in SLM to the formation of a nucleus of solid from its melt in contact 
with a substrate as it occurs in the fusion welding process (Fig. 34), the free energy required for 
the initiation of nucleation is a function of the wetting angle (ș) between the substrate and the 
solid formed. Therefore, the relationship between wetting angle and interfacial energies is 
illustrated in Fig. 34, Eq. (4), and (5).  
 
 
Fig. 34. Three-phase equilibrium for wetting and non-wetting systems [46]. 
 
)
5
........(
..........
..........
..........
..........
..........
..........
1
)
/
(
cos
)
4
(
..........
..........
..........
).........
cos
1(
)
(
−
=
+
=
−
+
=
LV
a
LV
SL
LV
SV
a
W
W
γ
θ
θ
γ
γ
γ
γ
 
where 
ȖLV = surface tension of the liquid-vapour interface 
ȖSV = surface tension of the solid-vapour interface 
ȖSL = surface tension of the solid-liquid interface 
ș = contact angle. 
 
 
During epitaxial solidification, both the contact angle, (ș), (Eq. (5)) and free energy ǻG*, 
become zero (Eq. (8)), and consequently, growth of the solid initiates at the fusion boundary

----- Page 99 (native) -----
98 
 
 
without difficulty [142]. As a result, it can be argued that little or no nucleation barrier in 
solidifying weld metals exists during fusion welding or SLM.  
)
6
)........(
4
3
/
4
(
*
)
(
)
(
*
)
(
2
3
SL
V
SL
S
v
S
het
r
G
r
S
A
G
V
S
G
γ
π
π
θ
γ
θ
+
∆
−
=
+
∆
−
=
∆
 
∆Gv = the free energy change per unit volume associated with formation of the nucleus, 
VS = The volume of the nucleus. 
AS = The surface area of the new interface created by the solid nucleus and the liquid, 
S (ș) = Shape factor dependent on the contact angle 
 
 (A) 
 (B) 
 
Fig. 35. (A) Illustration showing the epitaxial nucleation and competitive growth in the weld 
fusion zone [141], (B) Schematic of free energy change associated with heterogeneous 
nucleation in casting and welding juxtaposed with free energy change in homogeneous 
nucleation [143].

----- Page 100 (native) -----
99 
 
 
The critical radius 
*r  for heterogeneous nucleation is obtained by setting the first derivative of 
Eq. (6) to zero. 
)
7
..(
..........
..........
..........
..........
..........
..........
..........
..........
/)
2
(
*
V
SL
G
r
∆
=
γ
 
The associated free energy barrier 
*
G
∆
, for heterogeneous nucleation is derived by substituting 
the expression for r* into Eq. (6): 
)
8
......(
..........
..........
..........
..........
..........
..........
3
/)
(
16
3
3
*
V
SL
G
S
G
∆
=
∆
θ
πγ
 
 
 
According to Kou [144] and Savage [145], growth of the solid in fusion welding is 
perceived as being initiated by epitaxial growth from the substrate and proceeds by competitive 
growth toward the center line of the weld. At the fusion boundary, since the substrate is assumed 
to be completely wetted by the weld metal, grain growth is initiated in the weld by arranging 
atoms in the liquid phase on the existing crystalline substrate, thus extending the solid without 
altering the crystallographic orientation [146-148]. Moreover, Savage & Aronson [148] noted 
that solidification by epitaxial growth in fusion welding results in nearly complete continuity of 
the crystallographic orientation and grain boundary mis-orientation between base and weld metal 
grains adjacent to the fusion boundary. Therefore, Nelson et al. [141] reported that once 
solidification by epitaxial growth is initiated, it proceeds toward the weld center-line in a 
competitive-type growth mechanism illustrated in Fig. 35A above. This implies that grains with 
growth direction oriented most preferentially along the heat flow direction gradient tend to 
crowd out those grains whose growth directions are not as suitably oriented (Fig. 35A). Whereas,

----- Page 101 (native) -----
100 
 
 
the predominant mechanism of solidification in fusion welding is the competitive growth in the 
weld fusion zone, Kou [144] identified and discussed the details of other mechanisms such as 
dendrite fragmentation, grain detachment, heterogeneous nucleation and surface nucleation that 
may tend can interrupt and/or dominate the solidification structure in fusion welding. 
 
 
 Moreover, Nelson et al. [141] noted that it is unlikely that dendrite fragmentation, grain 
detachment, heterogeneous nucleation and surface nucleation would occur in fusion welding. In 
addition, Lippold et al. [149], defined the nature of the various boundaries observed in single-
phase weld metal as solidification grain boundaries (SGB), solidification sub-grain boundaries 
(SSGB) and migrated grain boundaries (MGB). It is now understood that the nature of epitaxial 
growth in fusion welding metals described in this section produces a network of grain boundaries 
in the fusion zone (Fig. 35A). This network of grain boundaries in the fusion zone consists of the 
solidification grain boundary (SGB) network which is an extension of the heat affected zone 
(HAZ) grain boundaries at the fusion boundary. Nelson et al. [141] and Das [46] noted that the 
fusion boundary morphologies observed in the fusion welding of homogeneous or single-phase 
metal are in contrast to that observed in the welding of heterogeneous substrate and weld metals 
and traditional casting processes because the energy barrier in the latter processes are finite in 
nature (Fig. 35B).  
 
 
For epitaxial solidification to take place in SLM, the substrate must be partially melted 
back (solidification regrowth) to promote growth from the prior grains of the substrate. For

----- Page 102 (native) -----
101 
 
 
solidification regrowth to occur, the amount of material constituted in the layer thickness of 
metal powder to be melted over the substrate metal must be commensurate with the laser energy 
intensity of the chosen processing parameters (laser power and scan rates e.t.c.). This strict 
control of laser-metal powder interaction is essential in order to obtain stronger interlayer 
bonding which results in full density components. Evidence of epitaxial solidification is usually 
confirmed by microstructural examination of cross-sections of SLM processed material 
encompassing several layer thicknesses as demonstrated by Das [46] and reproduced in Fig. 36. 
Fig. 36A is an example of incomplete homologous wetting and solidification whereby the melt 
front from the laser-melted powder layer above propagated down to barely contact the surface of 
the previous layer. The non-uniformity of layer thickness is especially notable. In contrast, layers 
in the cross-section of specimen fabricated at a higher laser power density, shown in Fig. 36B, 
completely indistinguishable indicating continuous grain growth across the layers. This result 
indicates sufficient remelt of the previous layer took place to induce epitaxial solidification. It 
should be noted that these micrographs traverse approximately three layer thicknesses. 
 
(A)
 (B) 
 
Fig. 36. (A) Microstructure of SLM processed Ti-6Al-4V exhibiting porosity and insufficient 
substrate remelts and (B) Etched microstructure of fully dense Ti-6Al-4V specimen [46].

----- Page 103 (native) -----
102 
 
 
 
Since SLM is a localised solidification process which occurs via epitaxial growth, evidence 
from Fig. 35 confirms that it can impart a finer and more uniform grain size to processed parts 
when compared to traditional casting processes. Consequently, this results in better mechanical 
properties. In summary, the mechanism for “good wetting” is ensured by partial remelting of the 
previous layer in SLM giving rise to epitaxial solidification. Remelting the previous layer 
removes surface contaminants, breaks down oxide films, provides a clean solid-liquid interface 
at the atomic level and allows epitaxial solidification. Laser processing parameters in SLM 
should be chosen so as to ensure that sufficient remelt of the previous layer takes place and 
continuity of the solid-liquid interface under the impingement of the laser beam is maintained. 
 
5.1.2: Effect of Processing Conditions on the Microstructure of SLS/SLM Fabricated Parts  
 
Olakanmi et al. [28] examined how the connectivity and orientation of the pores in the 
microstructure of SLS processed AlSi12 powder depended on the processing conditions using a 
CO2 laser system. Their study shows that though the microstructures consist of small pores, the 
connectivity and orientation of pores are largely dependent on the choice of processing 
parameters which determine the quantity of specific laser energy dissipated to the powder bed. 
For instance, elongated pores which are nearly perpendicular to the building direction were 
found in a sample fabricated with laser power of 200 W; scan rates of 120 mm/s; scan spacing of 
0.1 mm and layer thickness of 0.25 mm which generated specific laser energy input of 67 J/mm3 
(Fig. 37C). The inter-agglomerates are fully dense and consist of dendrite grains which are 
oriented nearly perpendicular to the build direction (Fig. 37C). Comparison of the inter-
agglomerate pores obtained at specific laser energy input of 100 J/mm3 and 75 J/mm3 (Fig. 37A,

----- Page 104 (native) -----
103 
 
 
B) with that produced by 67 J/mm3 shows that the size of the inter-agglomerates pores are larger 
and appear less dense than the higher laser energy. 
 
(A) 
 (B) 
 (C) 
 (D) 
 (E) 
 
Fig. 37. Optical micrographs of etched, polished sections parallel to the build directions at 
different energy density: (A) 100 J/mm3 (B) 75 J/mm3 (C) 67 J/mm3 (D) 40 J/mm3 (E)13 J/mm3 
[28]. 
 
 
Furthermore, the inter-agglomerates obtained when specific laser energy inputs are reduced 
to of 40 J/mm3, and 13 J/mm3 are observed not to have been as fully dense as the sample made 
with specific laser energy input of 67 J/mm3. These findings are similar to the results obtained in 
SLS of iron [94] and H13 tool steel [104] as well as SLM of TiC/AlSi10Mg nanocomposites 
[39], AlSi12 [38] and AlSi10Mg [41] powders in that they identified a critical specific laser 
energy input at which microstructural characteristics are optimised. Above this energy input, the 
sintered microstructure of AlSi12 part was characterised by horizontal elongated pores while the 
sintered density remained almost constant. 
 
 
It was also reported that both secondary dendrite arm spacing increased (Fig. 38) and the 
primary phase content decreased (Fig. 39) in the SLS processed AlSi12 microstructure as the

----- Page 105 (native) -----
104 
 
 
energy density increased [28]. Increased secondary dendrite arm spacing as the energy density 
increased was attributed to the fact that at the highest energy density (100 J/mm3), there is the 
potential for greater melt superheat so it takes longer for the initiation of solidification therefore, 
a lower temperature gradient may result giving rise to a lower cooling rate, hence, coarser 
dendrite arm spacing (Fig. 38). Meanwhile, as the specific laser energy input is reduced by one-
third to 67 J/mm3, superheating is not so pronounced giving a higher average interfacial 
temperature gradient leading to a faster cooling rate and slightly finer microstructure as shown in 
Fig. 38.  
 
 
Fig. 38. Relationship between the energy density and the average dendritic arm spacing of the 
SLS processed AlSi12 powders across the depth of the laser sintered AlSi12 samples [28].

----- Page 106 (native) -----
105 
 
 
 
Fig. 39. Effect of energy density on the fraction of primary phase in SLS processed 
AlSi12powder [28]. 
 
 
Moreover, with the specific laser energy input reduced to 50 J/mm3, the heat is just enough 
to sinter the powder and the dendritic microstructure can be seen to have become finer whilst the 
interconnectivity of the porosity increases (Fig. 38). Furthermore, it was demonstrated that the 
growth of the secondary dendritic arm spacing is in direct relationship with the energy density 
irrespective of the depth of measurement because the dissipation of high energy density on the 
powder bed is accompanied by lower thermal gradient and slow undercooling which results in 
coarse “broomlike” dendritic microstructure (Fig. 38 and 40) [28].

----- Page 107 (native) -----
106 
 
 
Top 
Bottom 
(A) 
 
(B) 
 
(C) 
 
(D) 
 
(E) 
 
(F) 
 
Fig. 40. Characteristic microstructures of SLS processed AlSi12 powder with varying processing 
conditions: (A, B) 100 J/mm3; (C, D) 67 J/mm3; (E, F) 50 J/mm3 [28].    
 
 
In consonance with the observation of Steen [127], as the sample height increases, heat 
conduction through the built layers to the substrate becomes very poor and the build temperature 
increases (Fig. 41) thereby causing significant heating to a greater depth with microstructural 
changes to a larger part of the build (Fig. 38 and 40). As a result, the microstructure in the 
bottom part of the build (Fig. 38, 40B, D, and F) becomes coarse as evident by the occurrence of 
larger dendritic arm spacing which implies slower solidification rates. The occurrence of coarse 
structure at the bottom portion of the build could also be attributed to the lower thermal 
conductivity of the powder bed at the first instance laser beam was impinged on it. This initiates

----- Page 108 (native) -----
107 
 
 
low cooling rates at the bottom portion of the build. As the build height increases, subsequent 
layers being deposited solidify on solid metal substrates which initiates high cooling rates, thus 
finer dendritic microstructures are found at the top portion of the build. The disappearance of 
layer bands in AlSi12 parts fabricated with varying energy densities between 50-100 J/mm3 
could be attributed to the same effect [28] while noting that these observations made for SLS 
processed AlSi12 parts are similar to those reported by Srivastava et al. [150] in their studies of 
direct laser fabricated TiAl-based alloys.  
 
 
The variation in fraction of primary phase in SLS processed AlSi12 part is marginal with 
variation in specific laser energy input (Fig. 39) [28]. Arnberg et al. [151] reported that the 
primary dendrite fraction in some Al foundry alloys decreased with increasing cooling rate 
whereas Veldman et al. [152] reported the opposite behaviour, a slight increase with cooling rate. 
Although, Olakanmi and co-investigators [28] emphasised that the processing techniques 
employed by these researchers is quite different from the SLS process,  nevertheless, the finding 
from their study in respect of the influence of the cooling rates on the fraction of primary 
dendrite phase in SLS processed AlSi12 parts agrees with the findings of Veldman et al. [152]. 
The differences in the method of measurement of the fraction of primary dendrite phase as well 
as the chemical composition of the materials investigated by Arnberg and Veldman research 
groups [151, 152] should be noted as this may be responsible for the different findings of their 
work.

----- Page 109 (native) -----
108 
 
 
 
Fig. 41. Sections through the micrograph of AlSi12 (200W-120mm/s) generated by 67 J/mm3 
[28].    
 
 
Finally, it was concluded that the attainment of the highest density (2.05 g/cm3) and most 
desirable microstructure when a critical specific laser energy input was dissipated during SLS of 
AlSi12 powders could be attributed to the initiation of appropriate laser-material interaction 
regime which generates adequate liquid phase for the solidification mechanism, inhibits the 
process of agglomeration, and promotes high cooling rates across the SLS fabricated specimens 
[28]. However, reduced densities and less desired microstructures obtained at the specific laser 
energy inputs lower or higher than the critical specific laser energy input could be explained by 
extremely shorter or longer laser-material interaction regime which promote the life time of the 
existing liquid phase beyond necessary, thus initiating spheroidisation, and extremely low 
cooling rates which result in coarse dendritic structures and porous microstructure in the

----- Page 110 (native) -----
109 
 
 
samples. It is pertinent to note that the work of Olakanmi et al. [28] is classified as SLS because 
the process could not impart full density into AlSi12 parts since infiltration will be needed to 
improve its consolidation process as well as mechanical properties. 
 
(A) 
 (B) 
 (C) 
 
Fig. 42. Optical micrographs showing the variation of microstructure of Ti-48Al-2Mn-2Nb 
(wt.%) alloy consisting of lamellar (Į2 + Ȗ), featureless (Ȗ) and partially lamellar [Ȗ + (Į2 + Ȗ)] 
and fabricated with laser power (A) 300W, (B) 360W, (C) 400W. (Scanning speed 8mm/s; 
powder feed rate 3g/min; z-increment 0.2mm; number of layers 20) [150]. 
 
 
Prior to Olakanmi et al. [28] study, Srivastava et al. [150] investigated the influence of 
process parameters and heat treatment on the microstructure of direct laser fabricated gamma 
titanium aluminide (TiAl) alloy samples. Their findings revealed that a variety of 
microstructures, ranging from cellular to columnar to dendritic morphologies and consisting of 
lamellar (Į2 + Ȗ), featureless (Ȗ) and partially lamellar [Ȗ + (Į2 + Ȗ)], is obtainable upon the 
variation of the laser power and scanning speed (Fig. 42). Moreover, micro heterogeneous and 
finer microstructures were developed in direct laser fabricated titanium alloy samples by 
comparison with their conventionally processed counterparts due to high cooling rates.

----- Page 111 (native) -----
110 
 
 
Subsequent heat treatment of the direct laser fabricated samples eventually resulted in the 
elimination of the compositional heterogeneity and microstructural refinement of the samples.  
 
Brandl et al. [30] also corroborated similar findings from the work of Srivastava et al. [150] 
when they investigated the impact of powder bed temperature, build orientation, and post-
process heat treatment on the microstructure of Nd:YAG laser melted AlSi10Mg parts. They 
discovered that laser traces were present in the as-processed microstructure with its heat affected 
zones characterised by inhomogeneous, coarsed cellular dendrites of Į-Al and inter-dendritic Si-
particles (Fig. 43A). Having analysed their results statistically by design of experiments, 
correlation analysis, and marginal means plots; they established that post heat treatment (peak 
hardening to T6) has the largest effect homogenising the as-built microstructure by dissolving 
dendrites, laser traces, and heat affected zones as the Si particles transform to globular shapes 
(Fig. 43B) while the building direction has the least effect on the microstructure of SLM 
fabricated AlSi10Mg parts.  
 
(A) 
 (B) 
 
Fig. 43. Typical microstructure of SLM processed AlSi10Mg parts at powder bed temperature of 
300 oC, and build orientation of 0o: (A) As built (B) Peak-hardened [30].

----- Page 112 (native) -----
111 
 
 
 
Fig. 44. Micrographs of aluminium alloy 2xxx on Al 6082 substrate after SLM processing (B) 
Optical micrograph of formation of single track; (B) SEM micrograph of microstructure of 
melted middle zone [153]. 
 
Fibre laser at low laser power and high scanning rates had also been employed to achieve 
SLM processing of a range of aluminium alloy powders [27, 36, 138, 153]. Analysis of the 
micrographs of the SLM processed aluminium alloys by fibre lasers confirmed that the 
microstructure was characterised by a high density and a crack-free structure with no occurrence 
of brittle hard oxidation layer (Fig. 44A and B). On a final note, of great interest is the recent 
work of Huang et al. [154] who addressed the SLS/SLM constraints of settings optimal 
parameters to obtain a dense product by employing electromagnetic vibrations (Fig. 45A) to alter 
the solidification process thereby allowing the microstructure (Fig. 45B and C) to be varied via 
magnetic flux density.  This technique may be adopted for creating microstructure-controllable 
products with complex shapes.

----- Page 113 (native) -----
112 
 
 
(A) 
 
(B) 
 
(C) 
 
Fig. 45: (A) Diagram of basic SLM experimental platform with dual-magnetic-pole AC 
electromagnet (SD: scanning direction of laser; MD: movement direction of electromagnet). (B) 
optical metallographic images for Ti-6Al-4V SLM part. (C) Variations of electromagnetic flux 
density with  the average grain size [154]. 
 
Analysis of the literature cited in this section reveals the following: 
  Microstructural evolution in SLS/SLM fabricated parts is controlled by the specific laser 
energy input. 
  The use of suitable heat treatment (e.g. peak hardening to T6 temperature) is able to 
homogenise the microstructure of as-built SLS/SLM fabricated parts.

----- Page 114 (native) -----
113 
 
 
 The use of both CO2 and Nd:YAG laser systems imparts defects such as porosity, and cracks 
into the as-built SLS/SLM fabricated microstructure while fibre laser SLM processed 
specimens are crack and pore free. 
 
5.1.3 Effect of Powder Properties on the Microstructure of SLS/SLM Processed Components 
5.1.3.1: Effect of Particle Size on the Microstructure of SLS Processed Components: Niu & 
Chang [5] observed that SLS of gas atomised powder yielded a highly porous structure when the 
particle size was small <38 µm) or coarse (>150 ȝm) but discovered that laser sinterability was 
better for particle sizes ranging between 53 and 150 ȝm as evidenced by a smooth, dense surface 
of the single layer part (Fig. 46). They attributed the behaviour of finer particle sizes under SLS 
to oxidation, which is more dominant when heating powder of smaller particle sizes. The porous 
structure might have been as a consequence of incomplete wetting rather than some other 
phenomenon being governed only by particle size. Niu & Chang [5] also stated that large 
particles (>100µm) require higher laser power for melting since heat transfer into the powder 
layer is lower. Therefore, for a given energy density, the structure tends to be more porous than a 
structure produced using smaller particle sizes. The observations of Niu & Chang [5] are only 
indicative: to ascertain the actual impact of the particle size and shape on the microstructure and 
mechanical properties, multiple layer experiments need to be carried out.

----- Page 115 (native) -----
114 
 
 
(A) 
 (B) 
  
(C) 
 (D) 
 
Fig. 46. SEM images of laser sintered high speed steel powders using laser power of 50 W and a 
scan rate of 5.0 mm/s and a scan line spacing of 0.15 mm. Particle sizes were: (A) as supplied 
from atomiser (full range), (B) 53 µm – 150 µm, (C) >150 µm and (D) <38 µm [5]. 
 
5.1.3.2 Effect of Alloying on the Microstructure of SLS/SLM Fabricated Parts: It is widely 
believed that additives can have profound effect on the microstructure of laser-sintered 
components: this is illustrated in the following examples. Murali et al. [155] investigated the SLS 
of a powder mixture of iron and graphite (99.22wt.% and 0.78wt.%. respectively) using a pulsed 
Nd: YAG laser and observed the laser sintered iron-graphite parts to be porous with a 
microstructure and mechanical properties substantially different from the same parts fabricated 
from the same powder mixture via conventional P/M. Moreover, they discovered that the carbon 
content in the sintered samples was as low as 0.3wt%. They concluded that in order to achieve a

----- Page 116 (native) -----
115 
 
 
target carbon content, a powder mixture of higher graphite content must be used. Simchi & Pohl 
[156] followed up this suggestion by varying the graphite content between 0.4 to 1.6wt% in 
direct laser sintering. They found that with the addition of graphite (0.4wt% to 0.8wt%) to the 
iron powder, the continuous network of pore channels was eliminated and irregular shaped pores 
surrounded by a fully dense iron matrix were formed (Fig. 47B and C). The microstructure 
consisted of small, spherical pores with no degree of orientation. With increasing graphite 
content (1.2wt%), the total porosity decreased steadily, and more pores were found in the 
microstructure (Fig. 47D). Simchi & Pohl [156] clearly demonstrate that a heterogeneous 
distribution of carbon in the iron matrix (Fig. 48 and Table 9) leads to the formation of different 
phases as corroborated through the work of Murali et al. [155].  
 
Table 9 
The local carbon concentration measured by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) method 
and microhardness values of marked areas in Fig. 48 [156]. 
Area 
Possible phases 
Carbon 
content 
(wt.%) 
Hardness (HV0.025) 
I 
Ferrite 
0.1 
137 
II 
Tempered Martensite 
1.6 
463 
III 
High Carbon Austenite 
1.9 
476 
 
Similar results were obtained for the other sintered parts, although heterogeneity is more 
pronounced in the case of samples having higher graphite content. The work of Simchi & Pohl 
[156] and Murali et al. [155] once again have directed attention to the issue of altering the 
starting powder composition and making the correct choice of alloy addition in order to

----- Page 117 (native) -----
116 
 
 
overcome the problem of heterogenous distribution of phases with the resultant poor mechanical 
properties.  
 
(A) 
 (B) 
  
(C) 
 (D) 
 
Fig. 47. Polished section of laser sintered parts shows the effect of graphite addition on the pore 
structures on a section cut parallel to the building direction; laser power is 215 W, scan rate is 75 
mm/s, scan line spacing is 0.3 mm, and layer thickness is 0.1 mm (A) 0% C (B) 0.4% C (C) 
0.8% C (D) 1.2% C [156]. 
 
   500 ȝm

----- Page 118 (native) -----
117 
 
 
 
Fig. 48. Characteristic microstructure of laser sintered iron-1.2 wt.% graphite powder mixture on 
a section cut parallel to the building direction shows heterogeneous carbon dissolution in the iron 
matrix resulting in the varying local hardness values (Table 2.4). Laser power is 215 W, scan rate 
is 75 mm/s, scan line spacing is 0.3 mm, and layer thickness is 0.1 mm [156]. 
 
 
Prior to these findings, Tang et al. [57] described how microstructural features such as 
porosity, pore size and shape, the agglomerate size, and grain shape of laser sintered copper alloy 
(Cu and Cu3P) are associated with the variation of the amount of in-situ - deoxidiser (SCuP). 
They noted the existence of a large amount of pores at a low SCuP level (25vol%) with small 
agglomerate sizes (200-300 ȝm) of ball-like shape. When the amount of deoxidiser increased to 
40vol%, more molten binder flowed and infiltrated into pores between the copper particles, 
thereby forming big agglomerates and a denser microstructure, but the pore sizes became larger. 
However, at higher fractions of SCuP, the re-arrangement force is higher and the viscosity of the 
mixture was lower, leading to faster re-arrangement of Cu particles and spreading of the binder. 
The molten binder spreads and wets the Cu particles well. The copper particles are pulled 
together by the liquid towards the centre of a laser scan path, thus forming long bar shaped 
tracks. Tang et al. [57] concluded that high porosity was still left in the microstructure due to the

----- Page 119 (native) -----
118 
 
 
short transient interaction duration (0.1 to 1s) between laser and metal powder. The porosity 
could be eliminated by the appropriate choice of the laser processing parameters which allows 
sufficient laser-material interaction duration that eliminates porosity and balling.  
 
 
Moreover, the work of Zhang et al. [118] also affirmed that the addition of nickel (Ni) to 
SLM fabricated tungsten components in varying contents of 10, 20 and 40wt% resulted in bar-
shaped structures, dendrites and honeycomb structures respectively via a mechanism consisting 
of the combination of LPS and partial melting of W particles. Meanwhile, the findings in this 
section corroborate the results obtained from the investigation on the effect of component ratios 
on the attainable liquid phase which determines, to a very great extent, the nature of 
microstructural features and densification mechanisms of direct laser sintered powders (see 
Section 3.2). Therefore, the right choice and correct amount of the appropriate additive for 
microstructural improvement in a typical SLS powder system is very important.  
 
(A) 
(B) 
 (C) 
 
Fig. 49. AFM results presenting ultrafine/nanoscale particles in the cross section of the SLM 
parts 
made 
from 
(A) 
Al/15wt%Fe2O3, 
(B) 
AlMg1SiCu/15wt%Fe2O3, 
and 
(C) 
AlSi10Mg/15wt%Fe2O3 [31].

----- Page 120 (native) -----
119 
 
 
Dadbakhsh & Hao [31] studied the effects of alloying composition of Al, AlMg1-SiCu 
and AlSi10Mg on the microstructure of SLM facilitated aluminium matrix composites via in-situ 
interaction with 15 wt%Fe2O3. They discovered that the in-situ composites made from all the Al 
alloys were reinforced by abundant and very fine particles with the in-situ composite made from 
AlSi10Mg containing the finest particles typically around 50–100 nm in size (Fig. 49). 
Moreover, a solid solution strengthening mechanism resulted in the microstructural 
characteristics of the composites having significant superior microhardness than that of un-
reinforced aluminium alloys thereby suggesting the promising prospective of SLM facilitated in-
situ reaction to produce advanced Al MMCs. The in-situ formed particles in the composites were 
Al oxides (i.e., stable Į–Al2O3), Al–Fe intermetallics (i.e., equilibrium Al13Fe4 and other non-
equilibrium Al–Fe phases), and Si crystals (alone or in combination such as Al0.5Fe3Si0.5, 
Al0.7Fe3Si0.3 and Al3FeSi2), depending on the Al alloy composition. The lower thermal 
conductivity of AlMg1SiCu or AlSi10Mg caused transformation of non-equilibrium Al–Fe 
intermetallics into equilibrium Al13Fe4 thereby resulting in extension of the solubility of Mg, Si, 
and Cu in Al matrix via rapid solidification.  
 
Meanwhile, there is still scarcity of literature dealing with the effect of sintering 
atmospheres and alloying additions in the SLS/SLM of aluminium or its alloys on microstructure 
with the exception of Wang et al. [38] who established that a He atmosphere produces lower 
ductility due to the formation of pore clusters in the AlSi12 microstructure whereas both argon 
and nitrogen atmospheres result in the SLM produced parts having a small amount of porosity. 
However, the mechanism responsible for the He processed porous microstructure as well as Ar

----- Page 121 (native) -----
120 
 
 
and N processed well consolidated microstructure is not currently understood. In addition, Ferrar 
et al. [157] examined the effect of inert gas flow within the SLM process as well as the nature of 
its influence induced by this gas flow on the reproducibility of the key attributes of porous 
titanium components. It was revealed that the measured attributes were significantly affected by 
the improved gas flow, with porosity reducing and the compression strength improving. Ferrar 
and co-investigators then incorporated the design modifications into a new machine designed to 
enable the production of porous components of closer control and greater reproducibility. 
Reports on the indirect SLS of aluminium alloys carried out at the University of Queensland in 
Australia, document the effects of nitrogen sintering atmospheres and alloying addition but only 
as they affect the dimensional stability of the components, [158-161] as no mention is made of 
their effect on microstructure.  
 
5.2 Metallurgical Defects 
 
 
Common metallurgical defects in SLS/SLM processed metallic parts are porosity, cracking, 
oxide inclusions, and loss of alloying elements. In the remaining parts of this section, each of 
these defects is elucidated by highlighting the mechanism of their formation, main influencing 
factors, and the remedial measures. 
 
5.2.1 Porosity 
 
Typical porosities common in SLS/SLM processed parts are insufficient/incomplete 
melting (lack of fusion) porosity; porosity as a consequence of entrapment of gases by surface

----- Page 122 (native) -----
121 
 
 
turbulence, and shrinkage porosity [28, 41, 96, 162, 163]. Porosities caused by 
insufficient/incomplete melting (lack of fusion porosity) are usually found along layer 
boundaries, irregularly shaped, and elongated in the x-y plane of the deposit with the size and 
number of pores strongly influenced by processing parameters such as laser power, layer 
thickness, scanning rates, and scan spacing [28, 41, 96]. The highest fusion porosity is obtained 
in regions having a preponderance of insufficient/incomplete melting across the interlayers, 
whereas the porosity is minimised when laser processing results in continuous interlayer melting 
[28, 41, 50, 95, 96]. Poor fusion porosity has been attributed to insufficient dissipation of the 
laser energy density into the powder layer thickness such that the top of the previous layer cannot 
be re-melted to attain coherent bonding (Fig. 19 and 36).  
 
 
Another possible explanation for the low fusion porosity in SLS/SLM processed parts is 
that the gas bubbles are entrapped in the interlayers during laser scanning. The entrapment of the 
gas bubbles thereby results in an unstable scan track because the vapourisation of the scan tracks 
is not uniform while their positions vary with time [7, 58, 96, 129, 163]. Scan track stability 
during SLS/SLM processing is also a function of the balance of forces active within the scan 
track. With the formation of a vapour cavity, the fluid forces of the molten pool tend to be 
balanced by the vaporisation pressure within the cavity [7, 58, 96, 129, 163]. The characteristic 
instability of the scan tracks consequently results in periodic collapse of the liquid metal 
surrounding the vapour cavity and the formation of periodic voids [7, 58, 96, 129, 163]. It was 
speculated that the metallic vapour was the major gas inside the scan track, with some shielding 
gas, possibly entrained into the scan track [7, 58, 96, 129, 163]. With the metal vapour thought to

----- Page 123 (native) -----
122 
 
 
have condensed during cooling; therefore, the main gas species in these pores at room 
temperature are expected to be mainly the entrained shielding gas. In order to reduce porosity, 
the scan track must be kept stable by employing high power/high speed SLS/SLM processing 
parameters [162]. Another possibility is the use of high-power continuous wave Nd:YAG lasers 
resulting in only a slightly ionised vapour flow [7, 58, 129]. The shorter wavelength of Nd:YAG 
lasers, in comparison to CO2 lasers, is responsible for less severe plasma effects (absorption and 
defocusing); thus leading to improved stability of the scan track [7, 58, 99, 105, 129, 164]. 
Moreover, increased average power (and hence energy density) dissipation on the powder 
bed/substrate has been found to maintain a continuous scan track during SLS/SLM processing 
[162].  
 
 
Similar to the processing conditions in laser welding, it is also possible that scan track 
instability and pore formation may also be minimised by suitably adjusting the defocus of the 
beam [165]. It had also been reported that during pulsed wave (PW) laser processing, there is a 
scanning speed at which the occurrence of porosity reached a maximum. This was attributed to 
the potential for gas to escape during the delayed solidification time at high energy density (low 
scanning rates/high laser power) and at reduced depth of the scan track at low energy density 
(high scanning rates/low laser power). Pulsed laser systems may provide the possibility to 
control the laser energy dissipation into the powder bed/substrate and thereby control the 
solidified microstructure, porosity, and solidification cracking [130]. The stability of the scan 
track is greatly affected by the pulse because each pulse has to reopen the scan track after its 
breakdown. Process cavities can be reduced if the porosity formed in a previous pulse is

----- Page 124 (native) -----
123 
 
 
effectively removed from the scan track formed by the next pulse when the overlapping ratio of 
two scan tracks is adequate [7, 58, 129, 130, 164]. Therefore, it is recommended to shorten the 
off-time of the pulse to less than the solidification time of the molten pool [7, 58, 129, 130, 164]. 
This requires a high-duty cycle and high amount of overlap of the fusion zone during one pulse 
transition [7, 58, 129, 130, 164]. It is recommended the adoption of short pulse durations and low 
energies in the case of pulsed wave systems to keep the area melted as small as possible [7, 58, 
129, 130, 164]. A pulse shape with gradually decreasing peak power levels or possibly combined 
with the use of a CW laser beam can also be used to reduce or prevent porosity and cracking 
[131]. The proper tailing wave allows withdrawal of the scan track gradually during 
solidification while the CW contribution causes a preheating effect to increase absorptivity 
[131]. With the development of high-power and high-quality lasers, stable scan tracks can be 
obtained, especially using CW Nd:YAG lasers.  
 
 
Moreover, porosity may still occur by another important mechanism, i.e. the entrapment of 
gases by turbulent flow of liquid metal in molten pools as mentioned in [7, 58, 96, 129, 162, 
166]. Gases are entrapped into liquid metal in the molten pool via surface turbulence (but not 
bulk turbulence). The entrapment of gas and surface oxide films via surface turbulence had been 
explored in castings [167]. The turbulent motion in a molten pool is supposed to be extensively 
understood in SLS/SLM: however, no investigation has been conducted on this mechanism. As 
noted earlier on, the entrapped gas by this mechanism was thought to be the shielding gas [162]. 
Possibly, the entrained gas species by surface turbulence may be metal vapour, shielding gas, or 
their combination. Further study is needed to explore the mechanism and control fluid motion in

----- Page 125 (native) -----
124 
 
 
the molten pool to avoid entrapment of gases (and the possible entrapment of oxide films). 
Shrinkage porosity occurs during solidification as a consequence of inadequate metal feeding 
[28].  
 
 
In summary, three mechanisms of pore formation may operate in SLS/SLM processing: 
however, the dominant mechanisms for pore formation during SLS/SLM processing of 
aluminium alloys need to be thoroughly investigated. The collapse of imperfect scan tracks or 
surface turbulent flow in the molten pool is considered to be the main causes of pores during 
SLS/SLM processing of metallic powders. An explicit relationship between the types of porosity 
and SLS/SLM process parameters is still lacking. Moreover, no information is available on the 
structural significance of small pores in SLS/SLM processed aluminium alloys.  
 
5.2.2 Cracking 
The tendency of aluminium alloy parts processed by SLS/SLM to encounter cracking is 
very strong. This could be explained by their large solidification temperature range, high co-
efficient of thermal expansion, and large solidification shrinkage [4, 168]. Similar to laser 
welded aluminium alloy components, SLS/SLM processed parts can also encounter liquation and 
solidification cracks. Liquation cracks had been attributed to the high amount of alloying 
additions, present in heat treatable alloys, which precipitate low melting point eutectic phases [4, 
168]. Provided sufficient stress is present with the application of high laser energy density, the 
melt will tear. Occurrence of liquation cracking can be reduced in SLS/SLM processed 
aluminium alloy parts by minimising the dissipated energy density on the powder bed/substrate.

----- Page 126 (native) -----
125 
 
 
Liquation cracking has not been investigated in SLS/SLM processed aluminium alloy parts. 
Therefore, a detail study exploring how the SLS/SLM process parameters, powder properties, 
alloy composition, cooling rates, and part geometry influence the susceptibility of SLS/SLM 
processed aluminium alloy parts to liquation cracking will be necessary.  
 
Solidification cracking had been observed in SLS/SLM fabricated parts made in several 
alloyed metallic parts [169]; however, it is scarcely observed in aluminium alloy parts processed 
with CW Nd:YAG laser systems while the contrary is true for PW Nd:YAG laser systems [30, 
170]. Moreover, heat treatable 2000 and 6000 series alloys are known to be more susceptible to 
solidification cracking than work hardening 5000 alloys during laser processing [4, 165, 171, 
172]. Cao et al. [168] highlighted how different theories have been employed to elucidate the 
mechanism of solidification cracking in laser processing. They asserted that solidification 
cracking is a function of the interaction between the augmented strain rate and the total strain 
resulting from external displacement and internal free shrinkage related to the ductility curve. On 
the basis of the outcome of the study by Cieslak & Fuerschbach [170], who compared the hot 
cracking susceptibility data of Al-Mg-Si alloys fabricated via casting and arc welding with PW 
Nd:YAG laser processing, it was established that the guidelines developed for minimising 
occurrence of solidification cracking in arc welding needed to be modified for laser processing 
because the cooling rates and the heat inputs encountered are different.  
 
Solidification cracking in aluminium alloy parts had been found to be metallurgically 
influenced by the temperature range of dendrite coherence, and the amount of liquid available

----- Page 127 (native) -----
126 
 
 
during freezing [30, 172]. The possibility for solidification cracking to occur is higher when an 
alloy has a wide critical solidification temperature range because solidification strains are 
directly related to the temperature interval over which solidification takes place and the tensile 
properties and ductility of the alloy are low in the freezing range [30, 171-173]. In regards to 
SLS/SLM processing, the actual liquidus and solidus temperatures are depressed further because 
of a lack of diffusion during non-equilibrium rapid solidification [30, 45]. Consequently, a wider 
critical temperature range and higher solidification cracking susceptibility are expected during 
SLS/SLM processing of aluminium alloys. Analysis of the literature on the solidification 
cracking susceptibility of laser processed aluminium alloys confirms that its occurrence is more 
pronounced in 0.8% Si in Al-Si; 1 to 3% Cu in Al-Cu; 1 to 1.5%  Mg in Al-Mg; and 1% Mg2Si 
in Al-Mg-Si alloys [168]. The addition of alloying elements with a view to narrowing the critical 
solidification range can also alter the melt pool composition to avoid cracking [30, 172, 174].  
 
During solidification, alloying elements and impurities are segregated at the grain 
boundaries by a micro-segregation mechanism, causing liquation films to persist down to low 
temperature [172, 174]. To minimise the initiation of stresses and cracks, it is necessary that 
sufficient liquid is available to fill in the cracks and take up the strain formed during 
solidification [172, 174]. Therefore, crack initiation by strain evolution competes with crack 
healing via refilling by residual liquid. Even though, crack initiation rate increases with strains, 
the refilling and healing movement of the residual liquid are controlled by its fluidity [172, 174]. 
The amount of eutectic necessary to prevent cracking varies with composition and freezing rate. 
The 5000 series alloys are not susceptible to solidification cracking due to their high Mg

----- Page 128 (native) -----
127 
 
 
contents, whereas, heat treatable alloys have higher solidification cracking tendency as a result of 
greater amount of alloying which create a tendency to form low melting constituents and widen 
the critical temperature ranges [2]. Therefore, 5000 alloys can be SLS/SLM processed without 
solidification cracking, whereas 2000 and 6000 alloys require alloying addition to modify 
composition and avoid solidification cracking [175].  
 
The solidification cracking susceptibility of SLS/SLM processed aluminium alloys is 
expected to be process sensitive. In SLM process, it had been reported that there exists an 
optimum laser energy density at which a crack-free fully densed part is obtainable. Above this 
value, solidification cracking occurs at energy density higher than the optimum value due to a 
low liquid viscosity, a long liquid lifetime, and resultant elevated thermal stresses; whereas at 
lower energy density, a disorderly liquid solidification front and a significant balling effect result 
in crack formation due to an enhanced instability of the liquid caused by Marangoni convection 
[28, 36, 176].  
 
The dissipation of lower laser energy density enhances the tendency for a fine dendritic 
structure and grain size on the SLM processed part as a consequence of rapid cooling [28, 176]. 
The occurrence of solidification cracking suggests that rapid cooling associated with lower laser 
energy density ensures the mushy zone remains wide in the laser processed parts [168]. Rapid 
cooling accelerates the development of high thermal shrinkage strains and increases stress 
gradient that promote high crack initiation rate. The residual liquid along grain boundaries in the 
mushy zone may be formed in a film-like shape, leading to easier concentration of strains and

----- Page 129 (native) -----
128 
 
 
occurrence of solidification cracks during SLM processing [162, 169]. Moreover, rapid cooling 
also reduces the time required for the residual liquid to refill and heal the initiated cracks [162, 
169, 177]. According to Cao et al. [168], rapid cooling rate may also be responsible for the 
increased solidification crack susceptibility in pulsed laser processed parts; though, pulsed-laser 
processing produces grain refinement and higher process control flexibility in comparison to CW 
laser processing. For example, higher susceptibility of solidification cracking and porosity at 
lower duty cycles was established by PW Nd:YAG processing of 2024-T3 alloy [177]. 
  
In similarity to laser welding, it is expected that by decreasing the cooling rate and the 
solidification rate, especially at the late stage of solidification of the melt pool during SLM 
processing, the propensity for the formation of solidification cracking will eventually be reduced 
[168]. During PW laser processing, higher pulse repetition rate and higher duty cycle are 
effective in reducing cracking [7, 129]. According to Morgan et al. [7]; O’Neil et al. [129]; and 
Cao et al. [168], the cracking may be prevented during PW laser processing provided the next 
pulse takes place before the initiation of solidification cracking caused by the previous pulse. On 
this ground, it is recommended to shorten the off-time of the pulse (using high duty cycle) to less 
than the solidification time of the molten pool [7, 129, 168]. The control of pulse shape with 
gradually decreasing peak power levels (tailing) or possibly combined with use of a CW laser 
beam can be used to reduce or prevent porosity and cracks [131]. 
 
Moreover, Cao et al. [168] noted that during the pulsed mode of operation, a pulse with a 
laser output greater than a minimum is thought to be effective for crack prevention. Since the

----- Page 130 (native) -----
129 
 
 
susceptibility of wider parts to cracking is less than that for narrower parts, a larger focussed spot 
size and a lower scanning speed to produce wider parts may overcome cracking [168]. 
Preheating the powder bed or the substrate can also avoid solidification cracking because it 
affects cooling rates [30]. To produce crack-free SLS/SLM processed parts, it is necessary that 
investigation is carried out to define the parameter-operating window for different aluminium 
alloys. 
 
5.2.3 Oxide Inclusions 
The surface oxide film is known to inhibit the densification mechanism by promoting 
balling and disrupting inter-particulate coalescence/wetting across the laser sintered/melted 
layers. Similar to the casting process as pointed out by Campbell [167], oxide may get into the 
melt pool either via alloying addition into the metal powder during primary processing (“old 
oxides”) or air/gas entrapment via surface turbulent flow (“young oxides”) during SLS/SLM 
processing. For example, addition of Mg or Si to the aluminium alloy prior to atomisation might 
be expected to change the nature of the oxide film. Specifically, Mg promotes the formation of 
spinel (MgAl2O4) in thin layers and Si, the formation of mullite (Al2O3 SiO2) [178]. As noted 
earlier on, because the vapourisation of alloying elements in the scan tracks is not uniform while 
the scan track positions vary with time, rapidly fluctuating scan tracks tend to entrap the 
shielding gas or even air since the shielding gas may not be truly pure [7, 58, 129, 179]. 
Consequently, some oxide particles possibly occur in the scan track vapour. The surface of the 
liquid metal in the melt pool then become oxidised to form oxide film as a result of the 
entrapment of air or shielding gas into the melt pool.

----- Page 131 (native) -----
130 
 
 
 
Fig. 50. SEM secondary electron image taken from the two opposing fracture surface of sand 
cast Al-Si11.5-Mg0.4 showing an extensive double oxide film [180]. 
 
Oxide films in powdered aluminium alloys have two sides: the dry, unbonded inner 
surfaces, and their wetted exterior surfaces. According to Campbell [167], oxide films are always 
folded dry side to dry side (on the opposing fracture surfaces of a tensile casting as shown in Fig. 
50. The wetted sides of oxide films during SLS/SLM processing of aluminium alloys may 
possibly nucleate into intermetallics phases as cracks in the fabricated parts. In agreement with 
Nyahumwa and co-researchers [181], other possible position for oxides in SLS/SLM processed 
aluminium alloys may be the grain boundaries since aluminium dendrites are unlike not nucleate 
through the unwetted dry side of the oxide films. Consequently, according to Cao & Campbell, 
[182], the gap between the two dry sides of the folded doubled oxide films constitutes the cracks 
in the aluminium alloy part with the width between them always less than 10 µm. Therefore, the 
unwetted dry sides of oxide films become the potential nucleation sites for gas and shrinkage 
porosity [167]. Oxide films in the inside surfaces of porosity had been reported in laser processed

----- Page 132 (native) -----
131 
 
 
aluminium alloy parts [168]. The oxide films as cracks in nature are expected to initiate cracks or 
inclusions in the SLS/SLM processed aluminium alloy parts.  
 
 
Fig. 51. (A) Marangoni convection in the melt pool. (B) Oxide disruption and solidification 
of the melt pool [27]. 
 
Louvis et al. [27] pointed out that the difficulties encountered when SLM processing aluminium 
and its alloys appeared to be caused by thin oxide films, and in many ways these defects are the 
same as those seen in conventional casting. They observed that the formation of oxide films on 
both solid and liquid metal surfaces leaves oxide films between the laser hatches at every layer of 
the aluminium parts and where two oxide films meet then pores are formed (Fig. 51). As noted 
earlier on, since the formation of oxide films cannot be avoided completely, the SLM process 
must break up these oxides if fully dense parts are to be formed, and this is why SLM fabrication 
of high density parts requires high laser power. According to Louvis and co-researchers, the

----- Page 133 (native) -----
132 
 
 
oxide film on the upper surface of the melt pool evaporates under the laser beam but on the other 
surfaces it remains intact. They then reasoned that Marangoni forces that stir the melt pool are 
the most likely mechanism by which lower  oxide films are disrupted but not the sides, thereby 
creating the ‘walls’ of oxides. They concluded that further research on the SLM of aluminium 
should be primarily orientated towards new methods of controlling the oxidation process and 
disrupting oxide films formed within the components. 
 
Just as oxide films are damaging to aluminium alloy castings, so they are to SLS/SLM 
processed parts made in aluminium alloys. However, the potential role of oxide films has not 
been elucidated in SLS/SLM processed aluminium alloy parts due to abundance of some defects 
such as porosity, cracking, and loss of alloying elements. It is expected that the potential role of 
oxide films will possibly be highlighted in SLS/SLM processing of aluminium alloys in the 
future, once these defects are eliminated.  
 
5.2.4 Loss of Alloying Elements 
High-power density employed in laser processing may cause selective vapourisation of 
alloying elements with low fusion points because of their higher equilibrium vapour pressure 
than aluminium [46, 183, 184]. According to Collur et al. [184], intrinsic vaporisation of alloying 
elements at the melt pool surface controls the overall vaporisation during laser processing while 
its mechanism of formation entails (i) transportation of vaporisation elements from the bulk to 
the surface of the molten pool; (ii) vaporisation of elements at the liquid/vapour interface; and 
(iii) transportation of the vaporised species into the surrounding gas phases.

----- Page 134 (native) -----
133 
 
 
Selective vaporisation of alloying elements leads to degradation of functional properties 
of laser processed parts. For example, vaporisation of Mg in laser processed aluminium alloys 
may result in the loss of precipitation strengthening, thereby, causing reduction in yield strength 
and hardness [183]; elongation and formability [184]; corrosion resistance and solidification 
cracking susceptibility [183]. The depletion of alloying elements also lead to scan track 
instability and high level of porosity in laser processed parts [46] thereby necessitating that 
appropriate measures be taken with a view to ensuring a reduction in vaporisation loss of 
alloying elements.  
 
By controlling the beam power density distribution and adjusting the pulsing parameters 
during CW and PW laser processing respectively, the temperature of the molten pool can be 
regulated, thereby reducing the loss of alloying elements. The change in the chemical 
composition of the laser processed part is a function of the vaporisation rate and the volume of 
the molten pool [185, 186]. Although, alloying vaporisation rate increases with the dissipated 
energy density, the change in composition is most pronounced at low energy density levels due 
to small size, and the high surface-to-volume ratio, of the molten pool [185, 186]. Therefore, 
employing laser processing conditions combining medium or high power with high scanning 
rates is critical to avoiding alloying vaporisation [184]. Fluxing materials can also be used to 
compensate for the loss of alloying elements: however, no science-based measures are currently 
used to avoid alloying losses during SLS/SLM processing of aluminium alloys.

----- Page 135 (native) -----
134 
 
 
6 Mechanical Properties of SLS/SLM Fabricated Parts 
 
 
From Table 10, it is evident that the SLS/SLM process is able to impart adequate 
mechanical properties to components produced from metal powders when compared to other 
manufacturing techniques [187-189]. To understand how mechanical properties of SLS/SLM 
processed parts vary with the fractional density, the effect of pores (porosity and pore shape) on 
the structural integrity (impact energy, fracture toughness, and fatigue strength) of P/M sintered 
parts will be discussed briefly. Thereafter, recent studies detailing the mechanical properties of 
SLS/SLM parts will be presented. Although, a sintered sample may attain full density; 
nevertheless, it may possess inferior mechanical properties as a result of microstructural defects, 
the presence of inclusions such as oxides (Fig. 52). Pores reduce the effective load carrying 
capacity of a material and act as stress concentrators and effective crack initiation sites which 
affect hardness, tensile properties, and ductility [187]. Therefore, a sample with residual 
microstructural porosity would be expected to be weaker than fully dense bulk material. 
Interestingly, mechanical properties of sintered parts are sensitive to pore shape and placement. 
Smooth pores at large spacings are noted to be less detrimental than small, closely spaced pores 
(Fig. 53). The undesirable influence of pores on ductility is as a consequence of crack initiation 
at the pores. Therefore, aside from the effect of pore volume on ductility, there is a further 
sensitivity to pore shape.

----- Page 136 (native) -----
135 
 
 
Table 10 
Comparative analysis of parts fabricated by SLS/SLM and other traditional production processes [188, 189]. 
Techniques 
Min. 
mass 
(g) 
Max. 
mass (g) 
Min. section 
Thickness (mm) 
Shape 
complexity 
Tooling 
Lead time 
Typical Tensile 
Strength (M Pa) 
SLS/SLM 
5 
5,000 
0.5 
5 Highest 
Nil 
Days 
100- 230 
Machining 
1 
No limit 
0.1 
4 High 
Nil 
Days to weeks 
100- 600 
Investment casting 
5 
30,000 
0.5 
4 High 
Simple 
Days to weeks 
100- 280 
Sand casting 
50 
No limit 
3 
3 Fair 
Moderate 
Weeks 
130- 480 
Powder metallurgy 
1 
1,000 
1.5 
3 Fair 
Complex 
Months 
130- 400 
Die casting 
<50 
50,000 
1 
2 Low 
Complex 
Months 
200- 360 
Closed die forging 
10 
No limit 
3 
2 Low 
Complex 
Months 
330- 660 
Extrusion 
1,000 
No limit 
1 
1 Lowest 
Moderate 
Weeks 
100- 400

----- Page 137 (native) -----
136 
 
 
 
Fig. 52. Impact energy as a function of the oxide inclusion content in a hot-repressed 4340 steel, 
showing the detrimental effect of a small level contamination [113]. 
 
(A) 
 (B) 
 
Fig. 53. The pores (dark spots) in these two sintered steels vary in shape and size, largely due to 
differences in sintering cycles. The arrangement of pores outlining the particles in (A) is 
detrimental to final properties, while the smooth pore structure evident in (B) is more desirable 
[113].

----- Page 138 (native) -----
137 
 
 
 
On the basis of the above discourse, German [113] and Grayson et al. [190] inferred that 
the shape, spacing, size, and placement of pores contribute to the significant variation in ductility 
observed in P/M materials. German [113] noted that with a porosity level greater than 15%, 
ductility is often negligible. Grayson et al. [190] characterised the fatigue behaviour of 
unreinforced pressed and sintered aluminium alloys by examining aspects of crack initiation and 
growth. They discovered that crack initiation occurred at surface or sub-surface pores and pore 
clusters with the veins of oxide observed on fatigue fracture surfaces. The presence of the veins 
of oxide was attributed to pre-existing microstructural features arising from the residue of the 
alumina film on the aluminium powder particles. Moreover, Upadhyaya [191] established that, 
for a common P/M alloy (201 AB), the tensile strength for a compaction pressure of 110 MPa 
and sintered density of 2.53 g/cm3 (approximately 9vol% porosity) was 169 MPa. When the 
sintered density was increased to 2.70 g/cm3 (6% higher density), the tensile strength increased 
by ~25% to 209 MPa.  
 
 
Furthermore, German [113] highlighted the role of porosity in low-alloy (Ni-Mo-C) steels; 
for instance, the fatigue endurance strength for hot forged material having 0% porosity is 650 
MPa, whilst the value for the same alloy produced by metal injection moulding (3% porosity) is 
575 MPa and die compaction (12% porosity) is 390 MPa. In the formation of fatigue cracks and 
their propagation through the microstructure, pores play a significant role. Given the condition of 
dynamic loading, the crack grows ever so slightly on each stress cycle, eventually reaching a 
point where fracture takes place [113]. The nature of the final failure may be ductile or brittle.

----- Page 139 (native) -----
138 
 
 
 
An understanding of the nature of the failure demands an accurate interpretation of the 
microstructure and of the fracture surface [192]. The presence of dimples on the SEM fractured 
surfaces is an indication of ductile failure while brittle fracture is characterised by cleavage with 
each fractured grain flat and differently oriented, thereby giving a “crystalline” or “rock candy” 
appearance to the fracture surface [192]. The impact energy and fracture toughness are also 
sensitive to pores. The impact energy is the energy needed to fracture a sample, while the 
fracture toughness indicates the energy required for the crack growth in an already defective 
structure [113]. Porous P/M parts are poor in impact toughness and fracture toughness tests. In 
the subsequent section, the mechanical behaviour of SLS/SLM processed parts is presented. 
 
6.1 Hardness and Wear Resistance 
 
Fig. 54A illustrates the optimum hardness of 145 HV0.1 obtained when a scanning rate of 
2,500 mm/s was employed for SLM processing of AlSi10Mg samples at high scanning velocities 
and laser powers as investigated by Buchbinder et al. [24]. The outcome of this study showed 
that the hardness of the SLM processed AlSi10Mg samples was not influenced by the adoption 
of high scan rates and laser power in contrary to earlier finding in Buchbinder et al. [193] where 
an increase in hardness with increasing scanning velocity had been demonstrated.

----- Page 140 (native) -----
139 
 
 
(A) 
 
(B) 
 
Fig. 54. Hardness of SLM processed AlSi10Mg samples depending on (A) scan rate (B) scan 
spacing [24]. 
 
Figure 54B also shows the variation of hardness of SLM processed AlSi10Mg parts with 
different scan spacings as measured by Buchbinder et al. [24]. It is evident that the resulting 
hardness of samples is independent of the adopted range of scan spacing and reaches an optimum 
value of 148 HV0.1 at a scan spacing of 0.15mm (Figure 54B). Optimum hardness value reported 
for SLM processed AlSi10Mg parts was found to be twice the hardness value obtained for die

----- Page 141 (native) -----
140 
 
 
cast AlSi10Mg components according to EN 1706 standards and this could be attributed to high 
solidification rates resulting from the adoption of high scanning velocities. 
 
According to Mercelis & Kruth [194] and Gu & Meiners [195], residual stresses are not 
always disadvantageous in SLM fabricated parts because its retention at a reasonable level 
enhances the part’s hardness provided a sufficiently high densification without the formation of 
cracks or pores could be achieved. Moreover, the rapid solidification effect imparted on the as-
processed parts by the SLM which results in grain refinement of microstructure is another reason 
that could be attributed to increased hardness of SLM fabricated parts. Consequently, this lowers 
the part’s co-efficient of friction (COF), thereby improving the wear resistance of SLM 
fabricated parts. Gu and co-researchers [176] demonstrated how variation of process parameters 
altered the phase constitutions and microstructural characteristics of SLM fabricated commercial 
pure (CP) Ti parts with the  variation in hardness and wear rate obtained for the parts attributed 
to this effect.  
 
For example, when Gu et al. [176] employed scanning rate of 100 mm s-1 for the SLM 
processing of commercially pure (CP) Ti parts, the average COF reached a high value of 1.41, 
resulting in a considerably elevated wear rate of 1.19 x 10-3 mm3 N-1 m-1. The worn surface 
obtained at 100 mm s-1 primarily consisted of parallel, deep grooves representing abrasion wear 
with the loose fragments at the edges of grooves revealing the local severe deformation and 
plowing of the surface during sliding. Moreover, some irregular shaped debris in the form of 
particles was also observed on the wear surface (Fig. 55A). Upon increasing the scanning rate to

----- Page 142 (native) -----
141 
 
 
200 mm s-1, the worn surface showed much shallower grooves, free of any loose abrasive 
fragments (Fig. 55B), thereby reducing the mean COF and attendant wear rate to 1.16 and 8.82 x 
10-4 mm3 N-1 m-1, respectively. Interestingly, both the co-efficient of friction (0.98) and wear rate 
(8.43 x 10-4 mm3 N-1 m-1) of CP Ti parts were minimised at the optimum scanning rate of 300 
mm s-1 as a consequence of very high hardness of 3.89GPa imparted on the parts.  
 
(A) 
 (B) 
 
(C) 
 (D) 
 
Fig. 55. SEM images showing characteristic morphologies of worn surfaces of SLM-processed 
Ti parts at: (A) 900 J m-1, 100 mm s-1; (B) 450 J m-1,  mm s-1; (C) 300 J m-1, 300 mm s-1; (D) 225 
J m-1, 400 mm s-1 [176]. 
 
Similar to Jain et al. [196], the formation of an adherent, plastically smeared tribolayer 
(Fig. 55C) on the worn surface contributed to the enhancement of wear performance at the 
instance scanning rate was optimised. Analysis of findings from the work of Gu et al. [176] 
implies that the mechanism of material removal during sliding changes from abrasion (Fig. 55A) 
to adhesion of the tribolayer (Fig. 55C) for SLM fabricated CP Ti part with the transition

----- Page 143 (native) -----
142 
 
 
phenomena favouring the reduction in wear rate after sliding. When a higher scanning rate of 
400 mm s-1 was adopted, although the localized formation of tribolayer was still observed on the 
worn surface, severe spalling and delamination of the tribolayer occurred (Fig. 55D). Both the 
COF and the wear rate were found to have increased significantly to 1.29 and 1.08 10-4 mm3 N-1 
m-1 respectively. According to Gu et al. [176], comparative analysis of the phase constitution, 
densification kinetics, and microstructural properties of SLM fabricated CP Ti parts reveals that 
limited hardness and wear performance of the part processed at a low scan speed is ascribed to 
insufficient densification rate due to the formation of thermal microcracks; and the formation of 
relatively coarsened grains. For parts processed at a higher scan rate, although the formation of 
considerably refined martensitic Į' phase should favour an improvement in hardness and wear 
property, the undesirable densification kinetics of the powder due to the presence of interlayer 
micropores weakens the ultimate performance of the as-processed Ti part. In conclusion, they 
stated that the applied SLM conditions for various Ti samples exerted a significant influence 
upon obtainable hardness and wear performance. 
 
Chlebus et al. [197] reported the effect of build orientation (x, y, and z-directions) on the 
hardness of SLM processed Tiʊ6Alʊ7Nb alloy. Their study revealed that the larger the 
specimen area parallel to the built platform and the smaller the specimen height (measured in z 
direction), the higher the hardness as a consequence of the grain size of the primary ȕ phase. 
However, lower hardness obtained for vertical specimens in comparison to hardness of 
horizontal ones was attributed to the larger ȕ grain size, and consequently the longer and thicker 
Įƍ martensite laths. The implication of these outcomes is that differences in the surface area of

----- Page 144 (native) -----
143 
 
 
the layers initiated variation in the thermal history of the material, thereby altering the 
microstructural properties and consequently the hardness values.  
 
6.2 Tensile Strength 
 
 
Tensile strength “which is primarily dependent on fractional density” exhibits similar 
trends to the variation of sintered density with respect to scan speed and laser power (Fig. 56). 
Besides the fractional density, the strength of SLS/SLM processed samples also depends on 
various powder characteristics such as particle size and distribution, and particle shape, alloying 
element e.t.c. As observed in other studies, higher SLS/SLM part densities were obtained by 
using a lower layer thickness [50, 94]. However, the minimum layer thickness that can be 
successfully employed is determined by various factors and most importantly by the maximum 
particle size in the system, as discussed in Section 4.2.1. 
 
 
Fig. 56. Ultimate tensile strength of SLS-processed bronze-nickel parts as a function of scan 
speed and laser power [50].

----- Page 145 (native) -----
144 
 
 
Below a certain layer thickness, the roller mechanism tends to displace the previously sintered 
layers from their predetermined position, thus disturbing the geometry of the component. [50]. 
This problem is particularly serious during the early build-up of the component. In a study 
carried out by Agarwala et al. [50] on bronze (Cu-10%wt.Sn)-nickel powders having 
agglomerate particles as large as ~150 µm, it was discovered that lowering layer thickness from 
500 µm to 250 µm resulted in an increase in ultimate tensile strength from approximately 35MPa 
to 60 MPa, irrespective of laser power or scan speed. The lower layer thickness resulted in 
improved sintering between layers thus advancing the part density. However, lowering the layer 
thickness to 125 µm resulted in difficulty in spreading fresh layer of powders without disturbing 
previously sintered layers.  
 
 
Agarwala and co-investigators [50] also observed that strength was considerably lower 
when bronze-nickel specimens were oriented and scanned in a longitudinal direction (40 MPa) in 
comparison to when they were oriented and scanned in the transverse direction (60 MPa). This is 
as a result of the short scan vector in the transverse scanning direction which resulted in better 
sintered part. Kruth et al. [103] demonstrated that short scan vectors cause the receipt of more 
localized net energy than a series of longer scan vectors because of the shorter time interval 
between successive pulses, minimising the temperature decay.  
 
 
Chlebus et al. [197] found that the strategy of specimen building influences the tensile 
strength values with the horizontal specimens built in x and y orientation tensioned along the

----- Page 146 (native) -----
145 
 
 
longer scanning lines characterised by significantly smaller rigidity than the specimens built in 
the z-orientation. The modulus of the sample built in the z-orientation is 15% higher than the 
value given in literature for wrought Tiʊ6Alʊ7Nb alloy (105 GPa ) by Boyer et al. [198]; but 
16% lower than in the case of specimens built in x and y orientation. Chlebus et al. [197] 
subsequently confirmed that specimens built at the direction of 45° to the long axis of a 
specimen have their Young’s modulus to be of intermediate value. Chlebus and co-investigators 
[197] then noted that the differences in elasticity of the horizontally and vertically built 
specimens could be influenced by different distribution and level of residual stresses. 
Furthermore, samples built in the y direction have slightly higher yield and tensile strength 
values, and lower elongation in comparison to samples built in the x-direction. Since the 
orientation of pores and the solidification direction with respect to the tension direction was 
identical in both x- and y- orientations, the influence of built orientation can be related to the 
distribution of residual stresses. The drastically low tensile strength values of the z- direction 
built specimens in comparison to the x- and y- built orientation  are undoubtedly related to the 
build defects (pores), with surface developed in the x–y plane, perpendicular to the specimen 
axis, consequently pulled apart by the tensile force; small tip radii of flat-shaped pores, which 
concentrate and magnify the applied stress; arrangement of layers perpendicular to the tension 
direction; larger number of pores (because of) resulting from a larger number of layers; and 
higher level of residual stresses in the z-axis direction. Furthermore, the  tensile strength of SLM 
Ti6Al7Nb builds are higher than that of their counterpart wrought products and those having Į-
equiaxial microstructure obtained via thermomechanical processing [199]. Finally, plastic 
elongations of SLM processed Ti6Al7Nb parts are small, similarly as found by Vandenbroucke

----- Page 147 (native) -----
146 
 
 
& Kruth [200] and Murr et al. [201], and significantly (very) smaller in comparison to the 
elongations ranging from 7.5 to 12% for wrought alloys.  
 
Comparison of the studies carried out by Agarwala et al. [50]; and Chlebus et al. [197] on 
bronze-nickel and Ti alloy components respectively to the outcome from Buchbinder et al. [24] 
who studied the role of build-up direction on the tensile strength of SLM processed AlSi10Mg 
parts confirms that samples with a layer orientation parallel to the tensile direction (0°) display 
the highest tensile strength (Rm = 420 MPa), while those built with a layer orientation 
perpendicular to the applied load (90°) have the lowest strength (Rm = 360 MPa) (Fig. 57). 
Buchbinder et al. [24] then concluded that the tensile strength obtained for SLM processed 
AlSi10Mg parts so far outreached the minimum tensile strength reported for die-cast AlSi10Mg 
part (Rm = 240 MPa) in accordance with EN 1706 standard (Fig. 57).  
 
 
Fig. 57. Tensile strength depending on build up direction for SLM processed AlSi10Mg part 
[24].

----- Page 148 (native) -----
147 
 
 
 
Powder properties also exert significance influence on the tensile strength of SLM 
fabricated parts. For instance, Spierings et al. [202] explored the effect of three different powder 
granulations on the resulting tensile strength of the steel produced with a view to elucidating the 
variation in the mechanical properties as stated in the material data sheet of the machine 
producers. Their results show that two powders 1 and 2 having different particle size 
distributions, but of finer granulation, showed a comparable higher tensile strength; in contrast to 
the coarser powder 3 with lower tensile strength (Fig. 58). The behaviour of the powders was 
attributed to the fact that the coarser powder 3 resulted in bigger pores in comparison to finest 
powder 1 (Fig. 59) as a consequence of bigger particles and possibly a higher amount of hollow 
particles, which can be specific to the production process.  
 
 
Fig. 58. Ultimate tensile strength Rm and yield strength at 0.2 per cent offset Rp0.2 for 0o, 45o and 
90o orientations for finer powder type 1 and coarsest powder type 3 [202].

----- Page 149 (native) -----
148 
 
 
 
Fig. 59. Pore sizes of test cubes for finer powder type 1 (left) and coarse powder type 3 (right) 
for 30mm layers in 0o orientation [202]. 
 
Spierings et al. [202] reported that energy absorption requirement of bigger particles to 
achieve full melting is higher in comparison to smaller particles as depicted by Eq. (9): 
ܧ௔௩
ܧ௡௘௘ௗ
ൌ 
ܣכ ܫ௢ כ  ߨכ ݎଶ
൫4 3
ൗ൯ߨכ ݎଷכ  ߩכ (ܥ௣ οܶ௠+ ܮ௠)
                                      (9) 
 ൌ   1
ݎכ 
3ܣܫ௢
4ߩ൫ܥ௣ οܶ௠+ ܮ௠൯                                                                   (10) 
 
where Cp and Lm are the specific or latent heat of fusion, respectively. A is the absorption 
coefficient of the powder material and I0 the intensity of the laser beam. 
 
According to Spierings & Levy [203], SLM processing of coarse powders leads to generally 
higher effective powder layer thicknesses which reduces the amount of energy reaching the 
underlying surface. Consequently, the reduced thermal penetration depth prevents a reliable 
connection of the layers via re-melting of the underlying surface, thereby, resulting in more

----- Page 150 (native) -----
149 
 
 
inhomogeneous regions like cracks and incomplete fusion in the material. This effectively 
decrease the fracture toughness (KIC) value because the cracks have their long axis in parallel to 
the layer orientation so that external loads perpendicular to the layers open the cracks. This 
explains the reduction in the tensile strength of samples made of coarse powders and built in the 
vertical direction (90o). Spierings et al. [202] also established that increasing amount of coarser 
particles in a powder blend increased the ductility (Fig. 60), although this effect is less 
pronounced for higher layer thicknesses. They identified this as an evidence for a weaker 
bonding of the different layers. However, Spierings and co-researchers reasoned that the 
differences should be less distinct for laser sources with a higher laser beam quality, as for such 
beams deep penetration welding occurs while the size range of particles has to remain limited as 
for broader size distributions the mechanical strength is reduced. Meanwhile, in order to assure 
that coarser powders lead to a reduced re-melting of the underlying layers, additional 
investigations have to be undertaken. 
 
 
Fig. 60. Elongation at fracture At for finest powder type 1, fine powder type 2, and coarse 
powder type 3 [202].

----- Page 151 (native) -----
150 
 
 
 
While Dewidar and co-workers [56] adopted infiltration with bronze to improve the 
mechanical properties of high speed steel components fabricated via direct SLS, Uzunsoy & 
Chang [51] also carried out a comparative evaluation of the microstructure and mechanical 
properties of laser sintered low carbon stainless steel (316L) processed using three different 
copper alloy infiltrants. Uzunsoy & Chang [51] found the tensile fracture strength increased in 
the order of high tensile brass< bronze < cast aluminium manganese bronze.  
 
6.3 Fatigue 
 
In similarity to the fatigue behaviour of conventional P/M sintered parts, the presence or 
absence of microstructural defects such as porosity or shrinkage cavities, dictate to a very great 
extent the fatigue life of SLS/SLM processed components. In SLS/SLM processed components, 
the occurrence of low melting porosity in between their layers reduces the effective load-bearing 
area perpendicular to the layers (z-direction) and causes stress concentration (notch effect), 
resulting in reduction of static and dynamic strength in the z-direction [30, 162, 169, 204-208]. 
Wang et al. [205, 206] investigated the crack path, initiation, and propagation of SLS processed 
FeNiCu-alloy via surface replication in four-point bending fatigue tests. They discovered that the 
fatigue behaviour was controlled by the complex layered structure with the pores on or under the 
surface being the preferable places for crack initiation. Furthermore, crack linkage and deflection 
occurred due to crack tip interaction with microstructure and sinter layers where microcracks 
initiated at pores adjacent to the advancing crack tip. According to Wang et al. [205, 206],

----- Page 152 (native) -----
151 
 
 
porosity has the most deteriorating influence on the fatigue strength of components whenever 
pore size and amount exceed certain threshold values.  
 
Brandl et al. [30] employed this concept to elucidate the effects of varying powder bed 
temperature, peak hardening heat treatment, and build direction on the microstructure, and 
fatigue response of SLM processed AlSi10Mg alloy. It was established that the combination of 
heating the powder bed to 300 oC and post-built peak hardening treatment of AlSi10Mg parts led 
to the homogenisation of the microstructure of the parts via the formation of spheroidal inter-
dendritic eutectic Si-particles and reduction of crack initiation and/or propagation, which 
eventually increased the fatigue resistance and the ductility [30]. However, Brandl and co-
investigators reported that build direction has the least effect on the fatigue resistance of SLM 
processed AlSi10Mg parts. It is clear that heating the AlSi10Mg powder bed reduced the amount 
of metallurgical defects (e.g. cracks, porosity) because when the laser beam impinges on the 
already heated powder bed, the cooling rate is reduced, thus the distortion is reduced since fewer 
stresses are developed [30].  
 
Analysis of the fracture behaviour of SLS/SLM parts shows that the crack initiation 
always started from the imperfections (pores, non-melted spots) at the surface or subsurface. 
This is generally expected due to the stress conditions and localized plastic deformation induced 
by surface discontinuities [209, 210]. According to Brandl et al. [30], the imperfections, 
however, can turn into a surface-notch after final machining and even promote crack initiation. 
Moreover, the peak-hardened samples showed dimples in the area of forced fracture (Fig. 62B)

----- Page 153 (native) -----
152 
 
 
in comparison to the as-built samples (Fig. 61B) which suggests ductile fracture behaviour. 
Brandl and co-investigators further reported that even though the peak-hardened sample 
demonstrated similar (ductile) forced fracture behaviour independent of the adopted power bed 
temperature (30 oC, or 300 oC) or the building direction (0o, 90 o). In order avoid such 
imperfections in SLM processed aluminium alloys, the process must therefore be improved upon 
by exploring the effects of scanning strategy of the laser beam, flow of inert gas, powder 
deposition etc.  
 
(A) 
 (B) 
 
Fig. 61. Typical fracture surfaces of SLM processed AlSi10Mg parts (powder bed temperature of 
300 oC / build direction of 0o / as-built): (A) crack initiation site and (B) area of forced fracture. 
[30].

----- Page 154 (native) -----
153 
 
 
(A) 
 (B) 
 
Fig. 62. Typical fracture surfaces of SLM processed AlSi10Mg parts (powder bed temperature of 
300 oC / build direction of 0o / peak hardened): (A) crack initiation site and (B) area of forced 
fracture [30]. 
 
7. Perspectives on SLS/SLM Processing of Aluminium Alloy Powders 
 
An analysis of the available literature on the SLS/SLM of metallic materials has revealed that 
aluminium, an engineering material in very high demand but which has not been extensively 
investigated by the SLS/SLM manufacturing method to explore the possibilities it offers for 
engineering applications. Therefore, SLS/SLM will be increasingly employed for fabricating 
high quality, low cost, repeatable, and reliable aluminium alloy parts in automotive, aerospace, 
and aircraft industries since it aids manufacturing businesses engaging in the fabrication of 
aluminium parts to deliver their new customised products more quickly and gain more consumer 
markets for their products. To date, the effects of the SLS/SLM process and powder parameters 
on the physical, mechanical and microstructural properties of aluminium powders and its alloys 
are yet to be fully proven. However, the aluminium powder is known to be uniquely bedevilled

----- Page 155 (native) -----
154 
 
 
with a tenacious surface oxide film which is difficult to avoid during SLS/SLM processing and 
therefore tends to produce processing problems and metallurgical defects. It is this lack of 
understanding of the effect of process and powder parameters on the processing and performance 
of SLS/SLM fabricated aluminium alloy components that has been addressed in this review in 
order to provide a basis for follow-on- research that leads to the development of high 
productivity of SLS/SLM processed aluminium alloy parts.  
 
8. Conclusions 
 
Consolidation regimes associated with SLS/SLM of aluminium alloys have been identified. 
The variants of SLS/SLM process of aluminium alloys have been categorised on the basis of 
material component system, type of laser employed for consolidation, the intensity of the 
specific laser energy input dissipated on the powder bed, as well as laser induced in-situ 
chemical reaction for fabricating aluminium alloy-based composites. Knowledge 
of 
these 
variants provides basic understanding of overcoming associated challenges of fabricating 
aluminium alloy powders for various technological applications via the SLS/SLM process. 
Available literature on SLS/SLM, powder metallurgy (P/M) sintering, and pulsed electric current 
sintering (PECS) of aluminium and its alloys were evaluated with a view to gaining useful 
insights especially in the aspect of alloying effect in disrupting the surface oxide film barrier to 
sintering or melting; liquid phase sintering (LPS); and alloying design suitable for the SLS/SLM 
process of aluminium powders. This led to highlighting the importance of reducing the oxide 
content of aluminium and its alloys during SLS/SLM processing. Provided oxide levels are low 
and adequate amount of liquid phase is available for filling all inter-particle pores completely,

----- Page 156 (native) -----
155 
 
 
components with inter-particulate bonding exhibiting pore free microstructure across the layers 
are obtainable by SLS process.  
 
 
Furthermore, an extensive analysis of the available literature on the direct SLS/SLM of 
metals has led to the recognition of the influential process parameters (processing atmosphere, 
laser processing parameters, layer thickness, and type of laser employed for the sintering 
process) and material properties (powder particle size and distribution, powder particle shape, 
apparent and tapping densities, powder flowability, chemical composition, and liquid phase 
forming additives). All the process and powder parameters reported above have been shown 
throughout the literature as having strong influences on the properties of metallic powdered parts 
fabricated via SLS/SLM with their effects being linked to what impact each has over the wetting 
conditions between the layers, density, surface roughness, dimensional accuracy, surface 
morphology, microstructure and mechanical properties.

----- Page 157 (native) -----
156 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
Dr. Eyitayo Olatunde Olakanmi wishes to acknowledge the Commonwealth Scholarship 
Commission in the UK for the sponsorship of this study at the Institute for Materials Research, 
University of Leeds. Special thanks to the Federal University of Technology, Minna, Nigeria for 
granting the study leave to carry out this study at Leeds University. Moreover, the insightful 
discussions held with Dr. Peter Fox of the University of Liverpool during my Ph.D viva and Mr 
Herman Burger of the Laser Materials Processing Group of the National Laser Centre, Pretoria, 
South Africa are highly appreciated.

----- Page 158 (native) -----
157 
 
 
References 
[1] Polmear IJ. Light Alloys: metallurgy of the light metals. 3rd ed. London: Arnold; 1995. 
[2] Cam G, Kodak M. Progress in joining of advanced materials. Int Mater Rev 1998;43:1-44. 
[3] Mondolfo LF. Aluminium Alloys: Structure and Properties. London: Butterworths; 1976.  
[4] Bias CT. In: Olsen FO editor, Hybrid laser-arc welding, Woodhead Publishing Ltd: CRC 
Press; 2009, p. 216-69. 
[5] Niu HJ, Chang ITH. Selective laser sintering of gas atomized M2 high speed steel powder. J 
Mater Sci 2000;35:31-38. 
[6] Asgharzadeh H, Simchi A. Effect of sintering atmosphere and carbon content on the 
densification and microstructure of laser-sintered M2 high-speed steel powder. Mater Sci Eng A 
2005;403(1-2):290-298. 
[7] Morgan R, Papworth A, Sutcliffe C, Fox P, O'Neill W. High density net shape components 
by direct laser re-melting of single-phase powders. J Mater Sci 2002;37:3093-3100.  
[8] Gu DD, Meiners W, Wissenbach K, Poprawe R. Laser additive manufacturing of metallic 
components: materials, processes and mechanisms. Int Mater Rev 2012;57:133–64. 
[9] Weiss LE. Process overview. <http://www.wtec.org/loyola/rp/02_01.htm> [accessed 
30.09.12]. 
[10] Liu ZH, Zhang DQ, Sing SL, Chua CK, Loh LE. Interfacial characterization of SLM parts 
in multi-material processing: Metallurgical diffusion between 316L stainless steel and C18400 
copper alloy. Mater Characterization 2014;94:116-125.

----- Page 159 (native) -----
158 
 
 
[11] Abdul Aziz MS, Ueda T, Furumoto T, Abe S, Hosokawa A, Yassin A. Study on 
machinability of laser sintered materials fabricated by layered manufacturing system: Influence 
of different hardness of sintered materials. In: Procedia CIRP (Volume 4) of the 3rd CIRP 
Conference on Process Machine Interactions (3rd PMI), Nagoya, Japan; 2012. p 79 – 83. 
[12] Wits WW, Weitkamp SJ, van Es J. Metal additive manufacturing of a high-pressure micro-
pump. In: Procedia CIRP (Volume 7) of the Forty Sixth CIRP Conference on Manufacturing 
Systems, Sesimbra, Portugal; 2013. p 252 – 257.  
[13] Calignano F, Manfredi D, Ambrosio EP, Biamino S, Pavese M, Fino P. Direct fabrication of 
joints based on direct metal laser sintering in aluminum and titanium alloys. In Procedia CIRP 
(Volume 21) of the 24th CIRP Design Conference, Milan, Italy; 2014. p 129 – 132. 
[14] Das S, Wohlert M, Beaman JJ, Bourell DL. Producing metal parts with selective laser 
sintering/hot isostatic pressing. JOM 1998;50(12):17-20. 
[15] Das S, Wohlert M, Beaman JJ, Bourell DL. Processing of titanium net shapes by SLS/HIP. 
Mater Des 1999;20:115-21. 
[16] Stoodley MA, Abbott JR, Simpson A. Titanium cranioplasty using 3-D computer modelling 
of skull defects. J Clin Neur Sci 1996;3(2):149-55. 
[17] Hayashi T, Maekawa K, Tamura M, Hanyu K. Selective laser sintering method using 
titanium powder sheet toward fabrication of porous bone substitutes. JSME Inter J 2005;A 
48(4):369-375.  
[18] Hollander DA, von Walter M, Wirtz T, Sellei R, Schmidt-Rohlfing B, Paar O, et al. 
Structural, mechanical, and in vitro characterisation of individually structured Ti-6Al-4V

----- Page 160 (native) -----
159 
 
 
produced by direct laser forming. Biomaterials 2006;27:955-63. 
[19] Kanazawa M, Maiko M, Minakuchi S, Nomura N. Fabrication of titanium alloy frameworks 
for complete dentures by selective laser melting. J Prosth Dent 2014;112(6):1441-47.  
[20] Wauthle R, van der Stok J, Yavari SA, Van Humbeeck J, Kruth J-P, Zadpoor AA, et al. 
Additively 
manufactured 
porous 
tantalum 
implants. 
Acta 
Biomater 
2014 
doi: 
10.1016/j.actbio.2014.12.003 (Article in press).  
[21] Vasquez M, Cross J, Hopkinson N, Haworth B. Developing new laser sintering materials for 
snowboarding applications. In Procedia Engineering (Volume 34) of the 9th Conference of the 
International Sports Engineering Association (ISEA), Lowell, Massachusetts; 2012. p 325–30. 
[22] Ardila LC, Garciandia F, González-Díaz JB, Álvarez P, Echeverria A, Petite MM, et al. 
Effect of IN718 recycled powder reuse on properties of parts manufactured by means of 
Selective Laser Melting. In Physics Procedia (Volume 56) of the 8th International Conference on 
Photonic Technologies LANE, Fürth, Germany; 2014. p 99 – 107. 
[23] Seyda V, Kaufmann N, Emmelmann C. Investigation of aging processes of Ti-6Al-4V 
powder material in laser melting. In Physics Procedia (Volume 39) of the 7th International 
Conference & Exhibition on Photonic Technologies LANE, Fürth, Germany; 2012. p 425 – 31. 
[24] Buchbinder D, Schleifenbaum H, Heidrich S, Meiners W, Bültmann J. High power selective 
laser melting (HP SLM) of aluminium parts. In Physics Procedia (Volume 12A) of the Sixth 
International WLT Conference on Lasers in Manufacturing, Munich ICM, Germany; 2012. p 
271–78. 
[25] Cooper DE, Stanford M, Kibble KA, Gibbons GJ. Additive Manufacturing for product 
improvement at Red Bull Technology. Mater Des 2012;41:226–30.

----- Page 161 (native) -----
160 
 
 
[26] 
Wang 
CY. 
Rapid 
Manufacturing: 
overview. 
<http://www.csa1.co.uk/discoveryguides/rapidman/overview.php> [accessed 30.09.12]. 
[27] Louvis E, Fox P, Sutcliffe CJ. Selective laser melting of aluminium components. J Mater  
Process Technol 2011;211:275–84. 
[28] Olakanmi EO, Cochrane RF, Dalgarno KW. Densification mechanism and microstructural  
evolution in selective laser sintering of Al-12Si Powders. J Mater Process Technol  
2011;211:113-121. 
[29] Olakanmi EO, Dalgarno KW, Cochrane RF. Laser sintering of blended Al-Si powders. 
Rapid Prototyp J 2012;18:109–119.  
[30] Brandl E, Heckenberger U, Holzinger V, Buchbinder, D. Additive manufactured AlSi10Mg 
samples using selective laser melting (SLM): Microstructure, high cycle fatigue, and fracture 
behaviour. Mater Des 2012; 34:159–69.  
[31] Dadbakhsh S, Hao L. Effect of Al alloys on selective laser melting behaviour and 
microstructure of in situ formed particle reinforced composites. J Alloy Comp 2012; 541:328–
334. 
[32] Dadbakhsh S, Hao L. In-situ formation of particle reinforced Al matrix composite by 
selective laser melting of Al/Fe2O3 powder mixture. Adv Eng Mater 2012;14(1-2):45-48. 
[33] Dadbakhsh S, Hao L Jerrard PGE, Zhang, DZ. Experimental investigation on selective laser 
melting behaviour and processing windows of in situ reacted Al/Fe2O3 powder mixture. Powder 
Technol 2012; 231:112–121.

----- Page 162 (native) -----
161 
 
 
[34] Dadbakhsh S, Hao L. Effect of Layer Thickness in Selective Laser Melting on 
Microstructure of Al/5ௗwt.%Fe2O3 Powder Consolidated Parts. The Scient World J 2014:2014, 
doi:10.1155/2014/106129  
[35] Ahuja B, Karg M, Nagulin KY, Schmidt M. Fabrication and characterization of high 
strength Al-Cu alloys processed using laser beam melting in metal powder bed. In Procedia 
(Volume 56) of the 8th International Conference on Laser Assisted Net Shape Engineering 
LANE, Fürth, Germany; 2014. p 135 – 146. 
[36] Li XP, Kang CW, Huang H, Zhang LC, Sercombe TB. Selective laser melting of an 
Al86Ni6Y4.5Co2La1.5 metallic glass: Processing, microstructure evolution and mechanical 
properties. Mater Sci Eng A 2014;606:370–79. 
[37] Kenzari S, Bonina D, ubois J-M, Fournée V. Additive manufacturing of lightweight, fully 
Al-based componentsusing quasicrystals. J Mater Process Technol 2014;214:3108–11. 
[38] Wang XJ, Zhang LC, Fang MH, Sercombe TB. The effect of atmosphere on the structure 
and properties of a selective laser melted Al–12Si alloy. Mater Sci Eng A 2014;597:370–75. 
[39] Gu D, Wang H, Chang F, Dai D, Yuan P, Hagedorn Y-C. et al. Selective laser melting 
additive 
manufacturing 
of 
TiC/AlSi10Mg 
bulk-form 
nanocomposites 
with 
tailored 
microstructures and properties. In Procedia (Volume 56) of the 8th International Conference on 
Photonic Technologies LANE, Fürth, Germany; 2014. p 108 – 16.  
[40] Olakanmi EO. Selective laser sintering/melting (SLS/SLM) of pure Al, Al–Mg, and Al–Si 
powders: Effect of processing conditions and powder properties. J Mater Process Technol 
2013;213:1387–1405.

----- Page 163 (native) -----
162 
 
 
[41] Read N, Wang W, Essa K, Attallah MA. Selective laser melting of AlSi10Mg alloy: Process 
optimisation and mechanical properties development. Mater Des 2015;65:417–24. 
[42] Li XP, Kang CW, Huang H, Sercombe TB. The role of a low-energy–density re-scan in 
fabricating crack-free Al85Ni5Y6Co2Fe2 bulk metallic glass composites via selective laser 
melting. Mater Des 2014;63:407–11.  
[43] Ghosh SK, Bandyopadhyay K, Saha P. Development of an in-situ multi-component 
reinforced Al-based metalmatrix composite by direct metal laser sintering technique — 
Optimization of process parameters. Mater Charact 2014;93:68-78.  
[44] Cao X, Wallace W. Immarigeon J_P, Poon C. Research and progress in laser welding of  
wrought aluminium alloys. I. Laser welding Processes. Mater Manuf Process 2003; 18:1–22.  
[45] Olakanmi EO. Direct selective laser sintering of aluminium alloy powders. PhD thesis, 
University of Leeds, Leeds. 2008. 
[46] Das S. Physical aspects of process control in selective laser sintering of metals. Adv Eng 
Mater 2003;5(10):701-11. 
[47] Kruth J-P, Levy G, Klocke F, Childs THC. Consolidation phenomena in laser and powder-
bed based layered manufacturing. Ann CIRP 2007;56(2):730-59. 
[48] Shellabear M, Nyrhilä O. Advances in materials and properties of direct metal laser-sintered 
parts. 
<http://www.rm-
platform.com/index.php?option=com_docman&task=cat_view&gid=24&Itemid=38> [accessed 
30.09.12]  
[49] Kruth J-P, Mercelis P, Van Vaerenbergh J, Froyen L, Rombouts M. Binding mechanisms in

----- Page 164 (native) -----
163 
 
 
selective laser sintering and selective laser melting. Rapid Prototyp J 2005;11(1):26-36. 
[50] Agarwala M, Bourell D, Beaman J, Marcus H, Barlow J. Direct selective laser sintering of 
metals. Rapid Prototyp J 1995;1(1):26-36. 
[51] Uzunsoy D, Chang ITH. The effect of infiltrant choice on the microstructure and 
mechanical properties of Rapidsteel*2.0. Mater Lett 2005;59(22):2812-2817. 
[52] Simchi A, Pelzoldt F, Pohl H. Direct metal laser sintering: materials considerations and 
mechanisms of particle bonding. Int J Powder Met. 2001;37(2):49-61. 
[53] Sercombe TB, Schaffer GB. Rapid manufacturing of aluminium components. Sci 
2003;301:1225-1227. 
[54] Miani F. On the development of new metal powders for the selective laser sintering process. 
In: Proceedings of the third world congress on intelligent manufacturing processes & system, 
Cambridge, MA, USA; 2000. p 245-52 
[55] Laoui T, Froyen L, Kruth JP. Effect of mechanical alloying on selective laser sintering of  
WC-9Co powder. Powder Met 1999;42(3):203-205. 
[56] Dewidar MM, Dalgarno KW, Wright CS Processing conditions and mechanical properties 
of high-speed steel parts fabricated using direct selective laser sintering. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part 
B: J Eng Manuf 2003;217:1651-62. 
[57] Tang Y, Loh, HT, Wong YS, Fuh JYH, Lu L, Wang X. Direct laser sintering of a copper-
based alloy for creating three-dimensional metal parts. J Mater Process Technol 2003;140(1-
3):368-72.

----- Page 165 (native) -----
164 
 
 
[58] Dalgarno KW, Wright CS. Approaches to processing metals and ceramics through the laser 
scanning of powder beds- A review. Powder Metall Prog 2001;1(1): 70-79. 
[59] German RM. Liquid phase sintering. London: Plenum Press; 1985. 
[60] Tandon R, Johnson J Liquid-phase sintering. In: Davis RJ, editor, Powder metal 
technologies and applications. Materials Park (OH): ASM International; 1998. p. 565-573. 
[61] Schaffer GB, Sercombe TB, Lumley RN. Liquid phase sintering of aluminium alloys. Mater 
Chem Phys 2001;67(1-3):85-91. 
[62] Gu D, Shen Y. WC-Co particulate reinforcing Cu matrix composites produced by direct 
laser sintering. Mater Lett 2006;60(29):3664-68. 
[63] Gu D, Shen Y. Effect of dispersion technique and component ratio on densification and 
microstructure of multi-component Cu-based metal powder in direct laser sintering. J Mater 
Process Technol 2007;182: pp.564-573.  
[64] Gu D, Shen Y. Influence of reinforcement weight fraction on microstructure and properties 
of submicron WC-Cop/Cu  bulk MMCs prepared by direct laser sintering. J Alloys Comp 2007; 
431:112-20. 
[65] Gu D, Shen Y. Direct laser sintered WC-10Co/Cu nanocomposites. Appl Surf Sci 2008;254 
(13):3971-78.  
[66] Zhu HH, Fuh JYH. Lu L. Formation of Fe-Cu metal parts using direct laser sintering. Proc 
IMechE Part C: J Mech Eng Sci 2003;217(1):139-47. 
[67] Xie G, Ohashi O, Song M, Furuya K, Noda T. Behavior of oxide film at the interface

----- Page 166 (native) -----
165 
 
 
between particles in sintered Al powders by pulse electric-current sintering. Metall Mater Trans 
A 2003;34(3):699-703. 
[68] Xie G, Ohashi O, Song M, Mitsuishi k, Furuya K. Reduction mechanism of surface oxide 
films and characterization of formations on pulse electric-current sintered Al–Mg alloy powders. 
Appl Surf Sci 2005;241, (1-2):102-06. 
[69] Liu Z. Y, Sercombe TB, Schaffer GB The effect of particle shape on the sintering of 
aluminium Metall Mater Trans A 2007;38:1351-57. 
[70] Zhu HH, Lu L, Fuh JYH, Wu CC. Effect of braze flux on direct laser sintering Cu-based 
metal powder. Mater Des 2006;27(2):166-70. 
[71] Zhu HH, Fuh JH, Lu L. Microstructural evolution in direct laser sintering of Cu-based metal 
powder. Rapid Prototyp J 2005;11(2):74-81. 
[72] Sercombe TB. Sintering of freeformed maraging steel with boron additions. Mater Sci Eng 
A 2003;363:242-52. 
[73] Chen XC, Xie JW, Fox P. Direct laser remelting of iron with addition of boron. Mater Sci 
Technol 2004;20:715-19. 
[74] Sercombe TB, Schaffer GB. Freeform fabrication of functional aluminium prototypes using 
powder metallurgy. J Mater Sci 1999;34:4245-51. 
[75] Sercombe TB, Schaffer GB. The effect of trace elements on the sintering of Al-Cu alloys. 
Acta Mater 1999;47(2):689-97.  
[76] Schaffer GB, Huo SH, Drennan J, Auchterlonie GJ. The effect of trace elements on the

----- Page 167 (native) -----
166 
 
 
sintering of an Al-Zn-Mg-Cu alloy. Acta Mater 2001;49(14):2671-78. 
[77] McPhee WAG, Schaffer GB, Drennan J. The effect of iron on liquid film migration and 
sintering of an Al-Cu-Mg alloy. Acta Mater 2003;51(13):3701-12. 
[78] Delgado ML, Ruiz-Navas EM, Gordo, E, Torralba, JM. Enhancement of liquid phase 
sintering through Al-Si additions to Al-Cu systems. J Mater Process Technol 2005;162-163:280-
85.  
[79] MacAskill IA, Hexemer Jr RL, Donaldson IW, Bishop DP. Effects of magnesium, tin and 
nitrogen on the sintering response of aluminium powder. J Mater Process Technol 2010;210(15): 
2252–60. 
[80] Gökçe A, Fındık F, Kurt AO. Microstructural examination and properties of premixed Al–
Cu–Mg powder metallurgy alloy Mater Charact 2011;62:730-735.  
[81] Gu D, Shen Y. Balling phenomena during direct laser sintering of multi-component Cu-
based metal powder. J Alloy Comp 2007;432:163-66. 
[82] Niu HJ, Chang ITH. Liquid phase sintering of M3/2 high speed steel by selective laser 
sintering. Scripta Mater 1998;39(1):67-72. 
[83] Niu HJ, Chang ITH. Selective laser sintering of gas and water atomized high speed steel 
powders. Scripta Mater 1999;41(1):25-30. 
[84] Niu HJ, Chang ITH. Instability of scan tracks of selective laser sintering of high speed steel 
powder. Scripta Mater 1999;41(11):1229-34. 
[85] Zhu HH, Lu L, Fuh JYH. Influence of binder's liquid volume fraction on direct laser

----- Page 168 (native) -----
167 
 
 
sintering of metallic powder. Mater Sci Eng A 2004;371:170-77. 
[86] Khan M, Dickens P. Selective laser melting (SLM) of gold (Au). Rapid Prototyp J 
2012;18:81–94. 
[87] Zhang B, Liao H, Coddet C. Effects of processing parameters on properties of selective 
laser melting Mg–9%Al powder mixture. Mater Des 2012;34:753–758. 
[88] Gu D, Shen Y. Balling phenomena in direct laser sintering
 of stainless steel powder: 
metallurgical mechanisms and control methods. Mater Des 2009;30:2903-2910. 
[89] German RM. Particle packing characteristics. Princeton, NJ: Metal Powder Industries 
Federation; 1989. 
[90] Krol TA, Seidel C, Zaeh MF. Prioritization of process parameters for an efficient 
optimisation of additive manufacturing by means of a finite element method. In Procedia 
(Volume 12) of the 8th CIRP Conference on Intelligent Computation in Manufacturing 
Engineering, Ischia (Naples), Italy; 2013. P 169–74. 
[91] Tolochko NK, Mozzharov SE, Laoui T, Froyen L. Selective laser sintering of single- and 
two-component metal powders. Rapid Prototyp J 2003;9(2):68-78.  
[92] Gu D, Shen Y. Processing and microstructure of submicron WC-Co particulate reinforced 
Cu matrix composites prepared by direct laser sintering. Mater Sci Eng A 2006;435-436:54-61. 
[93] Gu D, Shen Y, Wu X. Formation of a novel W-rim/Cu-core structure during direct laser 
sintering of W-Cu composite system. Mater Lett 2008;62:1765-68. 
[94] Simchi A, Pohl H. Effect of laser sintering processing parameters on the microstructure and 
densification of iron powder. Mater Process Engr 2003;A359(1-2):119-28.

----- Page 169 (native) -----
168 
 
 
[95] Chatterjee AN, Kumar S, Saha P, Mishra PK, Choudhury AR. An experimental design 
approach to selective laser sintering of low carbon steel. J Mater Process Technol 2003;136( 1-
3):151-57. 
[96] Ma M, Wang Z, Gao M, Zeng X. Layer thickness dependence of performance in high-
power selectivelaser melting of 1Cr18Ni9Ti stainless steel. J Mater Process Technol 
2015;215:142–50.  
[97] Sanz-Guerrero J, Ramos-Grez J. Effect of total applied energy density on the densification 
of copper–titanium slabs produced by a DMLF process. J Mater Process Technol 2008;202(1-
3):339-46. 
[98] Su WN, Erasenthiran P, Dickens PM. Investigation of fully dense laser sintering of tool 
steel powder using a pulsed Nd:YAG laser. Proc IMechE Part C: J Mech Eng Sci 2003;217 
(1):127–38. 
[99] Hauser C, Childs THC, Dalgarno KW. Selective laser sintering of stainless steel 314S HC 
processed using room temperature powder beds. In: Proceedings of the 10th Solid freeform 
fabrication symposium, Austin, Texas; 1999. p 273-80. 
[100] Hauser C. Selective laser sintering of a stainless steel powder PhD thesis, University of 
Leeds, UK; 2003.  
[101] Xubin Su X, Yang Y. Research on track overlapping during Selective Laser Melting of 
powders. J Mater Process Technol 2012;212:2074–79. 
[102] Aboulkhair NT, Everitt NM, Ashcroft I, Tuck C. Reducing porosity in AlSi10Mg parts 
processed by selective laser melting. Add Manuf 2014;1–4:77–86.

----- Page 170 (native) -----
169 
 
 
[103] Kruth J.-P, Froyen L, Van Vaerenbergh J, Mercelis P, Rombouts M, Lauwers B. Selective 
laser melting of iron-based powder. J Mater Process Technol 2004;149:616-22. 
[104] Xie W, Fox P, O’Neill W, Sutcliffe CJ. Effect of direct laser re-melting processing 
parameters and scanning strategies on the densification of tool steels. J Mater Process Technol 
2005;170 (3):516-23. 
[105] Hauser C, Childs THC, Dalgarno KW, Eane RB. Atmospheric control during selective 
laser sintering of stainless steel 314S powder. In: Proceedings of the 10th solid freeform 
fabrication symposium, Austin, TX; 1999. p 265-72.  
[106] Schaffer GB, Hall BJ, Bonner SJ, Huo SH, Sercombe TB. The effect of the atmosphere 
and the role of pore filling on the sintering of aluminium. Acta Mater 2006;54(1):131-38. 
[107] Wu X, Sharman R, Mei J, Voice W. Direct laser fabrication and microstructure of a burn-
resistant Ti alloy. Mater Des 2002;23:239-47. 
[108] Das S, Fuesting TP, Danyo G, Brown LE, Beaman JJ, Bourell DL. Direct laser fabrication 
of superalloy cermet abrasive turbine blade tips. Mater Des 2000;21:63-73. 
[109] Martin JM. Castro F. Liquid phase sintering of P/M aluminium alloys: effect of processing  
conditions. J Mater Process Technol 2003;143-144:814-21. 
[110] Schaffer GB, Hall BJ. The influence of atmosphere on the sintering of aluminium. Metall 
Trans A 2002;33(10):3279-84. 
[111] German RM. The importance of particle characteristics in powder injection moulding. Rev 
Partic Mater 1993;1:109-160.

----- Page 171 (native) -----
170 
 
 
[112] German RM. Sintering theory and practice. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 1996. 
[113] German RM. Powder metallurgy of iron and steel. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons;1998. 
[114] Lumley RN, Schaffer GB. The effect of solubility and particle size on liquid phase 
sintering. Scripta Mater 1996;35(5):589-95. 
[115] Lumley RN, Schaffer GB. The effect of additive particle size on the mechanical properties 
of sintered aluminium-copper alloys. Scripta Mater 1998;39(8):1089-94.  
[116] German RM, Bulger M. A model for densification by sintering of bimodal particle size 
distribution. Inter J Powder Metall 1992;28(3):301-11. 
[117] Simchi A. The role of particle size on the laser sintering of iron powder. Metall Mater 
Trans B 2004;35B:937-48. 
[118] Zhang DQ, Liu ZH, Cai QZ, Liu JH, Chua CK. Influence of Ni content on microstructure 
ofW–Ni alloy produced by selective laser melting. Int. J Refr Metals Hard Mater 2014;45:15–22. 
 
[119] Simchi A. Direct laser sintering of metal powders: Mechanism, kinetics and 
microstructural features. Mater Sci Eng A. 2006;428(1-2):148-58. 
[120] Dinsdale AT, Quested PN. The viscosity of aluminium and its alloys- A review of data and 
models. J Mater Sci 2004;39(24):7221-28. 
[121] Geiger GH, Poirier DR. Transport phenomena in metallurgy. Wesley: Pearson Addison; 
1973.  
[122] Park S-H, Hur B-H, Kim S-Y, Ahn D-K, Ha D-I. A study on the viscosity and surface 
tension for Al foaming and the effects of addition elements. In: Proceedings of the 65th world

----- Page 172 (native) -----
171 
 
 
foundry congress, Gyeongju, Korea; 2002. p 515-24. 
[123] Olakanmi EO, Cochrane RF, Dalgarno KW. Spheroidisation and oxide disruption 
phenomena in direct Selective Laser Melting (SLM) of pre-alloyed Al-Mg and Al-Si powders. 
In: Supplemental Proceedings: (Volume I: Materials Processing and Properties: Materials Issues 
in Additive Powder-Based Manufacturing Processes Symposium) of the 2009 TMS Annual 
Meetings and Exhibition, San-Francisco, California; 2009. p 371-80. 
[124] Williams C. CO laser processing - an overview. Aircraft Eng Aero Technol 1997;69(1):43-
52. 
[125] Lauwers B, Kruth, J-P, Froyen L, Laoui T. Comparison between Nd:YAG and CO2 laser 
for use with selective laser sintering of metal powders. In: Proceedings of the PHOTOMEC'99- 
Liège, Belgium; 1999. p 165-73. 
[126] Tolochko NK, Khlopkov YV, Mozzharov SE, Ignatiev MB, Laoui T, Titov VI. 
Absorptance of powder materials suitable for laser sintering. Rapid Prototyp J 2000;6(3):155-61. 
[127] Steen WM. Laser materials processing. London: Springer; 2003. 
[128] Santos EC, Shiomi M, Osakada K, Laoui T. Rapid manufacturing of metal components by 
laser forming. Inter J Mach Tools Manuf 2006;46(12):1459-68. 
[129] O'Neill W, Sutcliffe C.J, Morgan R, Landsborough A, Hon KKB. Investigation on multi-
layer direct metal laser sintering of 316L stainless steel powder beds. Ann CIRP 1999;48(1):151-
54. 
[130] Fischer P, Locher M, Romano V, Weber HP, Kolossov S, Glardon R. Temperature 
measurements during selective laser sintering of titanium powder. Inter J Mach Tools Manuf

----- Page 173 (native) -----
172 
 
 
2004;44:1293-1296. 
[131] Abe F, Osakada K, Shiomi M, Uematsu K, Matsumoto M. The manufacturing of hard tools 
from metallic powders by selective laser melting. J Mater Process Technol 2001;111:210-13. 
[132] Reutzel EW. In: Olsen FO editor, Hybrid laser-arc welding, Woodhead Publishing Ltd: 
CRC Press; 2009, p. 1-27. 
[133] Gisario A, Barletta M, Veniali F. Surface reconstruction of porous substrates in sintered 
bronze by cw-high power diode laser. Opt Lasers Eng 2012;50:1306–15. 
[134] Zhuoxing G, Jiandong H, Zhenfeng Z. Laser sintering of Cu-Sn-C system P/M alloys. J 
Mater Sci 1999;34:5403-06. 
[135] Ion JC. Laser processing of engineering materials: principles, procedures and industrial 
applications. London: Elsevier Butterworth Heinemann; 2005.  
[136] Basu B, Date AW Rapid solidification following laser melting of pure metals—I. Study of 
flow field and role of convection. Inter J Heat Mass Transf 1992;35(5):1049-58. 
[137] Basu B, Date AW. Rapid solidification following laser melting of pure metals—II: study 
of pool and solidification characteristics. Inter J Heat Mass Transf 1992;35(5):1059-67. 
[138] Li Y, Gu D. Parametric analysis of thermal behavior during selective laser melting additive 
manufacturing of aluminum alloy powder. Mater Des 2014;63:856–67. 
[139] Loretto MH, Godfrey AB, Hu D, Blenkinsop PA, Jones IP, Cheng TT. The influence of 
composition and processing on the structure and properties of TiAl-based alloys. Intermetall 
1998;6( 7-8): 663-66.

----- Page 174 (native) -----
173 
 
 
[140] Srivastava D, Hu D, Chang ITH, Loretto MH. The influence of thermal processing route 
on the microstructure of some TiAl-based alloys. Intermetall 1999;7(10):1107-12. 
[141] Nelson TW, Lippold JC, Mills MJ. Nature and evolution of the fusion boundary in ferritic-
austenitic dissimilar weld metals, Part I – Nucleation and growth. Weld J 1999;78(10):329-37.  
[142] Savage WF, Nippes EF, Erickson JS. Solidification mechanisms in fusion welds. Weld J 
1976;55(8):213-21. 
[143] [Grong Ø., Ed. (1997). Metallurgical Modelling of Welding (2nd Edition) Materials 
Modelling Series. London, The Institute of Materials. 
[144] Kou S. Welding metallurgy. New York: Wiley Interscience; 1987.  
[145] Savage WF. Solidification, segregation and weld imperfections. Weld World 1980;18(5-
6):89–114 
[146] Savage WF, Lundin CD, Aronson AH. Weld metal solidification mechanisms. Weld J 
1965;44(4):175-81. 
[147] Savage WF, Hrubec WJ. Synthesis of weld solidification using crystalline organic 
materials. Weld J 1972;51(5):260-71. 
[148] Savage WF, Aronson AH. Preferred orientation in the weld fusion zone. Weld J 
1966;45(2):85-89. 
[149] Lippold JC, Clark WAT, Tumuluru M. An investigation of weld metal interfaces. In: 
Cieslak MJ, Perepezlo JH, Glicksman ME, editors The metal science of joining. Warrendale PA: 
The Minerals, Metals & Materials Society; 1992. p. 141–46.

----- Page 175 (native) -----
174 
 
 
[150] Srivastava D, Chang ITH, Loretto MH. The effect of process parameters and heat 
treatment on the microstructure of direct laser fabricated TiAl alloy samples. Intermetall 
2001;9:1003-13. 
[151] Arnberg L, Chai G, Backerud L. Determination of dendritic coherency in solidifying melts 
by rheological measurements. Mater Sci Eng 1993;A173(1-2):101-03. 
[152] Veldman NLM, Dahle AK, StJohn DH, Arnberg L. Dendrite coherency of Al-Si Cu alloys. 
Metall Mater Trans A 2001;32A(1):147-55. 
[153] Bartkowiak K, Ullrich S, Frick, T, Schmidt M. New Developments of Laser Processing 
Aluminium Alloys via Additive Manufacturing Technique. Phys Proc 2011;12:393–401. 
[154] Huang W-C, Chuang C-S, Lin C-C, Wu C-H, Lin D-Y, Liu S-H, et al. Microstructure-
controllable laser additive manufacturing process for metal products. In Physics Procedia 
(Volume 56) of the 8th International Conference on Photonic Technologies LANE, Fürth, 
Germany; 2014. p 58–63. 
[155] Murali K, Chatterjee AN, Saha P, Palai R., Kumar S, Roy SK, et al. Direct selective laser 
sintering of iron-graphite powder mixture. J Mater Process Technol 2003;136:179-85. 
[156] Simchi A, Pohl H. Direct laser sintering of iron-graphite powder mixture. Mater Sci Eng A 
2004;383(2):191-200. 
[157] Ferrar B, Mullen L, Jones E, Stamp R, Sutcliffe CJ. Gas flow effects on selective laser 
melting (SLM) manufacturing performance. J Mater Process Technol 2012;212:355–364. 
[158] Sercombe TB. On the sintering of uncompacted, pre-alloyed Al powder alloys. Mater Sci 
Eng A 2003;341(1-2):163-68.

----- Page 176 (native) -----
175 
 
 
[159] Sercombe TB, Schaffer GB. On the role of magnesium and nitrogen in the infiltration of 
aluminium by aluminium for rapid prototyping applications. Acta Mater 2004;52(10):3019-25. 
[160] Sercombe TB, Schaefer GB. On the role of tin in the infiltration of aluminium by 
aluminium for rapid prototyping applications. Scripta Mater 2004;51(9):905-08. 
[161] Sercombe TB, Hopkinson N. Process shrinkage and accuracy during indirect laser 
sintering of aluminium. Adv Eng Mater 2006;8(4):260-64. 
[162] Kobryn PA, Moore EH, Semiatin SL. The effect of laser power and traverse speed on 
Microstructure, porosity, and build height in Laser-deposited Ti-6Al-4V. Scripta Mater. 2000; 
43:299–305. 
[163] Monroy K, Delgado J, Ciurana J. Study of the pore formation on CoCrMo alloys by 
selective laser melting manufacturing process. In: Procedia Engineering (Volume 63) of The 
Manufacturing Engineering Society International Conference (MESIC), Zaragoza, Spain; 2013 p 
361–69. 
[164] Fischer P, Roman V, Weber HP, Karapatis NP, Boillat E, Glardon R. Sintering of 
commercially pure titanium powder with a Nd:YAG laser source. Acta Mater 2003;51:1651-62. 
[165] Pastor M, Zhao H, DebRoy T. Pore formation during continuous wave Nd:YAG laser  
welding of aluminium for automotive applications. Rev Metal 2000;36:108-17. 
[166] King WE, Barth HD, Castillo VM, Gallegos GF, Gibbs JW, Hahn DE, et al. Observation  
of key hole-mode laser melting in laser powder-bedfusion additive manufacturing. J Mater  
Process  Technol 2014;214:2915–25.

----- Page 177 (native) -----
176 
 
 
[167] Campbell J. Casting. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann; 1991.  
[168] Cao X, Wallace W. Immarigeon J_P, Poon C. Research and progress in laser welding 
 of  wrought aluminium alloys. II. Metallurgical microstructures, defects, and mechanical  
properties. Mater Manuf Process 2003; 18:23–49.  
[169] Thijs L, Verhaeghe F, Craeghs T, Van Humbeeck J, Kruth JP. A study of the 
microstructural evolution during selective laser melting of Ti-6Al-4V. Acta Mater 
2010;58:3303–3312. 
[170] Cieslak MJ, Fuerschbach PW. On the weldability, composition, and hardness of  
pulsed and continuous Nd:YAG laser welds in aluminium alloys 6061, 5456, and 5086. Metall  
Trans B 1988;19B:319-33. 
[171] Jones IA, Riches ST, Yoon JW, Wallach ER. Laser welding of aluminium alloys. TWI  
J 1998;7:421-81. 
[172] Liu R, Dong Z, Pan Y. Solidification crack susceptibility of aluminum alloy weld  
metals. Trans. Nonferrous Met Soc China 2006;16:110-16. 
[173] Dudas JH, Collins FR. Preventing weld cracks in high-strength aluminium alloys. Weld J 
1966;45:241S-249S. 
[174] Sreeja Kumari SS, Pillai RM, Rajan TPD, Pai BC. Effects of individual and combined  
additions of Be, Mn, Ca and Sr on the solidification behaviour, structure and mechanical  
properties of Al–7Si–0.3Mg–0.8Fe alloy. Mater Sci Eng A 2007;460–461:561–573.

----- Page 178 (native) -----
177 
 
 
[175] Zhao H, White DR, DebRoy T. Current issues problems in laser welding of  
automotive aluminium alloys. Int Mater Rev 1999;44:238-266. 
[176] Gu D, Hagedorn Y-C, Meiners W, Meng G, Joa˜o R, Batista S, et al. Densification 
behaviour, microstructure evolution, and wear performance of selective laser melting processed 
commercially pure titanium. Acta Mater 2012;60:3849–3860. 
[177] Milewski JO, Lewis GK, Wittig JE. Microstructural evaluation of low and high duty 
 cycle Nd:YAG laser beam welds in 2024-T3 aluminium. Weld J 1993;72:341S-346S. 
[178] Dunkley JJ. Atomisation. In: Davis RJ, editor. Powder metal technologies and 
applications. Materials Park (OH): ASM international handbook committee, ASM International; 
1998. p 35-52. 
[179] Mills KC, Keene BJ, Brooks RF, Shirali A. Marangoni effects in welding. In Marangoni 
and interfacial phenomena in materials processing. In: Hondros ED, McLean M, Mills KC, 
editors. The Royal Society London: Institute of Materials, Minerals and Mining; 1998. p 97-111. 
[180] Cao X, Campbell J. Effects of precipitation of primary intermetallic compound on the  
mechanical properties of cast Al11.5Si0.4Mg alloy. AFS Trans 2000;108:391-400. 
[181] Nyahumwa C, Green NR, Campbell J. The concept of the fatigue potential of cast  
alloys. J Mech Behav 1998;9:227-235. 
[182] Cao X, Campbell J. Convection-free precipitation of primary iron-rich phase in liquid  
Al11.5Si0.4Mg alloy. AFS Trans 2001;109:501-15. 
[183] Zhao H, DebRoy T. Welding metal composition change during conduction

----- Page 179 (native) -----
178 
 
 
mode laser welding of aluminium alloy 5182. Metall Mater Trans B 2001;32B:163-172. 
[184] Collur MM, Paul A, DebRoy T. Mechanism of alloying element vapourisation during  
laser welding. Metall Trans B 1987;18B:733-740. 
[185] Ramasamy S, Albright CE. CO2 and Nd:YAG laser beam welding of 6111-T4  
aluminium alloy for automotive applications. J Laser Appl 2000;12:101-115. 
[186] Pastor M, Zhao H, Martukanitz RP, DebRoy T. Porosity, underfill and magnesium 
 loss during continuous wave Nd:YAG laser welding of thin plates of aluminium alloys 5182 and  
5754. Weld J 1999;207S-216S. 
[187] Furumoto T, Koizumi A, Alkahari MR, Anayama R, Hosokawa A, Tanaka R, et al. 
Permeability and Strength of a Porous Metal Structure Fabricated by Additive Manufacturing. J. 
Mater Process Technol 2015;219:10-16. 
[188] Schaffer GB, Apelian D. Aluminium powder metallurgy: process, properties, and design 
solutions. Washington DC: The Aluminium Association Inc; 2000. 
[189] Kalpakjian S, Schmid SR. Manufacturing Engineering and Technology. Upper Saddle 
River NJ: Prentice Hall; 2001.  
[190] Grayson GN, Schaffer GB, Griffiths JR. On the fatigue of sintered aluminium alloys. 
Mater Forum 2004;28:981-85. 
[191] Upadhyaya GS. Sintered metallic and ceramic materials: preparations, properties and 
applications. Chichester: John Wiley& Sons, Limited; 2000. 
[192] Callister WD. Materials science and engineering: an introduction. New York: John Willey

----- Page 180 (native) -----
179 
 
 
& Sons, Inc; 2007. 
[193] Buchbinder D, Meiners W, Wissenbach K, Müller-Lohmeier K, Brandl E. Rapid 
Manufacturing of Aluminum Parts for Serial Production via Selective Laser Melting (SLM). In: 
Hirsch J, editor. Aluminum Alloys (Vol. 2). Wiley; 2008. p. 2394-400. 
[194] Mercelis P, Kruth JP. Residual stresses in selective laser sintering and selective laser 
melting. Rapid Prototyping J 2006;12(5):254–65.  
[195] Gu DD, Meiners W. Microstructure characteristics and formation mechanisms of in situ 
WC cemented carbide based hard metals prepared by Selective Laser Melting. Mater Sci Eng A 
2010;527:7585–92. 
[196] Jain A, Basu B, Kumar BVM, Harshavardhan, Sarkar J. Grain size–wear rate relationship 
for titanium in liquid nitrogen environment. Acta Mater 2010;58:2313–23. 
[197] Chlebus E, KuĨnicka B, Kurzynowski T, Dybała B. Microstructure and mechanical  
behaviour of Tiʊ6Alʊ7Nb alloy produced by selective laser melting. Mater Charact  
2011;62:488–495. 
[198] Boyer R, Welsch G, Collings EE. Materials properties handbook: titanium alloys. 
Materials Park (OH): ASM international handbook committee, ASM International; 1998. p. 3-
31. 
[199] Niinomi M. Mechanical biocompatibilities of titanium alloys for biomedical application. J 
Mech Behav Biomed Mater 2008;1:30–42.  
[200] Vandenbroucke B, Kruth J-P. Selective laser melting of biocompatible metals for rapid 
manufacturing of medical parts. Rapid Prototyp J 2007;13:196–203.

----- Page 181 (native) -----
180 
 
 
[201] Murr L-E, Quinones S-A, Gayatan S-M, Lopez M-I, Rodela A, Martinez E-Y, et al.  
Microstructure and mechanical behaviour of Tiʊ6Alʊ4V produced by rapid-layer 
manufacturing, for biomedical applications. J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 2009;2:20–32.  
[202] Spierings AB, Herres N, Levy G. Influence of the particle size distribution on surface 
quality and mechanical properties in AM steel parts. Rapid Prototyp J 2011;17(3 ): 195-202. 
[203] Spierings AB, Levy G. Comparison of density of stainless steel 316L parts produced with 
selective laser melting using different powder grades. In: Proceedings of the 20th solid freeform 
fabrication symposium, Austin, Texas; 2009. p. 324-53. 
[204] Kobryn PA, Semiatin SL. Mechanical properties of laser-deposited Ti-6Al-
4V.JOM;2006:179-186 
[205] Wang Y, Bergstrom J, Burman C. Characterisation of an iron-based laser sintered material. 
J Mater Process Technol 2006;172:77-87. 
[206] Wang Y, Bergstrom J, Burman C. Four-point bending fatigue behaviour of an iron-based 
laser sintered material. Inter J Fatigue 2006;28(12):1705-15. 
[207] Bassoli E, Sewell N, Denti L, Gatto A. Investigation into the failure of inconel exhaust 
collector produced by laser consolidation. Eng Fail Anal 2013;35:397–404. 
[208] Leuders S, Thöne M, Riemer A, Niendorf T, Tröster T, Richard HA, et al. On the 
mechanical behaviour of titanium alloy TiAl6V4 manufactured by selective laser melting: 
Fatigue resistance and crack growth performance. Inter J Fatigue 2013;48:300–07. 
[209] Ammar HR, Samuel AM, Samuel FH. Porosity and the fatigue behaviour of hypoeutectic 
and hypereutectic aluminum–silicon casting alloys. Int J Fatigue 2008;30:1024–35. 
[210] Qian G, Hong Y, Zhou C. Investigation of high cycle and very-high-cycle fatigue

----- Page 182 (native) -----
181 
 
 
behaviours for a structural steel with smooth and notched specimens. Eng Fail Anal 
2011;17:1517–25.

----- Page 183 (native) -----
182 
 
 
Vitae 
Dr Eyitayo Olatunde Olakanmi completed a Ph.D at the Institute for Materials Research 
(IMR), University of Leeds in the UK in 2009. He was formerly a Post-Doctoral Research 
Fellow at the Department of Mechanical Engineering Science, University of Johannesburg, 
South Africa. Eyitayo Olatunde Olakanmi is the corresponding author and can be contacted at 
e.o.olakanmi@gmail.com  
 
Dr. Robert F. Cochrane is a Senior Lecturer within the Institute for Materials Research (IMR), 
University of Leeds in the UK. 
 
Kenneth W. Dalgarno is the Sir James Woodeson Professor of Manufacturing Engineering at 
Newcastle University in the UK.

----- Page 184 (native) -----
183 
 
 
Figure Captions 
Fig. 1. (A) A layered manufacturing (LM) paradigm (B) Generic fixturing [9]. 
Fig. 2. Results from (A) porosity and (B) Charpy impact measurements performed over 
manufactured samples. Each point represents the average % porosity or impact energy 
determined for six samples fabricated in five particular iterations. Red bars indicate standard 
deviation from the average values of porosity and impact energy. The dashed line represents an 
average porosity or impact energy obtained from these five values [22]. 
Fig. 3. The microstructural development in indirect SLS of aluminium alloys. (A) green part 
(nylon binder in black, not visible); (B) aluminium nitride skeleton surrounding the aluminium 
grains; (C) infiltrated part [53]. 
Fig. 4. Variants of binary liquid phase SLS or direct SLS (A) coated grains, (B) composites 
grains, and (C) separate grains [54]. 
Fig. 5. LPS of WC-Co powder mixture; (A) before infiltration (grey portion: non-molten WC 
particle, white portion: molten Co, dark portion: porosity); (B) after infiltration with low melting 
point material (copper) [55]. 
Fig. 6. Phase diagram of an ideal system for LPS [60].  
Fig 7. A schematic diagram contrasting the effects of solubility on densification or swelling 
during LPS [60]. 
Fig. 8. Typical microstructure of a LPS system with the phase diagram characteristics shown in 
Fig. 6 [60].

----- Page 185 (native) -----
184 
 
 
Fig. 9. Optical images of the polished sections of the laser sintered multi-component Cu-based 
metal powder with varying contents (wt%) of binder CuSn in the samples (a) 20 (b) 35 (c) 50 
and (d) 65 [63]. 
Fig. 10. Processing window for single layer parts made in (A) air atomised pure aluminium (AL-
1) (B) gas atomised pure aluminium (AL-2) (C) water atomised Al-5.6Mg (AL-3) (D) water 
atomised Al- 6Mg (AL-4) and (E) gas atomised Al-12Si AL-5 powders (AL-5) (Note: 
Reciprocals of slopes f-a, f-b, and f-c, were computed and multiplied by the reciprocal of scan 
spacing (0.1 mm) in order to obtain the applied energy density). Processing conditions are laser 
powers (20-240W), scan rates (20-250mms-1), and scan spacing 0.1mm [40]. 
Fig. 11. Relationship between the various regions of processing map and the surface morphology 
of SLS/SLM processed aluminium powder at a laser power of 150 W, scan spacing of 0.1 mm, 
and varying scanning rates [40]. 
Fig. 12. Apparent, Tapping, and Bed densities of the aluminium powders [40]. 
Fig. 13. SLM processing windows for the SLM parts fabricated from (A) Al/5wt.% Fe2O3, 
(B) Al/10wt.% Fe2O3 and (C) Al/15wt.% Fe2O3 powder mixture [33].  
Fig. 14. Effect of SLS processing conditions on the density of an in-situ multi-component 
reinforced aluminum based metal matrix composite: (A) Main plots for density and (B) Main 
plots for porosity [43]. 
Fig. 15. (A) Variation of the density of SLS processed AlSi12 powder with scan spacing at fixed 
laser power (240 W); (B) Variation of the density of SLS processed AlSi12 powder with 
scanning rates at different laser powers. and layer thickness (0.25 mm); and (C) Variation of the

----- Page 186 (native) -----
185 
 
 
density of SLS processed AlSi12 powder with layer thickness at fixed laser power (240 W), 
scanning rate (120 mm/s); scan spacing (0.1 mm) [28]. 
Fig. 16: (A) Procedure for a target dependent database. (B) Correlation and prioritisation matrix 
[90 ] 
Fig. 17. A schematic illustration of Marangoni flow as applied to the direct SLS of W-Cu 2-
phase direct SLS [93]. 
Fig 18. Variation of the density of SLS processed AlSi12 powder with the applied energy 
density. Processing conditions: laser power (100–200 W), scan rate (80–200mms−1), scan 
spacing 0.1–0.3mm, and layer thickness 0.25–1.00mm [28]. 
Fig. 19. Effect of variation in layer thickness on the microstructure of laser sintered AlSi12 
powder at laser power of 200 W, scan rates of 120 mm/s; and scan spacing of 0.1mm: (A) 
1.0mm, (B) 0.5mm and (C) 0.25mm [28]. 
Fig. 20. Fractional density vs. the specific energy input (ȥ) for sintered iron using different 
processing parameters [94]. 
Fig. 21. SEM image of SLS/SLM processed iron powder at the excessive delivery of specific 
laser energy input of 0.8 kJ/mm3 showing the occurrence of layer delamination as a result of 
increased life time of the generated liquid phase [94].  
Fig. 22. SLS/SLM scanning strategies (a) Standard (b) Diagonal and (c) Perimeter [56].

----- Page 187 (native) -----
186 
 
 
Fig. 23. Four different scanning strategies adopted in the direct laser sintering of tool steels using 
a Nd: YAG laser machine. The numbers indicate the scanning sequence while the arrows 
represent the scanning directions [98]. 
Fig. 24. Three types of overlapping regime under inter-layer stagger scanning strategy. (A) Intra-
layer overlapping regime. (B) Inter-layer overlapping regime. (C) Mixed overlapping regime 
[101]. 
Fig. 25. (A) Porosity evolution in AlSi10Mg samples processed using different combinations of 
scan speeds and scan strategies, (B) Influence of scanning strategy on relative density [102]. 
Fig. 26. Relative density of the SLM-produced Al–12Si samples in various atmospheres as a 
function of incident laser energy [38]. 
Fig. 27. The effect of the sintering gas on sintered density for Al–3.8Cu–1Mg–0.7Si (wt%) 
samples were sintered for 1 h and air cooled [106]. 
Fig. 28. The variation of (A) fractional density with specific energy input (ȥ) for iron powders of 
varying particle sizes; (B) saturation density with the mean particle sizes of iron powders [117]. 
Fig. 29. The variation of (A) the densification (D) with the specific energy input (ȥ) for iron 
powders of different particle sizes; (B) the densification co-efficient (K) with the mean particle 
size of iron powders at different oxygen concentrations [117]. 
Fig. 30. Comparison of the apparent, tapping, and sintered densities (laser power of 200W, scan 
speed of 65 mm/s, layer thickness of 0.25 mm, and a scan spacing of 0.1 mm) of bimodal with 
trimodal powders [29].

----- Page 188 (native) -----
187 
 
 
Fig. 31. The variation of the densification (D) with the specific energy input (ȥ) for iron-based 
powders of varying chemical composition under the same processing conditions [119]. 
Fig. 32. Density and relative density of the SLM parts. The density was measured by 
dimensional method while relative density was achieved according to CT scanning experiments 
[31]. 
Fig. 33. (A) Effect of the main SLM parameters (laser scanning speed, hatch distance) on the 
resulting relative density of AlSi12 at 100 W [27]. (B) Relationship between Relative density in 
% and volumetric energy density in J mm-3 for AW-2618 processed with LBM machine system, 
Realizer SLM 50 [35]. 
Fig. 34. Three-phase equilibrium for wetting and non-wetting systems [46]. 
Fig. 35. (A) Illustration showing the epitaxial nucleation and competitive growth in the weld 
fusion zone [141], (B) Schematic of free energy change associated with heterogeneous 
nucleation in casting and welding juxtaposed with free energy change in homogeneous 
nucleation [143]. 
Fig. 36. (A) Microstructure of SLM processed Ti-6Al-4V exhibiting porosity and insufficient 
substrate remelts and (B) Etched microstructure of fully dense Ti-6Al-4V specimen [46]. 
Fig. 37. Optical micrographs of etched, polished sections parallel to the build directions at 
different energy density: (A) 100 J/mm3 (B) 75 J/mm3 (C) 67 J/mm3 (D) 40 J/mm3 (E)13 J/mm3 
[28].

----- Page 189 (native) -----
188 
 
 
Fig. 38. Relationship between the energy density and the average dendritic arm spacing of the 
SLS processed AlSi12 powders across the depth of the laser sintered AlSi12 samples [28]. 
Fig. 39. Effect of energy density on the fraction of primary phase in SLS processed 
AlSi12powder [28]. 
Fig. 40. Characteristic microstructures of SLS processed AlSi12 powder with varying processing 
conditions: (A, B) 100 J/mm3; (C, D) 67 J/mm3; (E, F) 50 J/mm3 [28].    
Fig. 41. Sections through the micrograph of AlSi12 (200W-120mm/s) generated by 67 J/mm3 
[28].    
Fig. 42. Optical micrographs showing the variation of microstructure of Ti-48Al-2Mn-2Nb 
(wt.%) alloy consisting of lamellar (Į2 + Ȗ), featureless (Ȗ) and partially lamellar [Ȗ + (Į2 + Ȗ)] 
and fabricated with laser power (A) 300W, (B) 360W, (C) 400W. (Scanning speed 8mm/s; 
powder feed rate 3g/min; z-increment 0.2mm; number of layers 20) [150]. 
Fig. 43. Typical microstructure of SLM processed AlSi10Mg parts at powder bed temperature of 
300 oC, and build orientation of 0o: (A) As built (B) Peak-hardened [30]. 
Fig. 44. Micrographs of aluminium alloy 2xxx on Al 6082 substrate after SLM processing (B) 
Optical micrograph of formation of single track; (B) SEM micrograph of microstructure of 
melted middle zone [153]. 
Fig. 45: (A) Diagram of basic SLM experimental platform with dual-magnetic-pole AC 
electromagnet (SD: scanning direction of laser; MD: movement direction of electromagnet). (B) 
optical metallographic images for Ti-6Al-4V SLM part. (C) Variations of electromagnetic flux 
density with  the average grain size [154].

----- Page 190 (native) -----
189 
 
 
Fig. 46. SEM images of laser sintered high speed steel powders using laser power of 50 W and a 
scan rate of 5.0 mm/s and a scan line spacing of 0.15 mm. Particle sizes were: (A) as supplied 
from atomiser (full range), (B) 53 µm – 150 µm, (C) >150 µm and (D) <38 µm [5]. 
Fig. 47. Polished section of laser sintered parts shows the effect of graphite addition on the pore 
structures on a section cut parallel to the building direction; laser power is 215 W, scan rate is 75 
mm/s, scan line spacing is 0.3 mm, and layer thickness is 0.1 mm (A) 0% C (B) 0.4% C (C) 
0.8% C (D) 1.2% C [156]. 
Fig. 48. Characteristic microstructure of laser sintered iron-1.2 wt.% graphite powder mixture on 
a section cut parallel to the building direction shows heterogeneous carbon dissolution in the iron 
matrix resulting in the varying local hardness values (Table 2.4). Laser power is 215 W, scan rate 
is 75 mm/s, scan line spacing is 0.3 mm, and layer thickness is 0.1 mm [156]. 
Fig. 49. AFM results presenting ultrafine/nanoscale particles in the cross section of the SLM 
parts 
made 
from 
(A) 
Al/15wt%Fe2O3, 
(B) 
AlMg1SiCu/15wt%Fe2O3, 
and 
(C) 
AlSi10Mg/15wt%Fe2O3 [31].  
Fig. 50. SEM secondary electron image taken from the two opposing fracture surface of sand 
cast Al-Si11.5-Mg0.4 showing an extensive double oxide film [180]. 
Fig. 51. (A) Marangoni convection in the melt pool. (B) Oxide disruption and solidification 
of the melt pool [27]. 
Fig. 52. Impact energy as a function of the oxide inclusion content in a hot-repressed 4340 steel, 
showing the detrimental effect of a small level contamination [113].

----- Page 191 (native) -----
190 
 
 
Fig. 53. The pores (dark spots) in these two sintered steels vary in shape and size, largely due to 
differences in sintering cycles. The arrangement of pores outlining the particles in (A) is 
detrimental to final properties, while the smooth pore structure evident in (B) is more desirable 
[113]. 
Fig. 54. Hardness of SLM processed AlSi10Mg samples depending on (A) scan rate (B) scan 
spacing [24]. 
 
Fig. 55. SEM images showing characteristic morphologies of worn surfaces of SLM-processed 
Ti parts at: (A) 900 J m-1, 100 mm s-1; (B) 450 J m-1,  mm s-1; (C) 300 J m-1, 300 mm s-1; (D) 225 
J m-1, 400 mm s-1 [176]. 
Fig. 56. Ultimate tensile strength of SLS-processed bronze-nickel parts as a function of scan 
speed and laser power [50]. 
Fig. 57. Tensile strength depending on build up direction for SLM processed AlSi10Mg part 
[24].  
Fig. 58. Ultimate tensile strength Rm and yield strength at 0.2 per cent offset Rp0.2 for 0o, 45o and 
90o orientations for finer powder type 1 and coarsest powder type 3 [202]. 
Fig. 59. Pore sizes of test cubes for finer powder type 1 (left) and coarse powder type 3 (right) 
for 30mm layers in 0o orientation [202]. 
Fig. 60. Elongation at fracture At for finest powder type 1, fine powder type 2, and coarse 
powder type 3 [202].

----- Page 192 (native) -----
191 
 
 
Fig. 61. Typical fracture surfaces of SLM processed AlSi10Mg parts (powder bed temperature of 
300 oC / build direction of 0o / as-built): (A) crack initiation site and (B) area of forced fracture. 
[30]. 
Fig. 62. Typical fracture surfaces of SLM processed AlSi10Mg parts (powder bed temperature of 
300 oC / build direction of 0o / peak hardened): (A) crack initiation site and (B) area of forced 
fracture [30]. 
 
 
 
Table Captions 
Table 1: Properties of pure and alloyed aluminium at its melting point [44] 
Table 2: SLS/SLM process parameters and material variables influencing the processing and 
densification mechanism of fabricated parts [50]. 
Table 3: Solubility effects on densification in LPS [60]. 
Table 4: Fractional amount of liquid phase generated in various SLS processed metal systems. 
 Table 5: Elemental Composition of the Powdered Samples by Semi-quantitative EDS Analysis 
(weight %) [40].

----- Page 193 (native) -----
192 
 
 
Table 6: Summary of application of SLS/SLM to metal systems. 
Table 7: Commercial Machines and Lasers for SLS/SLM of Metal Powders [128]. 
Table 8: Comparison of absorptance of single-component and two-component metallic powders 
using Nd:YAG and CO2 lasers [126]. 
Table 9: The local carbon concentration measured by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) 
method and microhardness values of marked areas in Fig. 48 [156]. 
Table 10: Comparative analysis of parts fabricated by SLS/SLM and other traditional production 
processes [188, 189].