

----- Page 1 (native) -----
REVIEW
Open Access
In search of causality: a systematic review of the
relationship between the built environment and
physical activity among adults
Gavin R McCormack* and Alan Shiell
Abstract
Background: Empirical evidence suggests that an association between the built environment and physical activity
exists. This evidence is mostly derived from cross-sectional studies that do not account for other causal
explanations such as neighborhood self-selection. Experimental and quasi-experimental designs can be used to
isolate the effect of the built environment on physical activity, but in their absence, statistical techniques that
adjust for neighborhood self-selection can be used with cross-sectional data. Previous reviews examining the built
environment-physical activity relationship have not differentiated among findings based on study design. To deal
with self-selection, we synthesized evidence regarding the relationship between objective measures of the built
environment and physical activity by including in our review: 1) cross-sectional studies that adjust for
neighborhood self-selection and 2) quasi-experiments.
Method: In September 2010, we searched for English-language studies on built environments and physical activity
from all available years in health, leisure, transportation, social sciences, and geographical databases. Twenty cross-
sectional and 13 quasi-experimental studies published between 1996 and 2010 were included in the review.
Results: Most associations between the built environment and physical activity were in the expected direction or
null. Land use mix, connectivity and population density and overall neighborhood design were however, important
determinants of physical activity. The built environment was more likely to be associated with transportation
walking compared with other types of physical activity including recreational walking. Three studies found an
attenuation in associations between built environment characteristics and physical activity after accounting for
neighborhood self-selection.
Conclusion: More quasi-experiments that examine a broader range of environmental attributes in relation to
context-specific physical activity and that measure changes in the built environment, neighborhood preferences
and their effect on physical activity are needed.
Keywords: urban form, causation, neighborhood self-selection, walkability, physical activity
Background
Despite the continued effort of health professionals and
agencies to encourage people to participate in physical
activity many adults are not active enough to achieve
optimal health benefits [1,2]. Improved strategies for
increasing physical activity at the population level are
necessary. In the last 15 years there has been a growing
interest into the role of the built environment in
supporting physical activity. Compared with other health
promotion approaches, the creation of built environ-
ments that support physical activity is a sustainable
strategy for encouraging people to adopt, or further
increase levels of, physical activity. One’s neighborhood
is especially important as it is here where the majority
of physical activity, including walking, is undertaken [3].
Recent land development patterns have increased dis-
tances between homes and destinations, lowered popula-
tion densities, and led to disconnected street patterns,
all of which are characteristic of urban sprawl. Urban
* Correspondence: gmccorma@ucalgary.ca
Population Health Intervention Research Centre, Department of Community
Health Sciences, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada
McCormack and Shiell International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and
Physical Activity 2011, 8:125
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/8/1/125
© 2011 McCormack and Shiell; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

----- Page 2 (native) -----
sprawl is a major societal problem as it is negatively
associated with physical activity and health [4-7]. Char-
acteristics such as land use mix and proximity to home,
street or network connectivity, population density,
pedestrian infrastructure, aesthetics, and safety are inde-
pendently correlated with physical activities such as
walking and cycling [8-10]. Access to a mix of local
recreational and non-recreational destinations (e.g.,
cafes, grocery stores, food stores, other retail, schools,
and services) is positively associated with transportation
and leisure walking [11-13]. Neighborhoods that have
more intersections (i.e., grid-like street pattern) offer
direct and alternative routes to destinations supporting
walking compared with neighborhoods that have fewer
intersections (i.e., curvilinear-like street pattern) [14,15].
Higher population densities are positively associated
with physical activity[14,16], probably because of the
relation between population density and other environ-
mental attributes - population being needed to make
mixed land use economically viable for example. Positive
associations between walking for transport and access to
and the quality of pedestrian infrastructure such as
maintained sidewalks, pedestrian-level lighting and
shade, and street furniture, have also been found
[12,17]. Similarly, associations between walking and
neighborhood aesthetics (greenery, landscaping, diver-
sity, upkeep, cleanliness etc.), personal safety (e.g., graf-
fitti, incivilities) and traffic safety (i.e., vehicle volume,
speed, crossing-aids) have also been found, although
these findings are less consistent [9,18,19].
The existence of associations between the built envir-
onment and physical activity is promising. This evidence
continues to inform land use practices, for example
through the development and application of environ-
mental design guidelines [20,21]. This evidence however,
has been mostly derived from cross-sectional data.
Cross-sectional studies thus far have contributed to a
better understanding of the plausibility, consistency,
coherence (i.e., changes in the built environment asso-
ciated with other outcomes related to physical activity -
driving and obesity), and specificity (i.e., specific attri-
butes associated with specific types of physical activity)
of the built environment-physical activity relationship.
However, cross-sectional studies by their design do not
provide explicit information about temporal precedence
and most to date have not included mechanisms to rule
out competing explanations of the built environment-
physical activity relationship, such as neighborhood self-
selection. The selection or choice of neighborhood in
which to live is based on economic, social, lifestyle cir-
cumstances, and physical activity and transportation
preferences. Those inclined to walk for transportation
may seek out and eventually reside in neighborhoods
that cater to their preferred transportation mode (e.g.,
transit access, access to local stores and services, pedes-
trian infrastructure). As a result, the magnitude of any
association between the built environment and physical
activity that is estimated from cross-sectional studies
not accounting for neighborhood self-selection is likely
to be inflated. The failure to take into account neighbor-
hood self-selection is a major limitation of the evidence
to date[22]. Adjusting cross-sectional data for neighbor-
hood self-selection using methods such as direct ques-
tioning, statistical control, instrumental variable analysis,
sample selection models, joint discrete choice models,
and structural equation models, as well as quasi-experi-
mental study designs may reduce bias in estimated asso-
ciations between the built environment and physical
activity [23].
Many reviews acknowledge neighborhood self-selec-
tion as an issue,[10,24,25] and yet few report the results
from studies that account for neighborhood self-selec-
tion separate from those that have not [23,26]. One
exception is a review of transportation studies that
found that associations between the built environment
and travel behavior via active (i.e., walking and cycling)
and passive modes (i.e., driving) existed independent of
neighborhood self-selection [26]. Synthesizing evidence
that provides information about causation and not just
correlation between the built environment and different
types of physical activity, and not just active transporta-
tion, will assist in developing evidence-based urban
planning policies that will encourage more physical
activity. The aim of this study was to review quantitative
studies examining associations between the built envir-
onment and physical activity that either used a 1) statis-
tical design to adjust for neighborhood self-selection or
2) experimental or quasi-experimental design with
assessment of change in both the built environment and
physical activity.
Method
Data sources and search strategy
In September 2010, we searched for English-language
studies on built environments and physical activity from
all available years in health, leisure, transportation, social
sciences, and geographical databases (i.e., PubMed, Med-
line, Transport Research Information Services-TRIS,
UrbanStudies: Environment Complete, PsychInfo, Sport-
Discus, and LeisureTourism Abstracts). Keyword and
phrase searches within titles and abstracts were underta-
ken. Terms and their variants used to capture physical
activity included: physical activity; exercise; inactivity;
walking, bicycling, strolling, leisure-time, sports, recrea-
tion, active transportation and pedestrian. Terms and
their variants used to capture the built environment
included: objective environment, spatial, neighborhood,
built environment, physical environment, streetscape,
McCormack and Shiell International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and
Physical Activity 2011, 8:125
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/8/1/125
Page 2 of 11

----- Page 3 (native) -----
urban form, urban planning, walkability, pedestrian-
friendly and GIS.
The search across the seven databases provided 10,175
article hits (PubMed = 3147, Medline = 2008, TRIS =
1562, Urban Studies: Environment Complete = 1419,
PsychInfo = 1085, SportDiscus = 825, and LeisureTour-
ism Abstracts). From these we removed duplicate refer-
ences and studies that were not peer reviewed, were off
topic, or reported only qualitative data, referred only to
non-adult samples, took place in workplace/worksite
settings, or were methodological studies, commentaries,
editorials, or literature reviews. Literature review refer-
ence lists were searched for relevant articles missed in
the initial search. This left 538 potentially eligible
abstracts, each of which was reviewed independently by
both authors (GRM and AS) to confirm which ones met
our inclusion criteria: (1) having measured physical
activity; (2) using an objective assessment of the built
environment, and (3) used a cross-sectional study design
with adjustment for neighborhood self-selection or an
experimental or quasi-experimental design. Seventy-two
of the 538 articles were selected by either or both
authors (inter-rater agreement = 92.1%) to undergo full
article review.
The authors reviewed the 72 full articles identifying
those that: 1) examined physical activity as an outcome
which could measured via questionnaire, interview,
diary, survey, pedometer, accelerometer, Global Posi-
tioning Satellite (GPS) system, heart rate monitor, direct
observation, calorimetry, or doubly-labeled water; 2)
objective measures of the built environment using geo-
graphical information systems, desktop mapping, or
audits; 3) measured or estimated the effect of neighbor-
hood self-selection including administering items cap-
turing neighborhood preference or reasons for moving
to the neighborhood, instrumental variable analysis,
selection models, structural equations models, joint
probability models, and propensity score analysis and; 4)
estimated an association between the built environment
and physical activity adjusted for neighborhood self-
selection in the case of cross-sectional studies, or esti-
mated the change in physical activity relative to the
change in the built environment in the case of quasi-
experiments. Relevant quasi-experiments included those
that measured physical activity either before and after
neighborhood relocation or before and after an environ-
mental intervention of modification. Our approach was
inclusive hence quasi-experiments could include one or
multiple groups (i.e., comparison or control) and the
behaviors of the same participants need not have been
assessed before and after the intervention (i.e., a separate
pre-post sample design). Studies involving children aged
< 18 years of age or that used only self-reported mea-
sures of the built environment were excluded. Thirty-
three articles met the criteria and were consequently
included in the review after author consensus (initial
inter-rater agreement = 92.9%).
Data extraction
From the 33 articles we extracted, summarized and
tabulated the following information: author details;
study setting (place and date data collected), study
design (including sample recruitment), sample charac-
teristics (gender, age, and socioeconomic status), physi-
cal activity variables, objective environment variables,
method for neighborhood self-selection adjustment, cov-
ariates, associations between the built environment and
physical activity independent of neighborhood self-selec-
tion, and where the information provided report
whether the built environment-physical activity relation-
ship attenuated after adjustment for neighborhood self-
selection. We grouped natural experiments with quasi-
experiments as they share common characteristics - i.e.,
non-random allocation of participants into intervention
and comparison groups and an estimation of an inter-
vention effect - although we acknowledge that the for-
mer traditionally reflects interventions that result from
naturally occurring events while the latter reflects inter-
ventions that often involve deliberate manipulation [27].
With regard to built environment interventions and
people moving neighborhoods, the delineation between
what is considered a “natural” versus an “experimental”
intervention is not always clear.
Results
Study sample characteristics
The majority of studies were undertaken in the U.S. (n
= 29), with one study being conducted each in Canada
[28], Australia [29], U.K. [30], and Holland [31] (Addi-
tional file 1). Studies were published between 1996-2010
but more than 50% (n = 17) had been published since
2008. Among studies that reported response rates (n =
20) the lowest was 6.6% [32] and the highest was 64%
[33]. Mean ages among samples ranged between 30 and
50 years, although one study that followed participants
during and after high school included noticeably
younger participants (mean age = 21 years)[34]. Most
samples included both men and women except two that
included women only [33,35]. All income groups were
represented among the studies reviewed.
Study designs
Thirteen quasi-experiments were reviewed. Among
these, physical activity was measured either: 1) in the
same respondents before and after relocating to a new
neighborhood [33-36]; 2) in the same respondents
before and after an environmental modification [37-42],
or; 3) in separate respondents before and after an
McCormack and Shiell International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and
Physical Activity 2011, 8:125
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/8/1/125
Page 3 of 11

----- Page 4 (native) -----
environmental modification [28,30,43]. Two studies
attempted to assess temporal precedence by asking
respondents to recall their physical activity behaviors
before they had relocated to their most recent neighbor-
hood (i.e., quasi-longitudinal)[44,45]. Ten of the quasi-
experimental studies included a modification to the
built environment (i.e., no residential relocation) of
which two included intervention and comparison groups
[38,43] and eight included an intervention group only
[28,30,33,37,39-42].
Twenty studies used statistical approaches to control
for self-selection in the estimated association between
the built environment and physical activity. Most of
these captured each respondent’s reasons for moving to
their current neighborhood or their preferences for par-
ticular neighborhood attributes and used this informa-
tion as a covariate in subsequent analysis. The types of
preferential attributes included valuing shops and service
close by [46], preference for accessibility, physical activ-
ity options, or safety [45], or the closeness to school and
public transit, desire for nearby shops and services, and
ease of walking [29]. Studies included individual [46-48]
and multi-item neighborhood self-selection scales
[29,32,44,45,49-55]. Only eleven studies provided evi-
dence for the reliability or validity of their neighborhood
self-selection items [29,44,45,49-55].
Other statistical approaches were also used to take
into account neighborhood self-selection, notably instru-
mental variables and propensity scoring. Khattack and
Rodriguez [56] regressed the respondents neighborhood
type (i.e., neo-traditional or conventional) onto attitudes
related to residential choice that were not likely asso-
ciated with travel behavior, and then used the predicted
probability from this model when estimating the asso-
ciation between the built environment and walking trips.
Greenwald and Boarnet [57] also used instrumental vari-
able analysis, by including aggregate-level variables that
were associated with choice of urban setting but not
with individual travel behavior (i.e., percent capita
income, population with at least a college education,
population identified as African American, population
identified as Hispanic, population of housing units clas-
sified as rural not farms). Cao[53] used propensity score
analysis to estimate the conditional probability that an
individual resided in a traditional vs. suburban neighbor-
hood based on measured respondent characteristics,
including residential preferences, which was then used
to adjust the association between neighborhood type
and transportation and recreational walking. Boarnet et
al.[58] used a Heckman selection model to obtain an
estimate of unmeasured characteristics related to neigh-
borhood self-selection, which was then included as a
covariate in a model regressing physical activity onto
neighborhood type. Pinjari et al. [59] took a slightly
different approach by jointly modeling residential choice
and the association between the built environment and
physical activity.
Studies adjusting for neighborhood self-selection gen-
erally used single regression equations, with two (one
cross-sectional and one quasi-longitudinal) using struc-
tural equation models [44,52].
Measurement of physical activity
Self-reports were the most common method for captur-
ing physical activity (n = 27 studies), four studies used
direct observation [28,30,38,43], three used acceler-
ometers [37,42,55], and one used pedometer data [33]
(Additional file 1). Twelve studies measured overall
walking, eight captured walking for transport, and seven
captured recreational walking. Twelve studies measured
moderate-to-vigorous
intensity
physical
activity
(MVPA), and six captured cycling behavior. Physical
activity undertaken during the last 7 days (n = 11), 30
days or month (n = 5), two days (n = 4) or daily (n = 6)
were often captured. Several studies captured context-
specific physical activity including physical activity
undertaken in the neighborhood [43,45,48,53,54,59],
park [38], on a street or cycle path [28,30], and on a
trail [40]. Less than half of studies presented supporting
evidence for the reliability or validity of their physical
activity data collection method [29,33,34,36-42,45,54,55].
Measurement of the built environment
Application of GIS techniques to existing geographical
databases was the most common method for character-
izing the built environment. Neighborhoods were gener-
ally operationalized as local areas, transportation zones,
census districts, or buffers within a 1600, 800 or 400 m
Euclidean and network distance of home. The associa-
tion between land use proximity and mix and density
(population and employment) was examined most often
among the studies reviewed (Table 1). Natural experi-
ments included installation of trails[40,41,43], cycle
lanes [28], transit stops or stations[37,39,42], street
lighting[30], and park improvements[38] (Tables 1 and
2).
Associations between the built environment and physical
activity
Street and pedestrian connectivity
Three studies found positive associations between con-
nectivity and physical activity. Cao et al. [48] found that
walking to the store inside the neighborhood during the
past month was positively associated with pedestrian
connections between the street and stores in a commer-
cial street (i.e., pedestrian entrances). Similarly, Boarnet
et al.[58] found that the number of intersections within
a census block was positively associated with distance
McCormack and Shiell International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and
Physical Activity 2011, 8:125
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/8/1/125
Page 4 of 11

----- Page 5 (native) -----
walked while Chattman[47] found a positive association
between the number of 4-way intersections and fre-
quency of non-work walking and biking trips. Contrary
to these cross-sectional findings, Wells and Yang [33]
using a quasi-experiment found women who had moved
to a neighborhood with fewer cul-de-sacs walked less
than they had before, suggesting a negative association
between connectivity and physical activity.
Land uses
Six studies found associations between land use mix and
physical activity. Handy et al. [45] found that the num-
ber of different businesses within 800 m of home was
positively associated with the frequency of walking to a
store, but not strolling, within the neighborhood. Posi-
tive associations between frequency of MVPA[54] and
walking and biking[51] and the number of different
business types within 400 m of home was also found. In
addition, Cao et al. [60] found the monthly frequency of
undirected walking and biking trips undertaken during
good weather to increase as the number of business
types within 1600 m of home increased. Quasi-
longitudinal findings from the same dataset suggested
that movers reported doing more walking and biking
one-year post move if their current neighborhood
included an increased mix of businesses [44,45].
Cao et al. [51] found an increase in monthly home-
based non-work walking and biking trips with decreased
distance to a theatre (attenuated but remained signifi-
cant after adjustment for residential preferences), and
non-significant associations (attenuated and became
non-significant after adjustment for residential prefer-
ences) between distance to the library and post office
and walking/biking trips. Cao et al.[48] found a negative
association between distance to the nearest store and
monthly frequency of walking to a neighborhood store
after adjusting for the respondent’s reported importance
of having a store within walking distance. Using the
same dataset, distance to the nearest grocery store was
negatively associated with frequency of walking to stores
inside the neighborhood [45]. Boarnet et al.[58] found a
negative association between distance to city hall and
the distance walked over two days, while residents of a
Table 1 Summary of associations between built environmental attributes and physical activity among all studies
(cross-sectional and quasi-experiments)
N total
(studies)
Recreation
walking
Transportation
walking
General
walking
General
cycling
Combined
walk/cycle
Moderate to
vigorous PA*
Neighborhood characteristics
Street/pedestrian connectivity
5
o[48]
+[48]
o[57]/+[58]
+[47]
-[33]
Land use mix
6
o[45]
+[45]
+[44,45]
+[45]
+[51,60]
o[59]/+[54]
Recreation land use proximity
7
o[45]
o[45]
o[44]
+[45]
o[60]/-[51]
o[59]/+[34,54]/-[34]
Non-recreational land use proximity
10
o[45,48]
+[45]/-[45,46,48]
o[44]/-[58]
o[45]
o[47,51,60]
o[54,59]
Transit proximity/access
5
o[39]/+[58]
+[47]
o[39,42]/+[37]
Population/residential density
6
+[35]/-[35]
+[35]
+[57]
o[47]
o[33,34,59]
Employment/job density
5
o[57]/+[58]
o[47]
o[59]/-[33]
Aesthetics/variety/diversity
2
o[48]
o[48]
-[34]
Trails/pathways/cycle ways/sidewalk
5
o[31]/+[43]
/-[40,41]
o
[31,41,47]/
+[28,43]/-
[40]
o[40]/+[43]
/-[41]
Parks/public open space install or
improvements
2
+[31]
o[31]
o[38]
Pedestrian/cyclist amenities (street
furniture, lighting, shading)
3
o[48]
o[48]
+[30]
o[59]
Traffic-related
2
o[48]
+[48]
o[31]
o[31]
Aggregated neighborhood
characteristics
Walkability/pedestrian index
4
o[29,55]/
+[50]
+[29,50,55]
+[57]
o[52]
+[55]
Neighborhood type (traditional, New
urbanist)
5
+[53]
+[53]
+[32,56]
+[49,51]
Sprawl
1
o[36]
o[36]
+: studies reporting statistically significant positive association between the environmental characteristic and physical activity.
-: studies reporting statistically significant negative association between the environmental characteristic and physical activity.
o: studies reporting no statistically significant association between the environmental characteristic and physical activity.
Cross-sectional results that adjust for residential selection included only. Quasi-experimental studies: [28,30,31,33-43].
* Also included pedometer and accelerometer-determined physical activity and use of specific locations (i.e., parks or trails).
McCormack and Shiell International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and
Physical Activity 2011, 8:125
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/8/1/125
Page 5 of 11

----- Page 6 (native) -----
neo-traditional neighborhood were found to do more
transportation-related walking trips the closer they
resided to a commercial center [46]. Contrary to the
expected negative relationship between distance to desti-
nations and physical activity, Handy et al. [45,54] found
that increasing distance to the nearest bank and health
establishment was associated with more walking. Tem-
poral evidence provided general support for these cross-
sectional study findings. Boone-Heinonen et al.[34]
found that weekly frequency of MVPA increased among
those relocating to a neighborhood with more public
and pay recreational facilities, although a decrease in
MVPA frequency was found among women relocating
to a neighborhood with more pay recreational facilities
suggesting sex differences in the built environment-phy-
sical activity relationship. Generally this evidence
together suggests that increased mix and proximity of
land uses are important for encouraging physical
activity.
Transit proximity and access
Distance walked was found to increase as the distance
between home and light rail transit increased [58] while
another study found a positive association between the
presence of light, but not heavy, rail within 800 m from
home and non-work waking or biking frequency [47].
One quasi-experiment found that ridership increased
after the installment of a rail stop, which itself was posi-
tively associated with accelerometer-assessed moderate-
intensity physical activity [37]. Data from the same
study however, later showed no group (ridership status)-
by-time (pre-post rail installment) nor a time related dif-
ference in accelerometer-assessed moderate-intensity
physical activity[42]. Moreover, no association between
transit use and achieving recommended walking or vig-
orous physical activity was found after the development
of a light rail transit corridor [39]. Overall there appears
to be mixed support for the importance of transit (rail)
accessibility and physical activity.
Population and employment density
Population density was associated with walking behavior
in two studies. Greenwald and Boarnet[57] found a posi-
tive cross-sectional association between the frequency of
non-work related walking and population density, while
Coogan et al.[35] based on a quasi-experiment found
that women relocating to a neighborhood with a higher
population density increased their weekly time spent
walking for transportation and recreation. One cross-
sectional study showed a significant positive association
between employment density and walking distance while
also finding that the association between population and
retail employment density and walking distance attenu-
ated to non-significance after adjustment for neighbor-
hood self-selection [58]. A quasi-experiment found a
negative association between the ratio of service jobs to
the number of residents and post-relocation pedometer-
determined steps among women [33].
Aesthetics and design
Two studies examined the relationship between aes-
thetics and physical activity. A cross-sectional study
found no association between aesthetics-related attri-
butes (i.e., design variation, sidewalk shading, front door
setback, and proportion of houses with porches) and
monthly frequency of neighborhood strolling and trans-
portation-related walking [48]. A quasi-experiment
found a counterintuitive reduction in the weekly fre-
quency of MVPA among respondents after relocating to
a neighborhood with more landscape diversity [34].
Based on the few studies reviewed there appears to be
limited evidence for aesthetics supporting physical
activity.
Pedestrian and cyclist infrastructure (including sidewalks,
trails and pathways)
Chattman [47] found a positive association between
sidewalks on both sides of the street and the number of
non-work trips by walking/biking, however this was no
longer statistically significant after adjusting for neigh-
borhood self-selection. The installment of an urban
greenway/trail, was associated with increases in walking,
cycling and other physical activity post-intervention
Table 2 Summary of temporal associations between built
environmental attributes and any physical activity
outcome by type of quasi-experimental design
Change in physical activity
behavior
Increase No
change
Decrease
Neighborhood built
characteristics
Street/pedestrian connectivity
Land use mix
Recreation land use proximity
Non-recreational land use proximity
Transit proximity/access
Population/residential density
Employment/job density
Aesthetics/variety/diversity
Trails/pathways/cycle ways/sidewalk
Parks/public open space
Pedestrian/cyclist amenities
Traffic-related
Sprawl
Association found using a same sample pre-post design (residential
relocation)
Association found using a same sample pre-post design (environmental
modification)
Association found using a different sample pre-post design (environmental
modification)
Association found using a same sample pre-post quasi-longitudinal design
McCormack and Shiell International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and
Physical Activity 2011, 8:125
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/8/1/125
Page 6 of 11

----- Page 7 (native) -----
[43]. These results were supported by another study
which found increases in daily bicycle traffic following
the installation of cyclist infrastructure (i.e., cycle lanes,
signage, marking, reductions in speed limits) [28]. In
addition, Painter[30] found an increase in the number of
pedestrians using the street following installation of
street lighting in three neighborhoods. Several studies
however, have show no association between pedestrian
or cyclist infrastructure and physical activity. For
instance, a quasi-experiment by Meurs and Haaijer [31]
found no change in weekly walking and bicycle trips
among people relocating to neighborhoods with more
or less supportive street characteristics such as access to
cycle paths, pedestrian priority areas, and traffic calming
strategies. Furthermore, installation of a new trail was
not found to increase physical activity, and in fact was
associated with a reduction in the likelihood of time
spent walking and cycling among trail users[40]. This
finding might suggest that the increased connectivity
resulting from installation of the new trail meant that
people using the trail as transport corridor do need to
spend as much time walking or cycling to reach destina-
tions. Goulias and Burnbridge[41] found counterintui-
tive reductions in walking and overall physical activity
frequency 5-months after the construction a neighbor-
hood multi-use trail [40,41]. Whether or not pedestrian
and cyclist infrastructure lead to increases in physical
activity behavior might depend on the type of attributes
and the extent of the environmental modification under-
taken and the type of physical activity behavior
evaluated.
Neighborhood parks and open space
Meurs and Haaijer[31] examined changes in the neigh-
borhood environment among movers and non-movers
during a nine year period and found that increases in
the quantity of parks, green strips, and playgrounds to
built environment positively associated with weekly
walking, but not cycling, trips among non-movers.
Although the same relationship was not found among
movers. Cohen et al. [38] studied the effect of neighbor-
hood park upgrades on park use and physical activity.
They found that park use and exercise did not change
as a result of the upgrades (i.e., new or redesigned gym-
nasium, field improvements, landscaping, walking paths,
picnic areas, playgrounds) although the number of first
time parker users did increase.
Traffic-related characteristics
Cao et al. [48] found a cross-sectional association
between reductions in traffic volume and increases in
monthly frequency of walking to the store, but not strol-
ling, in the neighborhood however, no association was
found in another study examining changes in weekly
walking and cycling trips after participants moved to a
street with traffic calming and 30 km/h zones [31].
Walkability, sprawl, and neighborhood type
Four studies examined the association between a neigh-
borhood walkability or pedestrian index and physical
activity. Positive cross-sectional associations were found
between neighborhood walkability - combination of com-
mercial floor space, land use mix, residential density, and
connectivity - and walking trips[50]. In addition, those
who preferred less walkable neighborhoods were gener-
ally less likely to walk for any purpose regardless of
whether they lived in a high or low walkable neighbor-
hood [50]. Sallis et al. [55] and Owen et al. [29] using a
walkability index with the same components (intersection
density, retail density, retail floor area, and land use mix)
found positive associations with transportation-related,
but not recreational, walking. Specifically, Sallis et al. [55]
found that minutes of leisure walking in high walkable
neighborhoods attenuated after adjusting for reasons for
moving to the neighborhood. They also found more
accelerometer-determined MVPA in high versus low
walkable neighborhoods. Owen et al. [29] found that
neighborhood walkability was associated with more fre-
quent transportation walking among respondents who
reported desire for nearby shops and services as impor-
tant reasons for moving to their current neighborhood.
These findings are supported by Greenwald and Boarnet
[57] who found a positive cross-sectional association
between a neighborhood pedestrian environment score –
a composite score based on ease of street crossing, side-
walk continuity, street connectivity, and topography –
and frequency of non-work walking trips. In contrast
Bagley and Mokhtarian[52] found no association between
suburban and traditional neighborhood indices and daily
walking/biking distance.
Neighborhood type was consistently associated with
physical activity behavior including transportation-
related, recreational, non-specific walking and cycling
[32,49,51,53,56]. The findings of these studies together
albeit cross-sectional, suggest that neighborhoods with
higher residential densities, more mixed land use, and
that include highly connected street patterns are more
supportive of pedestrian and cyclist activity than neigh-
borhoods that do not have these characteristics. One
study only examined changes in physical activity in rela-
tion to composite environmental sprawl index which
included measures population density, percent of people
residing in high or low densities areas, population den-
sity per square mile of urban land, mean block size, and
percent of blocks ≤500 feet on a side [36]. The study
showed no association between change in physical activ-
ity energy expenditure nor walking distance among
movers to a different county regardless the level of
sprawl. Nevertheless, the combination of different envir-
onmental attributes appears to important for supporting
physical activity.
McCormack and Shiell International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and
Physical Activity 2011, 8:125
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/8/1/125
Page 7 of 11

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Discussion
To date reviews of studies examining the association
between the built environment and physical activity
have not summarized findings based on study control of
neighborhood self-selection [8,10,24,25]. This review
extends prior knowledge by summarizing findings from
studies that attempt to address neighborhood self-selec-
tion and temporal precedence when examining the asso-
ciation
between
the
objectively-assessed
built
environment and physical activity. We found that the
associations between specific built environmental attri-
butes and physical activity were generally mixed based
on this more rigorous evidence. Land use mix, compo-
site walkability indices and neighborhood type were
nevertheless consistently associated with higher physical
activity levels even after controlling for neighborhood
self-selection. Moreover, the built environment was
found to be more supportive of walking and cycling
compared with physical activity more generally-congru-
ent with previous findings [10,24,25] and with current
knowledge regarding behavior-specific environmental
settings [61].
Our finding that associations between the built environ-
ment and physical activity exist from both cross-sectional
studies that adjust for neighborhood self-selection and
from quasi-experiments is promising. To date few cross-
sectional studies have adjusted for neighborhood self-
selection when examining the relation between the built
environment and physical activity. This is reflected in the
low number of included cross-sectional studies in this
review versus elsewhere [8,10,24,25]. Cross-sectional find-
ings that do not account for residential self-selection pro-
vide no indication of the extent to which changes in the
built environment might be independently associated with
changes in physical activity. They may instead just reflect
an active individual’s preference to live in neighbourhoods
that support their existing physical activity levels. In prac-
tice, the built environment likely has some effect on the
amount of physical activity engaged in by active people
who desire to reside in more walkable neighborhoods[50]
and the balance between neighborhood supply and
demand has the potential to influence population-levels of
physical activity.
The purpose of this study was not to describe how
neighborhood self-selection and its potential interaction
with the built environment influences physical activity
but rather to isolate the influence that changes in the
built environment might have on changes in physical
activity. A unique finding of our review is that the asso-
ciation between the built environment and physical
activity likely exists independent of residential location
choices. The importance of adjusting for neighborhood
self-selection in cross-sectional studies is indicated by
reviewed studies that showed an attenuation in the asso-
ciation between the built environment and physical
activity after adjustment [47,51,55]. Future cross-sec-
tional studies should therefore try to account statistically
for neighborhood self-selection in order to obtain more
robust estimates of the likely magnitude of any associa-
tions between changes in the built environment and
physical activity.
Some support for the idea that changes in the built
environment precede changes in physical activity is
found in the quasi-experimental studies reviewed here
that show increased cyclist activity after the installment
of cycling infrastructure[28], increased walking, cycling,
and other physical activity after installment of a green-
way trail [43], increased pedestrian activity following
installment of street lighting[30] and increased first time
park user following park upgrades [38] (Table 2). These
results suggest that modifying one or a few environmen-
tal attributes independent of other factors has the
potential to encourage more physical activity. However,
null and counter-intuitive associations were also found,
for example, the reduction in physical activity following
the installation of a trail [40,41]. The overall pattern of
findings from quasi-experimental evidence also suggests
an increased number of null associations from studies
with stronger designs (Table 2). Quasi-experiments offer
more robust evidence of causality compared with cross-
sectional designs however, they are still subject to biases
that might contribute to counter-intuitive findings[27].
The use of quasi-experimental studies in the field is in
its infancy. Future quasi-experiments of built environ-
ment interventions should take steps to rule out com-
peting explanations and biases such as capturing pre
and post intervention data from cohorts, taking multiple
pre and post intervention measurements, including mul-
tiple intervention-matched control groups and obtaining
measures of individual-level dose or exposure to the
intervention [27]. Capturing information about inter-
mediate variables (e.g., psychosocial factors, knowledge,
awareness) in addition to physical activity might also
provide a better understanding about the pathways by
which the built environment influences physical activity
or clues when interventions provide unexpected results.
To date few potential built environmental interven-
tions and their influence on physical activity have been
evaluated and published in the peer-reviewed literature.
In addition, environmental attributes that are modified
are often those that are only modestly or inconsistently
associated with physical activity [8,10,24,25]. There is a
dearth of studies examining changes in physical activity
among the same respondents in the same neighborhood
following changes in pedestrian connectivity, population
density, or land uses - which are consistent correlates of
McCormack and Shiell International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and
Physical Activity 2011, 8:125
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/8/1/125
Page 8 of 11

----- Page 9 (native) -----
walking. This suggests quasi-experiments examining
changes in behavior pre and post installment or modifi-
cation of a wider range of environmental features is
needed. For this to occur researchers need to know
when changes to the built environment are scheduled to
take place to design the study methodology and to
obtain resources. Changes to funding opportunities (i.e.,
rapid reviews for natural experiment opportunities) and
building stronger partnerships with urban designers, city
planners, and community groups might alleviate some
of the barriers to conducting quasi-experiments.
Despite providing preliminary evidence for a causal
association between the built environment and physical
activity several limitations should be considered when
interpreting the findings of our review. The inclusion of
only peer-reviewed studies added to the scientific rigour of
our review however this approach also means that our
findings likely are affected by publication bias thus overes-
timating the potential influence of environmental attri-
butes on physical activity. The focus on only peer-
reviewed evidence might have resulted in the inclusion of
fewer quasi-experiments as many urban planning depart-
ments likely do not publish evaluations of their own inter-
ventions within this forum. We did not exclude or weight
study findings based on their individual rigor. This is
important to note given that many studies did not provide
estimates of the reliability of their physical activity or resi-
dential self-selection items. Given the small number of
studies included in this review we did not differentiate
among quasi-experimental approaches nor method of
neighborhood self-selection adjustment. A discussion of
the different methods of accounting statistically for neigh-
borhood self-selection, including strengths and limitations
is presented elsewhere [23]. We grouped environmental
attributes in categories that have face validity, but we
acknowledge that some attributes could be located under
multiple categories that may not be mutually exclusive.
Data for some environment-physical activity associations
were not available from the studies reviewed (e.g., aes-
thetics and cycling) or if available were examined in only a
few studies. Between studies, there was also wide variation
in the methods used to measure physical activity and the
built environment. Therefore making definitive statements
about which environmental attributes should be targeted
to increase specific types of physical activities is difficult
from our findings. Nevertheless, in support of findings
elsewhere [10,24,25], our results suggest that some specific
environmental attributes might be associated with certain
physical activities. For example, connectivity, land use mix,
and traffic-related factors are associated with walking for
transport but not recreational walking, and population
density is associated with walking but not cycling for any
purpose or non-specific moderate-to-vigorous intensity
physical activity. Consistency in the measurement of built
environment attributes and physical activity across studies
would improve the comparability of findings and result in
stronger statements about the relationship between the
built environment and physical activity. This might also
allow quantitative synthesis techniques such as meta-ana-
lysis to be used.
Evidence regarding the association between the built
environment and physical activity found from this review
is mixed. Generally, the associations between attributes
of the built environment and physical activity from cross-
sectional studies appear to remain following statistical
adjustment of self-selection although associations attenu-
ate somewhat. However, more rigorous quasi-experimen-
tal studies of the relationship between the built
environment and physical activity provide less support,
with several positive, null, and even counter-intuitive
negative associations being found. The mixed nature of
findings from the few quasi-experimental studies that
have been undertaken on this topic to date, suggest that
more quasi-experimental research is needed in order to
provide stronger evidence for recommending the creation
of walkable neighborhoods as an effective population
health intervention for increasing physical activity.
Creating or modifying neighborhoods to make them
walkable may not always immediately lead to more phy-
sical activity, but could result in other health benefits
such as higher social capital [62,63], improved mental
health [64], and fewer motor vehicle caused pedestrian
injuries [65]. However, there is dearth of data on the
economic cost of improving neighborhood walkability
(or health supportiveness) and the potential subsequent
health care savings resulting from improvements in
health. Future studies should examine the potential
short and long-term effects of built environment inter-
ventions on behavior as well the cost-effectiveness of
creating walkable neighborhoods. The results of this
review reflect previous evidence regarding the impor-
tance of street and pedestrian connectivity, land use and
destination mix, population density, and overall neigh-
borhood design for supporting physical activity among
adults, and adds to the evidence by showing that these
associations tend to remain even after taking steps to
control for neighborhood self-selection.
Additional material
Additional file 1: Summary of extracted information from studies
included in the review (n = 33). The file includes information about
the study design, sample recruitment, sample characteristics, physical
activity variables, built environment variables, neighborhood self-
selection, confounders, and findings for each study included in the
review.
McCormack and Shiell International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and
Physical Activity 2011, 8:125
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/8/1/125
Page 9 of 11

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Acknowledgements
GRM is supported by a Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR) Bisby
Postdoctoral Fellowship. At the time of this review, AS held an AHFMR
Health Scientist award and a CIHR Chair in Applied Public Health. The
authors thank Mr Jacob Speelman for his assistance in the search and
retrieval of articles.
Authors’ contributions
GRM and AS conceived the study, conducted the synthesis, interpreted the
findings and contributed to writing of the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 28 June 2011 Accepted: 13 November 2011
Published: 13 November 2011
References
1.
Bauman A, Bull F, Chey T, Craig CL, Ainsworth BE, Sallis JF, Bowles HR,
Hagstromer M, Sjostrom M, Pratt M: The International Prevalence Study
on Physical Activity: results from 20 countries. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act
2009, 6:21.
2.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Trends in leisure time physical
inactivity by age, sex and race/ethnicity - United States - 1994-2004.
MMWR 2005, 54:991-994.
3.
Giles-Corti B, Knuiman M, Timperio A, Van Niel K, Pikora TJ, Bull FC,
Shilton T, Bulsara M: Evaluation of the implementation of a state
government community design policy aimed at increasing local walking:
Design issues and baseline results from RESIDE, Perth Western Australia.
Prev Med 2008, 46:46-54.
4.
Frumkin H, Frank L, Jackson R: Urban Sprawl and Public Health. Designing,
Planning, and Building for Health Communities Washington, DC: Island Press;
2004.
5.
Ewing R: Can the physical environment determine physical activity
levels? Exerc Sport Sci Rev 2005, 33:69-75.
6.
Sturm R, Cohen DA: Suburban sprawl and physical and mental health.
Public Health 2004, 118:488-496.
7.
Frumkin H: Urban sprawl and public health. Public Health Rep 2002,
117:201-217.
8.
Wendel-Vos W, Droomers M, Kremers S, Brug J, van Lenthe F: Potential
environmental determinants of physical activity in adults: a systematic
review. Obes Rev 2007, 8:425-440.
9.
McCormack G, Giles-Corti B, Lange A, Smith T, Martin K, Pikora TJ: An
update of recent evidence of the relationship between objective and
self-report measures of the physical environment and physical activity
behaviours. J Sci Med Sport 2004, 7:81-92.
10.
Saelens B, Handy S: Built environment correlates of walking: a review.
Med Sci Sports Exerc 2008, 40:S550-566.
11.
Cerin E, Leslie E, du Toit L, Owen N, Frank L: Destinations that matter:
associations with walking for transport. Health Place 2007, 13:713-724.
12.
Hoehner C, Brennan Ramirez L, Elliott M, Handy S, Brownson R: Perceived
and objective environmental measures and physical activity among
urban adults. Am J Prev Med 2005, 28:105-116.
13.
McCormack GR, Giles-Corti B, Bulsara M: The relationship between
destination proximity, destination mix and physical activity behaviors.
Prev Med 2008, 46:33-40.
14.
Frank LD, Schmid TL, Sallis JF, Chapman J, Saelens BE: Linking objectively
measured physical activity with objectively measured urban form -
Findings from SMARTRAQ. Am J Prev Med 2005, 28:117-125.
15.
Frank L, Andersen M, Schmid T: Obesity relationships with community
design, physical activity, and time spent in cars. Am J Prev Med 2004,
27:87-96.
16.
Oakes JM, Forsyth A, Schmitz KH: The effects of neighborhood density
and street connectivity on walking behavior: the Twin Cities walking
study. Epidemiol Perspect Innov 2007, 4:16.
17.
Pikora T, Giles-Corti B, Knuiman M, Bull F, Jamrozik K, Donovan R:
Neighborhood environmental factors correlated with walking near
home: using SPACES. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2006, 38:708-714.
18.
Wendel-Vos W, Droomers M, Kremers S, Brug J, van Lenthe F: Potential
environmental determinants of physical activity in adults: a systematic
review. Obesity Reviews 2007, 8:425-440.
19.
Saelens BE, Handy SL: Built environment correlates of walking: a review.
Med Sci Sports Exerc 2008, 40:S550-566.
20.
City of New York: Active Design Guidelines. Promoting physical activity
and health in design. New York: City of New York; 2010.
21.
Western Australian Planning Commission: Livable Neighbourhoods. A
Western Australian Government Sustainable Cities Initiative. Perth:
Western Australian Government;, 2 2000.
22.
Boone-Heinonen J, Gordon-Larson P, Guilkey D, Jacobs D, Popkin B:
Environment and physical activity dynamics: the role of residential self-
selection. Psychology of Sport and Exercise 2011, 12:54-60.
23.
Mokhtarian P, Cao X: Examining the impacts of residential self-selection
on travel behavior: a focus on methodologies. Transport Res B-Meth 2008,
42:204-228.
24.
McCormack G, Giles-Corti B, Lange A, Smith T, Martin K, Pikora T: An
update of recent evidence of the relationship between objective and
self-report measures of the physical environment and physical activity
behaviours. J Sci Med Sport 2004, 7:81-92.
25.
Humpel N, Owen N, Leslie E: Environmental factors associated with
adults’ participation in physical activity: A review. Am J Prev Med 2002,
22:188-199.
26.
Cao X, Mokhtarian P, Handy S: Examining the impacts of residential self-
selection on travel behaviour: a focus on empirical findings. Transport
Rev 2009, 29:359-395.
27.
Shadish W, Cook T, Campbell D: Experimental and quasi-experimental designs
for generalized causal inference Boston, New York: Houghton Mifflin
Company; 2002.
28.
MacBeth A: Bicyle lanes in Toronto. ITE Journal 1999, 69:38-40.
29.
Owen N, Cerin E, Leslie E, duToit L, Coffee N, Frank L, Bauman A, Hugo G,
Saelens B, Sallis J: Neighborhood walkability and the walking behavior of
Australian adults. Am J Prev Med 2007, 33:387-395.
30.
Painter K: The influence of street lighting improvements on crime, fear
and pedestrian street use, after dark. Landscape Urban Plan 1996,
35:193-201.
31.
Meurs H, Haaijer R: Spatial structure and mobility. Transport Res D-Tr E
2001, 6:429-446.
32.
Joh K, Boarnet M, Nguyen M, Fulton W, Siembab W, Weaver S:
Accessibility, travel behavior, and new urbanism: case study of mixed-
use centers and auto-oriented corridors in the South Bay Region of Los
Angeles, California. Transport Res Rec 2008, 81-89.
33.
Wells N, Yang Y: Neighborhood design and walking. A quasi-
experimental longitudinal study. Am J Prev Med 2008, 34:313-319.
34.
Boone-Heinonen J, Guilkey D, Evenson K, Gordon-Larsen P: Residential self-
selection bias in the estimation of built environment effects on physical
activity between adolescence and young adulthood. Int J Behav Nutr
Phys Act 2010, 7:70.
35.
Coogan P, White L, Adler T, Hathaway K, Palmer J, Rosenberg L:
Prospective study of urban form and physical activity in the Black
Women’s Health Study. Am J Epidemiol 2009, 170:1105-1117.
36.
Lee I, Ewing R, Sesso H: The built environment and physical activity
levels: the Harvard Alumni Health Study. Am J Prev Med 2009, 37:293-298.
37.
Brown B, Werner C: A new rail stop: tracking moderate physical activity
bouts and ridership. Am J Prev Med 2007, 33:306-309.
38.
Cohen D, Golinelli D, Williamson S, Sehgal A, Marsh T, McKenzie T: Effects
of park improvements on park use and physical activity: policy and
programming implications. Am J Prev Med 2009, 37:475-480.
39.
MacDonald J, Stokes R, Cohen D, Kofner A, Ridgeway G: The effect of light
rail transit on body mass index and physical activity. Am J Prev Med 2010,
39:105-112.
40.
Evenson K, Herring A, Huston S: Evaluating change in physical activity
with the building of a multi-use trail. Am J Prev Med 2005, 28:177-185.
41.
Goulias K, Burbidge S: Evaluating the impact of neighborhood trail
development on active travel behavior and overall physical activity of
suburban residents. Transport Res Rec 2009, 78-86.
42.
Brown B, Werner C: Before and after a new light rail stop: resident
attitudes, travel behavior, and obesity. J Am Plann Assoc 2009, 75:5-12.
43.
Fitzhugh E, Bassett D, Evans M: Urban trails and physical activity: a natural
experiment. Am J Prev Med 2010, 39:259-262.
McCormack and Shiell International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and
Physical Activity 2011, 8:125
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/8/1/125
Page 10 of 11

----- Page 11 (native) -----
44.
Cao X, Mokhtarian P, Handy S: Do changes in neighborhood
characteristics lead to changes in travel behavior? A structural equations
modeling approach. Transportation 2007, 34:535-556.
45.
Handy S, Cao X, Mokhtarian P: Self-Sselection in the relationship between
the built environment and walking: evidence from Northern California. J
Am Plann Assoc 2006, 72:55-74.
46.
Shay E, Fan Y, Rodriguez D, Khattak A: Drive or walk? Utilitarian trips
within a neotraditional neighborhood. Transport Res Rec 2006, 154-161.
47.
Chatman D: Residential choice, the built environment, and nonwork
travel: evidence using new data and methods. Environ Plann A 2009,
41:1072-1089.
48.
Cao X, Handy S, Mokhtarian P: The influences of the built environment
and residential self-selection on pedestrian behavior: evidence from
Austin, TX. Transportation 2006, 33:1-20.
49.
Schwanen T, Mokhtarian P: What if you live in the wrong neighborhood?
The impact of residential neighborhood type dissonance on distance
traveled. Transport Res D-Tr E 2005, 10:127-151.
50.
Frank L, Saelens B, Powell K, Chapman J: Stepping towards causation: do
built environments or neighborhood and travel preferences explain
physical activity, driving, and obesity? Soc Sci Med 2007, 65:1898-1914.
51.
Cao X, Mokhtarian P, Handy S: The relationship between the built
environment and nonwork travel: A case study of Northern California.
Transport Res A-Pol 2009, 43:548-559.
52.
Bagley N, Mokhtarian P: The impact of residential neighborhood type on
travel behavior: A structural equations modeling approach. Ann Regional
Sci 2002, 36:279-297.
53.
Cao X: Exploring causal effects of neighborhood type on walking
behavior using stratification on the propensity score. Environ Plann A
2010, 42:487-504.
54.
Handy S, Cao X, Mokhtarian P: The causal influence of neighborhood
design on physical activity within the neighborhood: evidence from
Northern California. Am J Health Promot 2008, 22:350-358.
55.
Sallis J, Saelens B, Frank L, Conway T, Slymen D, Cain K, Chapman J, Kerr J:
Neighborhood built environment and income: examining multiple
health outcomes. Soc Sci Med 2009, 68:1285-1293.
56.
Khattak A, Rodriguez D: Travel behavior in neo-traditional neighborhood
developments: a case study in the USA. Transport Res A-Pol 2005,
39:481-500.
57.
Greenwald M, Boarnet M: Built environment as determinant of walking
behavoir: anaylzing nonwork pedestrian travel in Portland, Oregon.
Transport Res Rec 2001, 33-42.
58.
Boarnet M, Greenwald M, McMillan T: Walking, urban design, and health. J
Plan Educ Res 2008, 27:341-358.
59.
Pinjari A, Bhat C, Hensher D: Residential self-selection effects in an activity
time-use behavior model. Transport Res B-Meth 2009, 43:729-748.
60.
Cao X, Mokhtarian P, Handy S: No particular place to go: an empirical
analysis of travel for the sake of travel. Environ Behav 2009, 41:233-257.
61.
Giles-Corti B, Timperio A, Bull F, Pikora T: Understanding physical activity
environmental correlates: Increased specificity for ecological models.
Exerc Sport Sci Rev 2005, 33:175-181.
62.
Wood L, Shannon T, Bulsara M, Pikora T, McCormack G, Giles-Corti B: The
anatomy of the safe and social suburb: an exploratory study of the built
environment, social capital and residents’ perceptions of safety. Health
Place 2008, 14:15-31.
63.
Leyden K: Social capital and the built environment: the importance of
walkable neighborhoods. Am J Pub Health 2003, 93:1546-1551.
64.
Berke E, Gottlieb L, Moudon A, Larson E: Protective association between
neighborhood walkability and depression in older men. J Am Geriatr Soc
2007, 55:526-533.
65.
Clifton K, Burnier C, Akar G: Severity of injury resulting from pedestrian-
vehicle crashes: what can we learn from examining the built
environment? Transport Res D-Tr E 2009, 14:425-436.
doi:10.1186/1479-5868-8-125
Cite this article as: McCormack and Shiell: In search of causality: a
systematic review of the relationship between the built environment
and physical activity among adults. International Journal of Behavioral
Nutrition and
Physical Activity 2011 8:125.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
McCormack and Shiell International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and
Physical Activity 2011, 8:125
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/8/1/125
Page 11 of 11