

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Physical activity and mental health in children and 
adolescents: A review of reviews
This is the Accepted version of the following publication
Biddle, Stuart and Asare, M (2011) Physical activity and mental health in 
children and adolescents: A review of reviews. British Journal of Sports 
Medicine, 45 (11). 886 - 895. ISSN 0306-3674  
The publisher’s official version can be found at 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/content/45/11/886.abstract
Note that access to this version may require subscription.
Downloaded from VU Research Repository  https://vuir.vu.edu.au/29912/

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Physical Activity and Mental Health in Children and Adolescents:  
A Review of Reviews 
Stuart J.H. Biddle 
&  
Mavis Asare 
Loughborough University, UK 
 
 
Correspondence: 
Professor Stuart Biddle 
Physical Activity & Public Health 
School of Sport, Exercise & Health Sciences 
Loughborough University 
Loughborough 
Leicestershire 
LE11 3TU, UK. 
E: s.j.h.biddle@lboro.ac.uk  
 
Acknowledgement. Thanks to Michelle Taylor for assistance with literature searching and 
retrieval. 
 
Published as: Biddle, S. J. H., & Asare, M. (2011). Physical activity and mental health in children and adolescents: A 
review of reviews. British Journal of Sports Medicine, 45, 886-895 doi:10.1136/bjsports-2011-090185 
1

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Abstract 
Objective: To synthesise reviews investigating physical activity and depression, anxiety, 
self-esteem and cognitive functioning in children and adolescents. In addition, a brief review 
was undertaken to assess the association between sedentary behaviour and mental health.  
Methods: Searches were performed in 2010.  Inclusion criteria specified review papers 
reporting chronic physical activity and at least one mental health outcome that included 
depression, anxiety/stress, self-esteem, and cognitive functioning with children or 
adolescents.  
Results: Four review papers reported evidence concerning depression, four for anxiety, three 
for self-esteem, and seven for cognitive functioning. Nine primary studies assessed 
associations between sedentary behaviour and mental health. Physical activity has potentially 
beneficial effects for reduced depression, but the evidence base is weak. Intervention designs 
are low in quality, and many reviews include cross-sectional studies. Physical activity 
interventions have been shown to have a small beneficial effect for reduced anxiety but the 
evidence base is limited.  Physical activity can lead to improvements in self-esteem, at least 
in the short term. However, there is a paucity of good quality research. Reviews on physical 
activity and cognitive functioning have shown evidence that routine physical activity can be 
associated with improved cognitive performance and academic achievement, but these 
associations are usually small and inconsistent. Primary studies showed consistent negative 
associations between mental health and sedentary behaviour. 
Conclusions: Associations between physical activity and mental health in young people is 
evident, but research designs are often weak and effects are small-to-moderate. Evidence 
shows small but consistent associations between sedentary screen-time and poorer mental 
health. 
 
2

----- Page 4 (native) -----
Mental illness is a serious public health issue. It is expected to account for 15% of the global 
burden of disease by 2020, which would make it the leading disease burden [1]. Suicide, 
depression, eating disorders, and anxiety are some of the conditions that affect young people 
in disproportionate rates in comparison to many other population groups [2].  Moreover, there 
is widespread belief that physical activity is inherently ‘good’ for young people in respect of 
varied psychosocial outcomes, such as self-esteem and cognitive functioning. The majority of 
studies in this area, however, are cross-sectional and therefore causality cannot be established 
because the temporal relationship between exposure (physical activity) and outcome (mental 
health) has not been tested or shown with any consistency. Thus, although there is evidence 
that physical activity can enhance psychological well-being, such an outcome may not be 
inevitable [3] or may be dependent on certain conditions existing. 
The effect of physical activity on mental health in children and adolescents has 
received significantly less attention than in adult populations [4]. Where it has been 
investigated the work has primarily focused on depression, anxiety and self-esteem. In 
addition, researchers and education professionals are showing increasing interest in the 
effects of physical activity on cognitive functioning. For these reasons, as well as restrictions 
of space, our review is delimited to the outcomes of depression, anxiety, self-esteem, and 
cognitive functioning. 
The purpose of this paper, therefore, is to synthesise evidence on chronic physical 
activity participation and mental health in children and adolescents mainly through a ‘review 
of reviews’. Such a method has been adopted to optimise the ability to cover four areas of 
mental health and to synthesise 18 reviews. It would have been unwieldy to attempt 
individual systematic reviews of the literature in each of the four mental health domains. 
Moreover, a ‘review of reviews’ is accepted practice in the medical and health behaviour 
3

----- Page 5 (native) -----
literatures [5]. In addition, a brief analysis will also be provided on links between sedentary 
behaviour and mental health from primary research studies.  
 
METHOD 
To locate reviews of studies on chronic physical activity and mental health in young 
people, searches of the following electronic databases took place up to October 2010: 
PubMed, SPORTDiscus, PsychINFO, Web of Science, Medline, Cochrane Library, and ISI 
Science Citation Index. We searched by terms that reflected exposure variables of interest 
(e.g., sport, exercise, physical activity), mental health outcome variables (e.g., depression, 
anxiety, self-esteem, cognitive functioning), as well as methods (only reviews, systematic 
reviews and meta-analyses).  Only review papers were included. Additional searches of 
personal files supplemented the electronic sources. 
Papers were selected for detailed analysis if they met the following inclusion criteria: 
a). were review papers (narrative, systematic or meta-analytic); b). reported on the 
relationship between physical activity and at least one mental health outcome that included 
depression, anxiety/stress, self-esteem or physical self-worth, and cognitive functioning; c). 
reported chronic physical activity studies, including interventions (reviews of acute studies 
were excluded); d). were on school-aged children or adolescents up to and including aged 18 
years with no known physical health limitations. If a review contained some data on young 
people, but the primary emphasis was on adults, the data were scrutinised and reported where 
appropriate. 
To balance the work on physical activity, a brief narrative review was conducted on 
sedentary behaviour and mental health. This is not meant to be a comprehensive systematic 
review but rather a commentary on recent papers.  
RESULTS 
4

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Five review papers were retrieved that reviewed evidence concerning physical activity 
and depression, four for anxiety, three for self-esteem, and seven for cognitive functioning. 
Two papers covered more than one mental health outcome variable, with Larun et al. [6] 
addressing anxiety and depression, and Calfas and Taylor [7] reviewing depression, anxiety 
and self-esteem.  
Depression  
Evidence from adult studies demonstrates that physical activity is inversely associated 
with symptoms of depression [8, 9] and there is some evidence that this relationship is causal 
[10].  There is, however, much less evidence for this relationship in children and adolescents.  
We located five reviews that synthesised data for young people [6-9, 11], although the paper 
by Dunn and Weintraub primarily provides a methodological critique of papers used in the 
Larun et al. review. Reviews of depression are summarised in Table 1, excluding the critique 
by Dunn and Weintraub, leaving four reviews. 
North et al. [9] was the first meta-analysis investigating associations between physical 
activity and depression and included all research designs. An overall effect size (ES) of -0.53 
was reported with five studies involving only young people reflecting a similar value (ES=-
0.49). However, acute and chronic studies were included as well as non-intervention designs.  
The first systematic review concerning physical activity and mental health in 
adolescents was published as part of the American physical activity guidelines process [7], 
although the authors used a wide age range of 11-21 years. All research designs were eligible 
for analysis but an effect size was calculated only for experimental designs. From only four 
intervention studies, ES=-0.38 favouring physical activity over a control group. Using all 
research designs, Calfas and Taylor reported that 9 of 11 studies showed a negative 
association between physical activity and depression. 
5

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Craft and Landers [8] conducted a meta-analysis on exercise and depression for those 
with clinical depression. Only three studies provided data for those aged 12-18 years, 
showing a small non-significant effect size of -0.15, much smaller than for adults and all 
studies (-0.72).  
Larun and colleagues [6] conducted a systematic review of exercise interventions on 
depression in young people up to the age of 20 years. Five trials were located that 
investigated whether vigorous exercise (fitness training and weight training) conferred 
benefits over no intervention. They found a significant moderate effect (ES = -0.66, CI -1.25 
to -0.08) but noted that the trials were of low quality and highly varied in respect of 
methodological characteristics, such as sampling and measurement. When comparing 
vigorous with low intensity exercise, only two trials were located and these showed no 
significant effect, a result repeated for two trials investigating children receiving 
psychological treatment. This might suggest that lower levels of physical activity intensity 
may also be effective for anxiety reduction. 
When comparing exercise with psychosocial interventions, Larun et al. found only 
two trials, and no significant effect was evident. This was also the case for one trial involving 
children receiving psychological treatment, suggesting that physical activity may be equally 
effective as psychosocial interventions. There was no evidence for intervention effectiveness 
after 8 weeks.  
Limitations of findings include the use of broad inclusion criteria that allows 
participants in some interventions to have rather mild depression over a short time frame (i.e., 
they may not be particularly depressed at all). Studies also fail to specify the exact nature of 
the physical activity interventions in respect of frequency, intensity, duration and type of 
activity.  Group-based physical activity interventions often fail to control for the effects of 
social interaction. 
6

----- Page 8 (native) -----
In summary, physical activity over no intervention appears to be potentially beneficial 
for reduced depression, but the evidence base is weak. Intervention designs are low in 
quality, and many reviews include cross-sectional studies that may distort associations or fail 
to rule out ‘reverse causality’. 
Anxiety 
Active adults report fewer symptoms of anxiety than inactive adults [12, 13]. 
However, the amount of evidence for young people is considerably less. Our search revealed 
four reviews (see Table 2). The meta-analysis of exercise and anxiety reduction conducted by 
Petruzzello et al. [14] also reported effect sizes for those under 18 years of age. Results 
showed a small-to-moderate effect for physical activity programmes when assessing trait 
anxiety (ES=-0.47), although only three studies were available for review. The review by 
Calfas and Taylor [7] located only three intervention studies on anxiety and reported ES = -
0.15. This review does not completely map onto the studies reviewed by Petruzzello et al. and 
lacks methodological detail. 
Larun et al. [6] conducted a systematic review of exercise interventions on anxiety in 
young people up to the age of 20 years. Six trials were located that investigated whether 
vigorous exercise conferred benefits over no intervention. They found a non-significant, 
though small-to-moderate, trend (ES = -0.48).  Studies were of low quality and highly varied 
in respect of methodological characteristics. When comparing vigorous with low intensity 
exercise, only three trials were located and these showed no significant effect. When 
comparing exercise with psychosocial interventions, Larun et al. found only two trials, and no 
significant difference was evident.  
Wipfli et al. [15] claimed to address the methodological weaknesses of previous 
reviews by conducting a meta-analysis of just randomised controlled trials, although this was 
also done by Larun et al [6]. Three trials were reviewed for those under 18 years of age, 
7

----- Page 9 (native) -----
revealing a non-significant effect (ES = -0.18). It is not clear why Wipfli et al. only located 
three interventions two years after Larun et al. analysed six. 
In summary, physical activity interventions for young people have been shown to 
have a small beneficial effect for reduced anxiety. However, the evidence base is limited and 
in need of development. 
Self-esteem 
Self-esteem reflects the degree to which an individual values themselves and is widely 
viewed as a key indicator of positive mental health and well-being [16]. The belief that 
physical activity, including sport, is associated with the development of self-esteem in young 
people is a commonly held view. Typically, global self-esteem is seen as the apex of a 
hierarchical and multidimensional framework, underpinned by different domains of the self, 
including the perceptions of physical self-worth [17].  
We located three systematic reviews addressing physical activity and self-esteem in 
young people [7, 18, 19] (see Table 3). One of the first meta-analyses in exercise psychology 
was that by Gruber (1986).  He meta-analysed 27 experimental designs, mainly on children, 
but gave limited detail on methodology. 
Gruber [19] reported an overall effect for physical activity on self-esteem of 0.41, 
representing a small effect. Larger effects were found for children with perceptual, emotional 
and learning disabilities (ES = 0.57), for better controlled experiments assessing only one 
dependent variable (ES = 0.65), and for aerobic fitness activities (ES = 0.89). Three studies 
analysed by Calfas and Taylor [7] showed a small effect (ES = 0.12).  
A recent Cochrane meta-analysis by Ekeland et al. [18] examined whether exercise 
interventions improved global self-esteem among children and young people aged 3-20 years 
of age. This was later published as a journal paper [20]. The results showed that in the 8 trials 
8

----- Page 10 (native) -----
available for meta-analysis and testing an exercise alone intervention versus a no-intervention 
control there was a small-to-moderate effect in favour of the intervention group (ES = 0.49).   
Most of the trials analysed by Ekeland et al. [18] were small scale and of short 
duration. No follow-up results were given so the sustainability of changes could not be 
assessed. Only one of the trials was considered to be of high methodological quality, but it 
did demonstrate the strongest effects.  A further four trials compared the effects of exercise as 
part of a comprehensive intervention package against no-intervention control groups and 
showed a moderate positive effect on self esteem in favour of the intervention (ES = 0.51).  
In summary, physical activity can lead to improvements in self-esteem, at least in the 
short term. However, there is a paucity of good quality research. Moreover, global measures 
of self-esteem can be affected by many factors beyond physical activity. Hence, measures of 
physical aspects of the self, such as body image or physical self-worth, important indices of 
psychological health in their own right, might be better targets for intervention.  
Cognitive Functioning 
A link between physical activity and cognitive functioning has been thought to exist 
for many years. Blakemore [21] reported that the brain is activated during physical activity 
by increasing blood flow to essential areas that may stimulate learning [22].  Moreover, 
research has suggested that integrating physical activity in the classroom will enhance student 
learning [23].  However, further studies are needed to make school authorities confident that 
encouraging school physical activity will improve learning rather than disrupt ‘academic’ 
time.  Cognitive functioning is best defined as a). intelligence (IQ), which is the ability to 
reason quickly and abstractly; b). cognitive skills of concentration and attention; c). academic 
achievement, usually assessed by overall school grades and performance.   
Seven review papers were located (see Table 4). More than a decade ago, Shephard 
[24] reported a systematic review to investigate links between physical activity and cognitive 
9

----- Page 11 (native) -----
functioning using cross-sectional and longitudinal studies. It was found that increasing 
schools’ Physical Education (PE) time by 14-26% did not have a significant negative effect 
on academic performance. However, only 3 studies on routine physical activity were 
involved and evidence was not established concerning additional time for physical activity 
and intellectual enhancement; students who had extra PE time performed equally as well as 
students who had intact classroom curricular time.  
Sibley and Etnier [25] conducted a meta analysis to investigate the effects of different 
types of physical activity on cognitive functioning across varied age groups of young people. 
All research designs were included. The findings revealed that physical activity was 
associated with better cognitive functioning across all age groups. A small effect for chronic 
studies was found (ES=0.29). 
Trudeau and Shephard [26] conducted a systematic review on physical activity, 
physical fitness and academic performance. Seventeen studies of varied research designs 
were involved. Findings indicated that allocating up to an additional hour per day of 
curricular time to physical activity programmes in school do not affect academic performance 
of primary school students. Furthermore, physical activity improved classroom behaviour, 
attention and concentration. A positive but weak relationship was established between 
physical fitness and academic achievement. However, for experimental studies, the authors 
did not find strong evidence for an effect of school physical activity on academic 
performance because children in the experimental group, whose academic tuition was 
reduced, did not perform better than the control group; that is, children exposed to additional 
school physical activity achieved equally well as those students who had regular academic 
tuition.   
Tomporoski, Davis, Miller and Naglieri [27], in a systematic review of 15 studies, 
examined the relationship between physical activity and cognitive functioning among 6 to 16 
10

----- Page 12 (native) -----
year-olds. For prospective and experimental designs, 2 of 4 studies showed improvements in 
intelligence, 3 of 6 for cognition, and one of 6 for academic achievement. In contrast, 3 of 4 
cross-sectional studies on academic achievement showed positive associations. They 
concluded that children’s cognitive functioning can be enhanced through physical activity, 
but this is mainly in respect of executive functioning tasks (i.e., “goal-directed actions in 
complex stimulus environments, especially novel ones, in which elements are constantly 
changing”; p. 126).  
To update previous reviews, Keeley and Fox [28] conducted a systematic review to 
investigate the link between physical activity, physical fitness and cognitive functioning 
among 4 to 18 year old students. Eighteen studies with varied research designs were included. 
Generally studies involved exposing experimental participants to increased school-based 
physical activities at the expense of academic work time. A weak positive relationship was 
found between increased school physical activity and cognitive functioning. Specifically, 
cross-sectional studies indicated that more physical activity was associated with better 
performance in some subjects (e.g., mathematics) but not in others (e.g., English). One 
intervention study reported that increased physical activity significantly improved cognitive 
functioning; two intervention studies found no association between increased physical 
activity and academic performance.  A weak but positive association was found between 
physical fitness and cognitive functioning in young people with the strongest correlations 
being with cardiovascular fitness.  
Though a strong association has not been established between increased school 
physical activity and cognitive functioning, Keeley and Fox (2009) found that the 
introduction of more physical activity, at the expense of academic subject time, did not have 
a detrimental effect on children’s academic performance.  This reflects conclusions from 
other reviews. 
11

----- Page 13 (native) -----
The Centres for Disease Control and Prevention [29] in the USA have also examined 
the relationship between routine physical activity on the cognitive functioning of young 
people. The review involved 50 studies with cross-sectional (K=11) and longitudinal (K=38) 
research designs, with 32 classified as interventions. It was found that increased time in 
school PE had a positive but weak relationship with academic achievement in 11 of 14 
studies . Time spent in increased break (recess) play had a small positive relationship with 
classroom behaviour, including children’s attention and concentration (all 8 studies found one 
or more positive associations between recess and indicators of cognitive skills). In addition, 
classroom based physical activity (5-20 minutes break during lessons) improved children’s 
academic behaviour and achievement (8 of the 9 studies found positive associations). 
Extracurricular physical activities (participation in school sports) also had a positive 
association with academic performance (all 19 studies examining after-school sport found 
one or more positive associations with cognitive performance). Finally, the review concluded 
that school physical activity programmes have a positive impact on academic performance. 
However, effects are inconsistent and often small.   
In a recent systematic review, Best [30] examined the relationship between aerobic 
physical activity and cognitive functioning in young people. Studies used experimental 
designs, however only 3 studies assessed the effects of chronic aerobic exercise on cognitive 
functioning. Aerobic exercise did not influence children’s tasks requiring visual-motor 
coordination but did improve tasks requiring flexible and divergent thinking.   
In summary, systematic reviews on physical activity and cognitive functioning have 
shown evidence that routine physical activity can be associated with improved cognitive 
performance, classroom behaviour and academic achievement in young people, but these 
associations are usually small and not entirely consistent.  
12

----- Page 14 (native) -----
The major implication arising from these reviews is that integrating physical activity 
in the school system may help young people to learn better and reduce the likelihood of 
negative classroom behaviours. However, strong evidence has not yet been established 
between chronic physical activity and students’ cognitive functioning, and this could be due 
to methodological shortcomings of studies. These include expectancy effects and un-blinded 
intervention designs. Thus, available evidence does not contribute strongly to the proposition 
that increasing school physical activity time to the detriment of classroom curricular time is 
beneficial for school children.  Studies with more rigorous designs are needed on physical 
activity, including non-aerobic exercise, and its effect on cognitive functioning.  
Sedentary Behaviour and Mental Health 
Sedentary behaviour in young people and adults is a rapidly developing area of 
research. Operationally defined as ‘sitting time’, sedentary behaviour can be high in the 
contexts of leisure time (e.g., screen time), school, and travel (i.e., car use). Most of the 
evidence with young people has centred on screen time, and TV viewing in particular. 
Although TV viewing remains the most prevalent sedentary behaviour for youth, it is only 
one behaviour and may not reflect wider patterns of excessive sitting [31].  However, the 
development of attractive home-based or even mobile electronic entertainment has led to 
concerns about excessive sitting time in young people.  
Most of the evidence linking sedentary behaviour to health outcomes has focussed on 
TV viewing and weight status [32], with more recent studies looking at screen time (i.e., TV 
and computers) as well as aspects of metabolic health more broadly [33, 34]. Less has been 
written about sedentary behaviour and mental health in young people. For this brief section of 
the paper, we review recent papers addressing links between sedentary behaviour and mental 
health, with a summary shown in Table 5. 
13

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Results from the nine primary studies show consistent negative mental health 
associations with sedentary behaviour, primarily screen viewing. This mirrors a growing 
literature showing adverse physical health outcomes of high sitting time [35]. The one 
longitudinal study did show that TV viewing, but not computer games, was associated with 
increased odds of depression after 7y follow-up [36]. 
The associations across the studies, however, are small and all but one are derived 
from cross-sectional designs. It is plausible that those with poorer mental health choose to be 
more sedentary at screens – a reverse causality hypothesis. Only half the cross-sectional 
studies controlled for physical activity in their analyses. Most of the studies are large, with 
some being very large, and one assessing across multiple countries. Sedentary behaviour 
needs to be considered alongside physical activity in the study of mental health. 
Overall Conclusions 
In summarising physical activity and mental health in young people, physical activity 
is likely to have positive psychosocial outcomes. The ‘review of reviews’ method adopted 
allows us to see the wider field of several mental health outcomes associated with physical 
activity in young people. It also allows a view of the gaps and inconsistencies across different 
outcomes.   
The effects appear strongest for self-esteem (at least in the short term), and those who 
are physically active appear less likely to suffer from mental health problems and may have 
enhanced cognitive functioning. Evidence on depression is also promising but remains an 
underdeveloped area of enquiry. Although all participants are likely to gain significant 
benefits, such effects are likely to be greater in those who have poorer mental health at 
baseline, however, the evidence is not extensive. Studies are largely cross-sectional (thus 
unable to rule out ‘reverse causality’), small-scale, and lack measurement consistency. In 
addition, while physical activity may enhance psychological well-being, it is possible that the 
14

----- Page 16 (native) -----
prevailing psychological climate and social interactions inherent in such settings will also be 
crucial. Unfortunately, such factors are rarely accounted for. Higher levels of sedentary 
(sitting) behaviour are associated with worse mental health. 
15

----- Page 17 (native) -----
References 
1. 
Biddle SJH, Mutrie N. Psychology of physical activity: Determinants, well-being and 
interventions (2nd Edition). London: Routledge; 2008. 
2. 
Viner RM, Booy R. ABC of adolescence: Epidemiology of health and illness. BMJ. 
2005;330:411-4. 
3. 
Lagerberg D. Physical activity and mental health in schoolchildren: A complicated 
relationship. Acta Paediatr. 2005;94:1699-701. 
4. 
Whitelaw S, Teuton J, Swift J, et al. The physical activity - mental wellbeing 
association in young people: A case study in dealing with a complex public health topic using 
a 'realistic evaluation' framework. Ment Health and Phys Act. 2010;3(2):61-6. 
5. 
Hillsdon M, Foster C, Naidoo B, et al.The effectiveness of public health interventions 
for increasing physical activity among adults: A review of reviews. London: Health 
Development Agency; 2004. 
6. 
Larun L, Nordheim LV, Ekeland E, et al. Exercise in prevention and treatment of 
anxiety and depression among children and young people. Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews. 2006;3:Art.No.: CD004691. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD004691.pub2. 
7. 
Calfas KJ, Taylor WC. Effects of physical activity on psychological variables in 
adolescents. Pediat Exer Sci. 1994;6:406-23. 
8. 
Craft LL, Landers DM. The effect of exercise on clinical depression and depression 
resulting from mental illness: A meta-analysis. J Sport Exercise Psy. 1998;20:339-57. 
9. 
North TC, McCullagh P, Tran ZV. Effect of exercise on depression. Exerc Sport Sci 
Revs. 1990;18:379-415. 
10. 
Mutrie N. The relationship between physical activity and clinically defined 
depression. In: Biddle SJH, Fox KR, Boutcher SH, editors. Physical activity and 
psychological well-being. London: Routledge; 2000. p. 46-62. 
11. 
Dunn AL, Weintraub P. Exercise in the prevention and treatment of adolescent 
depression: A promising but little researched intervention. Am J Lifestyle Med. 2008;2:507-
18. 
12. 
Department of Health. At least five a week: Evidence on the impact of physical 
activity and its relationship to health. A report from the Chief Medical Officer. London: 
Author; 2004. 
13. 
Taylor AH. Physical activity, anxiety, and stress. In: Biddle SJH, Fox KR, Boutcher 
SH, editors. Physical activity and psychological well-being. London: Routledge; 2000. p. 10-
45. 
16

----- Page 18 (native) -----
14. 
Petruzzello SJ, Landers DM, Hatfield BD, et al. A meta-analysis on the anxiety-
reducing effects of acute and chronic exercise: Outcomes and mechanisms. Sports Med. 
1991;11:143-82. 
15. 
Wipfli BM, Rethorst CD, Landers DM. The anxiolytic effects of exercise: A meta-
analysis of randomized trials and dose-response analysis. J Sport Exercise Psy. 2008;30:392-
410. 
16. 
Fox KR. The effects of exercise on self-perceptions and self-esteem. In: Biddle SJH, 
Fox KR, Boutcher SH, editors. Physical activity and psychological well-being. London: 
Routledge; 2000. p. 88-117. 
17. 
Fox KR. The physical self and processes in self-esteem development. In: Fox KR, 
editor. The physical self: From motivation to well-being. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics; 
1997. p. 111-39. 
18. 
Ekeland E, Heian F, Hagen KB, Abbott J, Nordheim LV. Exercise to improve self-
esteem in children and young people. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 
2004:Issue 1. Art.No.:CD003683. DOI:10.1002/14651858. CD003683.pub2. 
19. 
Gruber JJ. Physical activity and self-esteem development in children: A meta-
analysis. In: Stull GA, Eckert HM, editors. Effects of physical activity on children. 
Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics; 1986. p. 30-48. 
20. 
Ekeland E, Heian F, Hagen KB. Can exercise improve self esteem in children and 
young people? A systematic review of randomised controlled trials. Brit J Sports Med. 
2005;39:792–8. 
21. 
Blakemore CL. Movement is essential to learning. JOPERD. 2003;74(41):22-4. 
22. 
Hillman CH, Castelli DM, Buck SM. Aerobic fitness and neurocognitive function in 
healthy preadolescent children. Med Sci Sport Exer. 2005;37:1967-74. 
23. 
Maeda JK, Murata NM. Collaborating with classroom teachers to increase daily 
physical activity: the GEAR program. JOPERD. 2004;75:42-6. 
24. 
Shephard RJ. Curricular physical activity and academic performance. Ped Exerc Sci. 
1997;9:113-26. 
25. 
Sibley BA, Etnier JL. The relationship between physical activity and cognition in 
children: A meta-analysis. Ped Exerc Sci. 2003;15:243-56. 
 
26. 
Trudeau F, Shephard RJ. Physical education, school physical activity, school sports 
and academic performance. Int J of Behav Nutr Phy 2008. 2008;5 (10doi:10.1186/1479-
5868-) http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/5/1/10.  
27. 
Tomporowski PD, Davis CL, Miller PH, Naglieri JA. Exercise and children’s 
intelligence, cognition, and academic achievement. Ed Psychol Rev. 2008;20:111-31. 
28. 
Keeley TJH, Fox KR. The impact of physical activity and fitness on academic 
achievement and cognitive performance in children. Int Rev Sport Exerc Psych. 
2009;2(2):198-214. 
17

----- Page 19 (native) -----
29. 
Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. The association between school-based 
physical activity, including physical education, and academic performance. Atlanta, GA: U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services; 2010. 
30. 
Best JR. Effects of physical activity on children’s executive function: Contributions of 
experimental research on aerobic exercise. Dev Review. 2010:doi:10.1016/j.dr.2010.08.001. 
31. 
Biddle SJH, Gorely T, Marshall SJ. Is television viewing a suitable marker of 
sedentary behavior in young people? Ann Behav Med. 2009;38:147-53. 
32. 
Marshall SJ, Biddle SJH, Gorely T, Cameron N, Murdey I. Relationships between 
media use, body fatness and physical activity in children and youth: A meta-analysis. Int J 
Obes. 2004;28:1238-46. 
33. 
Ekelund U, Brage S, Froberg K, Harro M, Anderssen SA, Sardinha LB, et al. TV 
viewing and physical activity are independently associated with metabolic risk in children: 
The European Youth Heart Study. PLoS Med. 2006;2(12):2449-56. 
34. 
Tremblay MS, Colley RC, Saunders TJ, Healy GN, Owen N. Physiological and health 
implications of a sedentary lifestyle. App Physiol, Nutr Metab. 2010;35:725–40. 
35. 
Tremblay MS, LeBlanc AG, Janssen I, Kho ME, Hicks A, Murumets K, et al. 
Canadian sedentary behaviour guidelines for children and youth. App Physiol, Nutr Metab. 
2011;36:59-64. 
36. 
Primack BA, Swanier B, Georgiopoulos AM, Land SR, Fine MJ. Association between 
media use in adolescence and depression in young adulthood: A longitudinal study. Arch Gen 
Psychiat. 2009 February 1, 2009;66(2):181-8. 
37. 
Murdey ID, Cameron N, Biddle SJH, Marshall SJ, Gorely T. Short-term changes in 
sedentary behaviour during adolescence: Project STIL (Sedentary Teenagers and Inactive 
Lifestyles). Ann Hum Biol. 2005;32:283-96. 
38. 
Mathers M, Canterford L, Olds T, Hesketh K, Ridley K, Wake M. Electronic media 
use and adolescent health and well-being: Cross-sectional community study. Ac Pediat. 
2009;9:307-14. 
39. 
Iannotti RJ, Janssen I, Haug E, Kololo H, Annaheim B, Borraccino A, et al. 
Interrelationships of adolescent physical activity, screen-based sedentary behaviour, and 
social and psychological health. Int J Pub Health. 2009;54(0):191-8. 
40. 
Iannotti RJ, Kogan MD, Janssen I, Boyce WF. Patterns of adolescent physical 
activity, screen-based media use, and positive and negative health indicators in the U.S. and 
Canada. J Adoles Health. 2009;44(5):493-9. 
41. 
Hamer M, Stamatakis E, Mishra G. Psychological distress, television viewing, and 
physical activity in children aged 4 to 12 years Pediatr 2009. 2009;123:1263-8. 
42. 
Russ SA, Larson K, Franke TM, Halfon N. Associations between media use and 
health in US children. Ac Pediatr. 2009 2009/10//;9(5):300-6. 
18

----- Page 20 (native) -----
43. 
Holder MD, Coleman B, Sehn ZL. The contribution of active and passive leisure to 
children's well-being. J Health Psychol. 2009;14:378-86 doi:10.1177/1359105308101676. 
44. 
Page AS, Cooper AR, Griew P, Jago R. Is children’s screen viewing related to 
psychological difficulties irrespective of physical activity and sedentary time? Pediatrics. 
2010;126(5):e1-e7. 
 
 
 
19

----- Page 21 (native) -----
20

----- Page 22 (native) -----
Table 1. Reviews of physical activity and depression in young people  
Author, date 
& years 
covered 
Type of  
review; 
number of 
studies 
(K) 
Sample 
for 
current 
analyses 
Exposure 
variables 
Types of 
research 
design 
Main 
findings   
Comments  
Larun et.al [6] 
 
1965-2005 
Meta-
analysis 
 
K=5 
11-19 yrs 
Vigorous 
exercise 
 
RCTs 
The review assessed vigorous exercise (VIG) vrs no 
intervention in a general population. VIG had a significant 
negative effect on depression; ES= -0.66.  
 
VIG v. no exercise for children in treatment: no difference.  
 
VIG v. low intensity exercise for depressed children in 
treatment: no difference.  
 
Exercise v. psychosocial intervention for depressed 
children in treatment: no difference.   
 
Few studies included. 
 
Craft & 
Landers 
[8] 
Up to 1996 
Meta-
analysis 
and 
systematic 
review 
 
K=3 
12 - 18 yrs 
PA: 
Aerobic and 
anaerobic 
Quasi-
experimental 
Exercise significantly reduced depression among 
participants with clinical depression and depression 
resulting from mental illness (including adults). Effect size 
for young people was small (ES= -0.15).  
 
The review is one of the few 
that examined the effects of 
chronic exercise on clinically 
diagnosed depression.  
 
Review includes varied age 
groups. Only 3 studies were on 
young people.  
 
Calfas & 
Taylor  
[7] 
 
Up to 1982 
Meta-
analysis 
 
K=11 
11-21 yrs 
PA: 
flexibility 
training; 
running; 
vigorous 
activity 
 
Quasi-
experimental & 
cross-sectional 
observational  
34trials available for meta-analysis 
 
Significant negative relationship between PA and 
depression (ES= -0.38) 
 
9 of 11 studies showed negative association. 
Only 4 effect sizes available 
for calculation of overall ES. 
 
 
North, et al. 
[9] 
Meta-
analysis 
<18 yrs  
PA 
aerobic; and 
Various 
Higher levels of exercise significantly associated with 
lower depression (ES= -0.49) among young people.  
Only 5 studies involved young 
people. It was not possible to 
21

----- Page 23 (native) -----
Up to 1989 
 
K=5 
muscular 
strength  
endurance 
 
  
identify research designs used, 
intensity or duration of 
exercise, or type of depression 
assessed. 
 
22

----- Page 24 (native) -----
Table 2. Reviews of physical activity and anxiety in young people  
Author, date 
& years 
covered 
Type of  
review; 
number of 
studies 
(K) 
Sample 
for 
current 
analyses 
Exposure 
Variables 
Types of 
research 
design 
Main 
Findings   
Comments  
Larun et al. [6] 
 
1965-2005 
Meta-
analysis 
 
K=6 
11-19yrs 
Vigorous 
exercise 
RCTs 
VIG had a small-to-moderate effect on anxiety (ES=-0.48). 
 
There was no statistically significant difference between 
VIG and low intensity exercise on anxiety. 
 
There was no statistically significant difference between 
exercise and psychosocial interventions on anxiety.  
 
Few studies and many with 
methodological weaknesses. 
 
Wipfli et al. 
[15] 
 
up to Jan 2006 
Meta-
analysis 
 
K=3 
<18yrs 
PA 
aerobic; 
anaerobic; 
combined 
RCTs 
Exercise group showed small reductions in anxiety v. other 
forms of anxiety treatment (ES = -0.19).  
 
  
8 studies were included in the 
full meta-analysis (all ages) 
that were acute studies. It was 
not possible to tell if the 3 
studies on those <18 yrs 
included those in acute 
exercise RCTs. 
 
Unclear why only three 
interventions were located two 
years after Larun et al. 
analysed six. 
 
Calfas & 
Taylor  
[7] 
 
up to 1982 
Meta-
analysis   
and 
systematic 
review 
 
 
K=20 
11-21 yrs 
PA 
(Fitness 
training): 
flexibility 
training; 
running; 
vigorous 
activity 
 
Quasi-
experimental 
& cross-
sectional 
observational  
3 trials available for meta-analysis 
 
Small relationship between PA and anxiety (ES=-0.15). 
 
  
Duration of PA was not 
mentioned; moderate PA was 
not adequately explained.  
 
 
 
23

----- Page 25 (native) -----
Petruzzello, et 
al . [14] 
 
1960-1989 
Meta-
analysis 
 
K=3 
< 18yrs  
PA 
programmes 
(aerobic, 
anaerobic)  
Longitudinal 
design 
Chronic exercise significantly associated with less trait 
anxiety (ES= -0.47)  
 
 
Not clear on methods for 
studies with young people. 
24

----- Page 26 (native) -----
Table 3. Reviews of physical activity and self-esteem in young people  
 
Author, date 
& years 
covered 
Type of  
review; 
number of 
studies 
(K) 
Sample 
for 
current 
analyses 
Exposure 
Variables 
Types of 
research 
design 
Main 
Findings   
Comments  
Ekeland et al. 
[18] 
 
1965-2002 
Meta-
analysis  
 
K=25 
3-20yrs 
PA > 4 
weeks 
 
 
RCTs 
8 trials available for meta-analysis  
 
Exercise alone intervention versus a no-intervention 
control showed small-to-moderate effect in favour of the 
intervention group (SMD = 0.49).   
 
25 trials located but only 8 
subjected to meta-analysis. 
Calfas & 
Taylor  
[7] 
 
Up to 1982 
Meta-
analysis  
and 
systematic 
review 
 
K=20 
11-21 yrs 
PA: 
flexibility 
training; 
running; 
vigorous 
activity 
 
 
Quasi-
experimental 
& cross-
sectional 
observation  
3 trials available for meta-analysis 
 
There was a significant positive relationship between PA 
and psychological outcomes-i.e. increased self esteem; 
effect size was 0.12 
Only 3 trials subjected to 
meta-analysis. 
 
Unclear distinction between 
self-esteem and self-concept 
as outcome variables. 
Gruber [19] 
 
Dates covered 
not stated 
Meta-
analysis  
 
K=27 
<18yrs 
PA: 
Aerobic;  
PE 
activities; 
perceptual 
motor; dance 
 
Experimental 
& quasi-
experimental  
Exercise significantly associated with higher self-esteem 
among children (ES=0.41).  
 
Exercise had larger effects for children with a disability 
(ES=0.57) and for aerobic fitness activities (ES=0.89).  
Report lacked detail on search 
strategies and methods. 
25

----- Page 27 (native) -----
Table 4. Reviews of physical activity and cognitive functioning in young people  
Author, date 
& years 
covered 
Type of  
review; 
number of 
studies 
(K) 
Sample 
for 
current 
analyses 
Exposure 
Variables 
Types of 
research 
design 
Main 
Findings   
Comments  
Best [30] 
 
Dates covered 
not stated 
Systematic 
 Review 
 
K=3 
7-11 yrs 
PA 
(Aerobic): 
Running;  
walking 
Experimental 
Exercise (specifically aerobic) had significant positive 
relationship with creativity- specifically flexible and 
divergent thinking but not with perceptual-motor skills or 
visual-motor coordination.  
 
 
Centres for 
Disease 
Control and 
Prevention 
[29] 
 
Dates covered 
not stated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Systematic 
review 
 
K=50 
Children; 
exact ages 
not stated  
School PE; 
Recess 
(break); 
classroom 
physical 
activity 
breaks; 
extra-
curricular 
physical 
activity 
All 
School-based PE (k=14): weak or no association between 
increased PE time and academic achievement 
 
Recess studies (k=8):  weak or no association between 
recess activity and cognitive outcomes 
 
Classroom physical activity studies (k=9): Consistent 
association between classroom activity breaks and 
cognitive outcomes 
 
Extra-curricular physical activity studies (k=19):  
Consistent association between extra-curricular physical 
activity and cognitive outcomes 
Some studies analysed 
included ‘attitude’ and ‘mood’ 
outcomes, not cognitive 
functioning. 
Keeley and 
Fox [28] 
 
Up to Feb 
2009 
Systematic 
review 
 
N=18 
4-18 yrs 
PA 
(break-time 
play; active 
travel; sport 
& physical 
education; 
informal 
play & 
sports; and 
dance clubs 
outside 
school) 
RCTs; quasi 
experimental; 
longitudinal; 
cross sectional 
A weak positive relationship was found between increased 
school physical activity and cognitive functioning. 
 
Cross-sectional studies indicated that more physical 
activity was associated with better performance in some 
subjects (e.g., mathematics) but not in others (e.g., 
English).  
 
Intervention Studies indicated that introduction of more 
curricular time to PE did not have a detrimental effects on 
children’s academic performance. 
 
A weak but positive association was found between 
 
26

----- Page 28 (native) -----
physical fitness and cognitive functioning in young people 
with the strongest correlations being with cardiovascular 
fitness.   
 
Tomporowski 
et al. [27] 
 
Dates covered 
not stated 
 
Systematic 
review 
 
K=15 
8-16 yrs 
PA 
(Chronic 
exercise): 
Strength 
training; 
aerobic; 
running   
 
 
Cross-
sectional, 
prospective & 
experimental  
Prospective and experimental designs: 
 
 2 of 4 studies showed improvements in intelligence 
 
3 of 6 for cognition 
 
1 of 6 for academic achievement.  
 
Cross-sectional designs: 
3 of 4 studies showed association with academic 
achievement. 
 
Executive functioning tasks 
seem most positively affected. 
Trudeau and 
Shephard [26] 
 
1966-2007 
Systematic 
review 
 
K=17 
5-16 yrs 
PA 
PE 
activities; 
school sport  
 
Quasi 
experimental; 
longitudinal; 
cross-sectional  
PA and academic achievement: 
Allocating up to an additional hour per day of curricular 
time to PA programmes did not affect academic 
performance of primary school students.  
 
Children, in the experimental group, whose academic 
tuition was reduced achieved equally as the control group.  
 
PA and classroom behaviour: 
PA significantly improved concentration and classroom 
behaviour.  
 
Fitness and Academic Achievement: 
A positive but weak relationship.  
  
The context of PA was not 
clearly defined.  
 
Limited studies were used to 
assess the effect of fitness on 
academic achievement.  
 
   
Sibley and 
Etnier [25] 
 
Up to 2001 
Meta-
analysis 
 
K=16 
4-18 yrs 
PA: 
aerobic; 
resistance 
training;  
perceptual 
motor;  
PE programs 
True 
experiment; 
quasi 
experiment; 
cross- 
sectional   
PA significantly associated with better  cognitive 
functioning (ES=0.32). 
 
No effect for memory tests and only a small effect for 
verbal tests. 
 
Results were similar for  healthy subjects, subjects with 
mental impairments and subjects with physical disabilities. 
 
27

----- Page 29 (native) -----
The influence of PA on cognitive functioning was not 
moderated by the type of research design, participant 
health and PA type.  
 
Shephard [24] 
 
Dates covered 
not stated 
 
Narrative 
review 
 
K=3 long-
itudinal 
studies 
highlighted  
<20yrs 
PA: 
PE activities 
Cross-
sectional;  
longitudinal 
Academic performance is maintained or even enhanced by 
an increased level of PA.  
 
 
Narrative review only. 
28

----- Page 30 (native) -----
Table 5. Primary studies investigating sedentary behaviour and mental health in young people 
 
Study 
Sample characteristics 
Design/Method 
Sedentary Behaviour 
Exposure Variables 
Mental Health 
Outcome Variables   
Results 
Comments 
Murdey et al. [37] 
N= 119 UK youth.   
64 boys and 55 girls 
across three school year 
cohorts: 
Yr 6 (10.0–10.9y); Year 
8 (12.0–12.9 years); 
Year 10 (14.0–14.9 
years). 
 
Cross-sectional phase 
of longitudinal study.  
Free-time sedentary 
behaviour assessed by 
momentary time 
sampling paper diary. 
Body image (body 
attractiveness subscale 
of Physical Self-
Perception Profile for 
Children; PSPP-C) 
Small negative 
association only for 
girls between 
sedentary behaviour 
and body image: 
r=-0.23, p=0.05 
PA not accounted 
for in analyses. 
 
Only study to 
assess and 
aggregate multiple 
sedentary 
behaviours. 
 
Mathers et al. [38] 
N= 925 Australian 
adolescents (mean age = 
16.1y) 
Cross-sectional data 
from the third (2005) 
wave of the 
longitudinal Health of 
Young Victorians 
Study. 
Electronic media use 
(EMU) assessed with  
MARCA – 
Multimedia Activity 
Recall for Children 
and Adolescents, a  
computerised time-use 
diary. 
Health-related quality of 
life (HRQoL; 
KIDSCREEN); health 
status 
(Pediatric Quality of 
Life Inventory 4.0; 
PedsQL);  depression/ 
anxiety (Kessler-10); 
behaviour problems 
(Strengths and 
Difficulties 
Questionnaire - SDQ). 
 
Higher EMU 
associated with 
poorer HRQoL and 
more behaviour 
problems. 
 
High video game use 
associated with worse  
HRQoL 
 
   
PA not accounted 
for in analyses. 
 
Iannotti, Janssen, et 
al. [39] 
N= 49,124 
Young people aged 11, 
13 and 15y from 
countries participating 
in the Health Behaviour 
in School-Aged 
Children (HBSC). 
 
10 countries selected to 
represent 5 regions: 
North America, North 
Cross-sectional self-
report survey of 
health behaviours, 
including physical 
activity and screen 
time. 
Screen-based media 
sedentary behaviour 
(SBM) in hours/day. 
Physical Self-Image: 
Perception (of body 
size); Life Satisfaction;  
Quality of Family 
Relationships; Quality 
of Peer Relationships. 
Higher levels of SBM  
associated with 
poorer self-image.  
 
More frequent SBM  
associated with 
poorer Life 
Satisfaction in four 
regions and poorer 
perceived health 
status and family 
PA accounted for 
as a confounder. 
29

----- Page 31 (native) -----
Study 
Sample characteristics 
Design/Method 
Sedentary Behaviour 
Exposure Variables 
Mental Health 
Outcome Variables   
Results 
Comments 
Europe, South Europe, 
West Europe, East 
Europe.   
 
relationships in three 
regions. 
Iannotti, Kogan, et 
al. [40] 
N=22,084 
American and Canadian 
youth aged ~11-15y as 
part of Health 
Behaviour in School-
Aged Children (HBSC) 
study. 
 
Cross-sectional self-
report survey of 
health behaviours, 
including physical 
activity and screen 
time. 
Screen-based media 
sedentary behaviour 
(SBM) in hours/day. 
Physical Self-Image: 
Perception (of body 
size); Life Satisfaction;  
Quality of Family 
Relationships; Quality 
of Peer Relationships. 
 
More frequent SBM  
associated with 
poorer Life 
Satisfaction  
and family 
relationships. 
 
Poorer self-image 
only significant for 
Canadian youth. 
 
Higher SBM 
associated with 
higher ratings of peer 
relationships. 
  
PA accounted for 
as a confounder. 
 
May include some 
participants from 
Iannotti, Janssen et 
al. (2009). Not 
possible to tell. 
Hamer et al. [41] 
 
N=1486 Scottish 
children aged 4 to 12y 
(mean age=8.5y)  
Cross sectional 
assessment of 
psychological well-
being, sedentary 
behaviour and 
physical activity 
Parent reported TV 
and screen 
entertainment (TVSE). 
Psychological well-
being (Strengths and 
Difficulties 
Questionnaire) 
 
Higher SDQ scores 
associated with 
greater TVSE time 
independently of PA 
and after controlling 
for confounders. 
 
TVSE and PA 
interact to be 
associated with 
higher levels of 
psychological 
distress. 
 
PA accounted for 
as a confounder. 
 
Parental proxy 
reports likely to 
have poor validity.  
 
Russ et al. [42] 
N=54,863 American 
youth aged 6-17y.  
Cross-sectional 
assessment of  media 
Parent reported media 
use (TV, computers, 
Parent reported social-
emotional problems of 
Significant 
association between 
Parental proxy 
reports likely to 
30

----- Page 32 (native) -----
Study 
Sample characteristics 
Design/Method 
Sedentary Behaviour 
Exposure Variables 
Mental Health 
Outcome Variables   
Results 
Comments 
 
use and parent 
reported child 
psycho-social well-
being 
screen time) 
the child, concerns about 
child’s self-esteem, and 
social competence 
TV viewing and 
psycho-social well-
being: 
 
Each additional hour 
of TV increased 
concerns about 
social/emotional 
health by 8%; for 
self-esteem concerns 
by 8%; a decrease for 
social competence by 
10% 
 
No effects for 
computer use or 
screen time. 
 
have poor validity.  
 
PA not accounted 
for in analyses. 
Holder et al. [43] 
N=514 Canadian 
children aged ~9-11y. 
  
Cross-sectional 
assessment of  screen 
time and phone used, 
self-concept and 
happiness 
 
Self and parent 
reported sedentary 
behaviour (TV, 
computer, computer 
games, phone) 
Piers-Harris Children’s 
Self-Concept Scale 2 
 
Happiness/satisfaction 
(from Piers-Harris) 
 
Self-reported happiness 
using a faces scale 
 
Screen time (but not 
phone) had small but 
significant association 
with both child and 
parent reported  
happiness (faces 
scale)  
 
No associations with 
self-concept. 
 
Markers of PA 
assessed but not 
used as covariates. 
Primack et al. [36] 
N=4142 American 
adolescents (Grades 7-
12; aged ~12-17y at 
baseline) 
Longitudinal cohort 
study with 7y follow-
up. Analyses included 
only those not 
depressed at baseline. 
Self-report of ‘last 
week’ exposure to 4 
types of electronic 
media: TV, video, 
computer games, radio 
Centers for 
Epidemiologic Studies – 
Depression Scale (CES-
D) 
Significantly 
increased odds of 
depression at follow 
up for each additional 
hour of TV viewing 
(OR=1.08). No effect 
for other media. 
 
PA not accounted 
for in analyses. 
31

----- Page 33 (native) -----
Study 
Sample characteristics 
Design/Method 
Sedentary Behaviour 
Exposure Variables 
Mental Health 
Outcome Variables   
Results 
Comments 
Page et al. [44] 
N=1013 UK youth 
(mean age=10.95y) 
 
 
Cross sectional 
assessment of 
psychological well-
being, sedentary 
behaviour and 
physical activity 
Self-reported daily TV 
hours and computer 
use. 
 
Total sedentary time 
also assessed with 
accelerometer. 
Psychological well-
being (Strengths and 
Difficulties 
Questionnaire) 
 
Children who spent 
more than 2h/day 
watching TV or using 
a computer were at 
increased 
risk of high levels of 
psychological 
difficulties. 
 
PA accounted for 
as a confounder. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32