

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Education and debate
Selling sickness: the pharmaceutical industry and disease
mongering
Ray Moynihan, Iona Heath, David Henry
A lot of money can be made from healthy people who believe they are sick. Pharmaceutical
companies sponsor diseases and promote them to prescribers and consumers. Ray Moynihan, Iona
Heath, and David Henry give examples of “disease mongering” and suggest how to prevent the
growth of this practice
There’s a lot of money to be made from telling healthy
people they’re sick. Some forms of medicalising
ordinary life may now be better described as disease
mongering: widening the boundaries of treatable
illness in order to expand markets for those who sell
and deliver treatments.
1 2 Pharmaceutical companies
are actively involved in sponsoring the definition of
diseases and promoting them to both prescribers and
consumers. The social construction of illness is being
replaced by the corporate construction of disease.
Whereas some aspects of medicalisation are the
subject of ongoing debate, the mechanics of corporate
backed disease mongering, and its impact on public
consciousness, medical practice, human health, and
national
budgets,
have
attracted
limited
critical
scrutiny.
Within many disease categories informal alliances
have
emerged,
comprising
drug
company
staff,
doctors, and consumer groups. Ostensibly engaged in
raising public awareness about underdiagnosed and
undertreated
problems,
these
alliances
tend
to
promote a view of their particular condition as
widespread, serious, and treatable. Because these
“disease awareness” campaigns are commonly linked
to companies’ marketing strategies, they operate to
expand markets for new pharmaceutical products.
Alternative approaches—emphasising the self limiting
or relatively benign natural history of a problem, or the
importance of personal coping strategies—are played
down or ignored. As the late medical writer Lynn Payer
observed,
disease
mongers
“gnaw
away
at
our
self-confidence.”
2
Although some sponsored professionals or con-
sumers may act independently and all concerned may
have honourable motives, in many cases the formula is
the same: groups and/or campaigns are orchestrated,
funded, and facilitated by corporate interests, often via
their public relations and marketing infrastructure.
A key strategy of the alliances is to target the
news media with stories designed to create fears about
the condition or disease and draw attention to the
latest
treatment.
Company
sponsored
advisory
boards supply the “independent experts” for these
stories, consumer groups provide the “victims,” and
public relations companies provide media outlets with
the positive spin about the latest “breakthrough”
medications.
Inappropriate medicalisation carries the dangers
of unnecessary labelling, poor treatment decisions,
iatrogenic illness, and economic waste, as well as the
opportunity costs that result when resources are
diverted away from treating or preventing more
serious disease. At a deeper level it may help to feed
unhealthy obsessions with health,
3 obscure or mystify
sociological
or
political
explanations
for
health
problems,
4 and focus undue attention on pharmaco-
logical, individualised, or privatised solutions.
3 More
tangibly and immediately, the costs of new drugs
targeted at essentially healthy people are threatening
the
viability
of
publicly
funded
universal
health
insurance systems.
5
Recent discussions about medicalisation
6 have
emphasised the limitations of earlier critiques
1 of the
Summary points
Some forms of “medicalisation” may now be
better described as “disease mongering”—
extending the boundaries of treatable illness to
expand markets for new products
Alliances of pharmaceutical manufacturers,
doctors, and patients groups use the media
to frame conditions as being widespread and
severe
Disease mongering can include turning ordinary
ailments into medical problems, seeing mild
symptoms as serious, treating personal problems
as medical, seeing risks as diseases, and framing
prevalence estimates to maximise potential
markets
Corporate funded information about disease
should be replaced by independent information
Australian Financial
Review, GPO Box
506, Sydney, 2201,
Australia
Ray Moynihan
journalist
Caversham Group
Practice, 4
Peckwater Street,
London NW5 2UP
Iona Heath
general practitioner
School of Medical
Practice and
Population Health,
Faculty of Health,
University of
Newcastle, NSW
2308, Australia
David Henry
professor of clinical
pharmacology
Correspondence to:
R Moynihan
ray_128@
hotmail.com
BMJ 2002;324:886–91
886
BMJ VOLUME 324
13 APRIL 2002
bmj.com

----- Page 2 (native) -----
disabling impact of a powerful medical establishment.
Contemporary writers argue that the lay populace has
become more active, better informed about risks and
benefits, less trusting of medical authority, and less pas-
sively accepting of the expansion of medical jurisdic-
tion into their bodies and lives. Although these views
may herald a more mature debate about medicalisa-
tion, the erosion of trust in medical opinion reinforces
the need for wide public scrutiny of industry’s role in
these processes.
In this paper we do not aim for a comprehensive
classification
or
definitive
description
of
disease
mongering, but rather we draw attention to an impor-
tant but under-recognised phenomenon. We identify
examples, taken from the Australian context but famil-
iar
internationally,
which
loosely
represent
five
examples of disease mongering: the ordinary proc-
esses or ailments of life classified as medical problems;
mild symptoms portrayed as portents of a serious dis-
ease; personal or social problems seen as medical ones;
risks conceptualised as diseases; and disease preva-
lence estimates framed to maximise the size of a medi-
cal problem. These groups are not mutually exclusive
and some examples overlap.
Ordinary processes or ailments as
medical problems: baldness
The medicalisation of baldness shows clearly the
transformation of the ordinary processes of life into
medical phenomena. Around the time that Merck’s
hair growth drug finasteride (Propecia) was first
approved in Australia, leading newspapers featured
new
information
about
the
emotional
trauma
associated with hair loss. The global public relations
firm Edelman orchestrated some of the coverage but
largely left its fingerprints off the resulting stories. An
article on page 4 in the Australian newspaper featured
a new “study” suggesting that a third of all men expe-
rienced
some
degree
of
hair
loss,
along
with
comments by concerned experts and news that an
International Hair Study Institute had been estab-
lished.
7 It suggested that losing hair could lead to
panic and other emotional difficulties, and even have
an impact on job prospects and mental wellbeing. The
article did not reveal that the study and the institute
were both funded by Merck and that the experts
quoted had been supplied by Edelman, despite this
information being available in Edelman’s publicity
materials in May 1998.
Although Merck is prevented from advertising fin-
asteride direct to consumers in Australia, it has contin-
ued to promote hair loss as a medical problem, with
waves of advertisements urging balding men to “See
Your Doctor.” The company argues that it does not
describe baldness as an illness and that men have a
legitimate right to be made aware of scientifically
proved options to stop hair loss (statement from Merck
spokesperson, 7 March 2002).
Mild symptoms as portents of serious
disease: irritable bowel syndrome
Irritable bowel syndrome has long been considered a
common functional disorder, and a “diagnosis of
exclusion” covering a range of symptom severity, yet it
is
currently
experiencing
something
of
a
global
‘‘makeover.” Without question many people with the
condition are severely disabled by their symptoms, but
the arrival of new drugs has seen manufacturers seek
to change the way the world thinks about irritable
bowel syndrome.
What
for
many
people
is
a
mild
functional
disorder—requiring little more than reassurance about
its benign natural course—is currently being reframed
as a serious disease attracting a label and a drug, with
all the associated harms and costs.
Confidential plan to “shape” medical opinion
A confidential draft document leaked from a medical
communications company, In Vivo Communications,
describes a three year “medical education programme”
to create a new perception of irritable bowel syndrome
as a “credible, common and concrete disease.” The
proposed 2001-3 education programme is part of the
marketing
strategy
for
GlaxoSmithKline’s
drug
Lotronex (alosetron hydrochloride).
In Vivo is one of a handful of companies specialis-
ing in corporate backed “medical education,” and the
leaked plan provides a rare insight into the highly
secretive world of drug promotion, with its new
emphasis on “shaping” medical and public opinion
about the latest diseases.
According
to
the
documents,
the
education
programme’s key aim is this: “IBS [irritable bowel syn-
drome] must be established in the minds of doctors as
a significant and discrete disease state.” Patients also
“need to be convinced that IBS is a common and rec-
ognised medical disorder.” The other main messages
are about promoting the new “clinically proven
therapy”—Lotronex.
The first step is to set up an “Advisory Board, com-
prising one KOL [key opinion leader] from each state
of Australia.” Its chief role would be to provide advice
to the corporate sponsors on current opinion in
gastroenterology and on “opportunities for shaping it.”
Further work would include developing “best practice
guidelines” for diagnosing and managing irritable
bowel syndrome and attending overseas meetings.
Another strategy was to produce a newsletter in the
pre-launch period to “establish the market” and
Merck has widely promoted hair loss as a medical problem, including advertising on buses
CHRIS GROENHOUT
Education and debate
887
BMJ VOLUME 324
13 APRIL 2002
bmj.com

----- Page 3 (native) -----
convince the “specialist market” that the condition is a
“serious and credible disease.”
For general practitioners, In Vivo recommends a
series of advertorials in leading medical magazines,
featuring interviews with members of the company’s
advisory board, because “The imprimatur of [board]
members is invaluable in reassuring [general practi-
tioners] . . . that the material they receive is clinically
valid.”
Other groups to be targeted with promotional
material include pharmacists, nurses, patients, and a
medical foundation described as already having a
“close relationship” with In Vivo. A “patient support
programme” is also planned for 2002-3, so that Glaxo-
SmithKline will “reap the loyalty dividend when the
competitor drug kicks in.”
Medical education or marketing?
Although billed as a medical education plan, the
document is clearly part of the Lotronex marketing
strategy. One clause explicitly stipulates that all publi-
cations and manuscripts must be approved by the
drug company’s marketing, medical, and legal depart-
ments. The document also makes clear the media’s
role in changing public perceptions about irritable
bowel syndrome, stating that “PR [public relations]
and media activities are crucial to a well-rounded
campaign—particularly
in
the
area
of
consumer
awareness.’’
Whatever the integrity or competence of the pro-
fessionals
or
consumer
advocates
involved,
and
without seeking to minimise the importance of the
disorder for some individuals, this plan shows that
staff and organisations sponsored by a drug company
are helping to shape medical and public opinion
about the condition that company is targeting with
its new product. Although GlaxoSmithKline has
argued that its sponsorship of education can improve
doctors’ prescribing habits (personal communication,
7 March 2002), the conflict of interest is obvious and
potentially dangerous. Self evidently, the drug compa-
ny’s primary interest will be shaping opinion about
irritable bowel syndrome in a way that will maximise
sales of its medication.
In this case the proposed campaign was stopped
because of the withdrawal of Lotronex from the
market, after reports to the US Food and Drug Admin-
istration of serious and sometimes fatal adverse
reactions.
8 In a recent letter to patients, the administra-
tion suggested that indiscriminate use of the drug
could result in more fatal adverse events and that many
patients in whom the condition was non-serious could
experience more harm than good.
9
Conversations with industry insiders and other
published material from the drug marketing industry
confirm that the strategies proposed for promoting
irritable bowel syndrome by In Vivo were in no way
exceptional. A “practical guide” published by Britain’s
Pharmaceutical Marketing magazine last year explicitly
emphasised that key objectives of the pre-launch
period were to “establish a need” for a new drug and
“create the desire” among prescribers.
10 The guide
instructed drug marketers that they may need to “initi-
ate a review of the whole way in which a particular dis-
ease is managed.”
Personal or social problems as medical
ones: social phobia
When
Roche
was
promoting
its
antidepressant
Aurorix (moclobemide) as a valuable treatment for
social phobia in 1997, its public relations company
issued a press release, picked up by some of the media,
announcing that more than one million Australians
had an underdiagnosed psychiatric disorder called
social
phobia.
11
The
release
described
a
“soul
destroying condition” and quoted a clinical psycholo-
gist strongly endorsing the role of antidepressants in
its
treatment.
At
that
time,
government
figures
suggested the number of people with the disorder
might be closer to 370 000.
In 1998, a newspaper article, “Too shy for words”—
this time not orchestrated by Roche—suggested that
two million Australians were affected by the condi-
tion.
12 All the media stories seemed to be part of a
wider push to change the common perception of shy-
ness, from a personal difficulty to a psychiatric
disorder.
An important aspect of Roche’s marketing for
moclobemide involved working with a patient group
called
the
Obsessive
Compulsive
and
Anxiety
Disorders Foundation of Victoria and funding a large
conference
on
social
phobia.
According
to
the
foundation’s chief at the time, “Roche is putting a lot
of money into promoting social phobia . . . Roche
funded the conference to help get social phobia
known
among
[general
practitioners]
and
other
health professionals . . . It was a vehicle to raise aware-
ness with the media too.”
11 Roche’s promotion of its
antidepressant drug also included working with osten-
sibly independent medical specialists, one of whom
was later described by a public relations agent as
“Moclobemide
Man”
(personal
communication,
1998).
Pharmaceutical Marketing’s practical guide singled
out the promotion of social phobia as a positive exam-
ple of drug marketers shaping medical and public
opinion about a disease.
10 “You may even need to rein-
force the actual existence of a disease and/or the value
of treating it. A classic example of this was the need to
create recognition in Europe of social phobia as a dis-
tinct clinical entity and the potential of antidepressant
agents such as moclobemide to treat it,” said the indus-
try guide. It went on: “Social phobia was recognised in
the US and so transatlantic opinion leaders were
mobilised to participate in advisory activities, meetings,
publications etc. to help influence the overall belief in
Europe.” The medicalisation of human distress seems
to have no limits.
13
A senior Roche official recently conceded that
company promotion exaggerated the prevalence of
social phobia in Australia. “A lot of disease estimates
are blown out of all proportion . . . The marketing
people
always
beat
these
things
up”
said
local
managing director Mr Fred Nadjarian (see news
article).
Risks conceptualised as diseases:
osteoporosis
Like high blood pressure or raised cholesterol levels,
the medicalisation of reduced bone mass—which
Education and debate
888
BMJ VOLUME 324
13 APRIL 2002
bmj.com

----- Page 4 (native) -----
occurs as people age—is an example of a risk factor
being conceptualised as a disease.
Unlike medicalising baldness, conceiving osteo-
porosis as a disease is ethically complex. Slowing bone
loss can reduce the risk of future fracture—just as low-
ering blood pressure can reduce a person’s chance of a
future stroke or heart attack—but for most healthy
people, the risks of serious fractures are low and/or
distant, and in absolute terms, long term preventive
drug treatment offers small reductions in risk. For
example, in a placebo controlled trial in which
alendronate was taken for four years by women who
were free of fracture but had bone mineral density
measurements 1.6 standard deviations below the mean
for normal young adult white women, the incidence of
radiographic vertebral fractures was 3.8% in the
placebo group and 2.1% in the treatment group.
14 This
equated to a 44% relative reduction in risk but an abso-
lute risk reduction of only 1.7%.
Furthermore, the promotional focus on chemical
solutions for the complex problem of preventing frac-
tures takes attention away from a variety of modestly
effective
non-pharmacological
strategies,
such
as
dietary supplementation with calcium and vitamin D,
smoking cessation, and weight bearing exercise.
15
Despite
the
ethical
complexities,
osteoporosis
remains a strong example of disease mongering
because the corporate role in changing the way popu-
lations think about bone loss has been so extensive.
Drug companies have sponsored meetings where the
disease
was
being
defined,
16
funded
studies
of
therapies,
17 and developed extensive financial ties with
leading researchers. They have funded patient groups,
disease foundations, and advertising campaigns (on
both drugs and disease) targeted at doctors
11 and have
sponsored osteoporosis media awards offering lucra-
tive prizes to journalists.
A controversial definition
Contrary to much of the corporate promotion, the
definition of osteoporosis is still controversial. Diagnos-
tic criteria set by the World Health Organization, which
set the bone density of young white women as
“normal” and judge the bones of older women against
this standard, are contentious.
16 A key meeting of the
WHO study group involved in defining the diagnosis
of
osteoporosis
was
funded
in
part
by
three
pharmaceutical companies.
16
The link between bone density and fracture risk is
also the subject of scientific controversy, with reviewers
pointing out that while bone mineral density is associ-
ated with fracture, it is not a sufficiently accurate
predictor of an individual’s risk of fracture to be used as
a guide to therapy.
18 A recent evaluation by the Univer-
sity of British Columbia concluded that “Research evi-
dence does not support either whole population or
selective . . . bone mineral density testing of well women
at or near menopause as a means to predict future
fractures.”
16
Good quality studies have shown that several drugs,
including oestrogens, selective oestrogen receptor
modulating agents, and bisphosphonates, reduce the
risk of fractures.
15 However, although public promotion
of those drugs often relies on presentations of relative
reductions in fracture risk, the absolute reductions for
healthy women are small when weighed against poten-
tial harms and costs.
19
The marketing of fear
Osteoporosis Australia, a medical foundation, which
has received funding from pharmaceutical companies,
issued a press release recently urging people to take a
one minute test for their risk of osteoporosis.
20 Accord-
ing to the foundation, “we call this disease a silent thief:
if you’re not vigilant, it can sneak up on you and snatch
your quality of life and your long-term health.” An
accompanying 10 point checklist suggests that merely
being a menopausal woman was enough to justify a
trip to the doctor to be tested for this disease. The con-
struction of the widely used WHO diagnostic criteria is
such
that
large
numbers
of
healthy
women
at
menopause will automatically be diagnosed as having
this “disease” because their bones are being compared
with those of much younger women.
Against a background of controversy over disease
definition, poor predictive value of bone density
measurement, and heavily advertised expensive thera-
pies offering marginal benefits to menopausal women,
corporate backed promotional activities are attempt-
ing to persuade millions of healthy women worldwide
that they are sick.
Disease prevalence estimates framed to
maximise the size of a medical problem:
erectile dysfunction
Double page advertisements told Australians recently
that 39% of men who visit general practitioners have
erection problems.
21 The advertisement featured an
unhappy couple, who looked to be in their 30s or 40s,
on
opposite
sides
of
a
double
bed,
with
the
accompanying text: “Erection problems: hard to talk
about, easy to treat.” As with much disease mongering,
the key strategy here was to make the condition seem
as widespread as possible.
The 39% claim in the advertisement was refer-
enced to an abstract of a survey finding. The full
version of the published survey
22 revealed that the 39%
figure was obtained by tallying all categories of difficul-
ties, including men who reported having problems
only “occasionally,” and the average age of those
reporting complete erectile dysfunction was 71 years.
Another recent Australian study, not cited in the adver-
tisement, estimated that erection problems affected
only 3% of men in their 40s, and 64% of men in their
70s.
23
The advertisement’s fine print cited a host organis-
ation, Impotence Australia, and two other groups but
did not mention that the advertisement was funded by
the manufacturer of sildenafil (Viagra), Pfizer. Impo-
tence Australia had at that time only recently been set
up with a grant of $A200 000 (£74 000; $105 200;
€119 400) from Pfizer. Its executive officer told the
press, “I could understand that people may have a feel-
ing that this is a front for Pfizer.”
24
Defending the public promotion of erection prob-
lems, a Pfizer spokesperson said, “The best consumer is
an educated consumer . . . Who better than the manu-
facturer to help this process?” (personal communica-
tion, 5 March, 2002).
Education and debate
889
BMJ VOLUME 324
13 APRIL 2002
bmj.com

----- Page 5 (native) -----
Discussion
These observations of disease mongering are selective
and preliminary. They are not the result of systematic
study, but rather a series of anecdotal case studies
designed to provoke debate. We know little of the true
extent of these industry funded zones of influence, and
even less of their impact. But we believe more
information and analysis of the nature and functioning
of these “unholy alliances”
2 is warranted. The key con-
cern with the examples here is the invisible and
unregulated attempts to change public perceptions
about health and illness to widen markets for new
drugs.
Although
mainstream
media
already
play
an
important role investigating and reporting on contem-
porary promotional activities, more could be done to
expose and reduce misleading “wonder drug” stories,
which help to facilitate so much disease mongering.
As
a
practical
step,
we
suggest
that
health
professionals, policy makers, journalists, and consum-
ers move away from reliance on corporate sponsored
material about the nature or prevalence of disease.
Genuinely independent sources of information about
health problems could replace those skewed towards
making the maximum numbers of healthy people feel
sick.
Just as researchers from the Cochrane Collabora-
tion are generating systematic evaluations of the best
evidence about therapies, a similar effort may be
required in evaluating and/or producing unbiased
information about illness—starting with those condi-
tions most prone to disease mongering. Independent
lay involvement is crucial to produce accurate, compre-
hensive, and accessible materials.
The
public
is
entitled
to
know
about
the
controversy surrounding disease definitions and about
the self limiting and relatively benign natural course of
many conditions. A publicly funded and independently
run programme of “de-medicalisation,” based on
respect for human dignity, rather than shareholder
value or professional hubris, is overdue.
We dedicate this article to the late Lynn Payer, medical writer,
who died last year. We thank David Newby for his help in
conducting literature searches.
Competing interests: DH has received funding from Ameri-
can Home Products to conduct research into non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs. As a member of the Australian Pharmaceu-
ticals Benefits Advisory Committee, he has has twice been the
subject of legal action by Pfizer.
1
Illich I. Limits to medicine. London: Penguin, 1990.
2
Payer L. Disease-mongers. New York: John Wiley, 1992.
3
Crawford R. Healthism and the medicalization of everyday life. Int J
Health Services 1980;10:365-88.
4
Pilgrim D, Bentall R. The medicalisation of misery: A critical realist analy-
sis of the concept of depression. J Mental Health 1999;8:261-74.
5
Gilbert D, Walley T, New B. Lifestyle medicines. BMJ 2000;321:1341-4.
6
Williams S, Calnan M. The “Limits” of medicalization? Modern medicine
and the lay populace in “late” modernity. Soc Sci Med 1996;42:1609-20.
7
Hickman B. Men wise up to bald truth. Australian 1998 May 21:p4.
8
US Food and Drug Administration. Glaxo Wellcome decides to withdraw
Lotronex
from
the
market.
www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/ANSWERS/
ANS01058.html (accessed 18 March 2002).
9
Lotronex
information.
Dear
IBS
patient.
www.fda.gov/cder/drug/
infopage/lotronex/dear_patient.htm (accessed 18 March 2002).
10 Cook J. Practical guide to medical education. Pharmaceutical Marketing
2001;6:14-22.
11 Moynihan R. Too much medicine? Sydney: ABC Books, 1998:137-68.
12 Heath S. Too shy for words. The Age 1998 Mar 30:16. (“Living” section.)
13 Heath I. There must be limits to the medicalisation of human distress.
BMJ 1999:318; 439-40.
14 Cummings SR, Black M, Thompson DE, Applegate WB. Effect of
alendronate on risk of fracture in women with low bone density but with-
out vertebral fractures: results from the fracture intervention trial. JAMA
1998;280:2077-82.
15 Wade JP. Rheumatology: 15. Osteoporosis. CMAJ 2001;165:45-50.
16 Green C, Bassett K, Foerster V, Kazanjian A. Bone mineral density testing:
does the evidence support its selective use in well women? Vancouver,
BC: British Columbia Office of Health Technology Assessment, 1997.
17 Black DM, Cummings SR, Karpf DB, Cauley JA, Thompson DE, Nevitt
MC, et al. Randomised trial of effect of alendronate on risk of fracture in
women with existing vertebral fractures. Lancet 1996;348:1535-41.
18 Wilkin TJ. Changing perceptions in osteoporosis. BMJ 1999;318:862-4.
19 Moynihan R, Bero L, Ross-Degnan D, Henry D, Lee K, Watkins J, et al.
Coverage by the news media of the benefits and risks of medications.
N Engl J Med 2000;342:1645-50.
20 Osteoporosis—take the time to take the test. Osteoporosis Australia News
release, 6 Aug 2001.
21 Advertisement. Sydney Morning Herald 2000 21 Oct:76-7. (Good Weekend
supplement.)
22 Chew K, Earle C, Stuckey B, Jamrozik K, Keogh E. Erectile dysfunction in
general medicine practice: prevalence and clinical correlates. Int J
Impotence Res 2000;12:41-5.
23 Pinnock C, Stapleton A, Marshall V. Erectile dysfunction in the commu-
nity: a prevalence study. Med J Aust 1999;171:353-7.
24 Moynihan R. Taking the soft option. Australian Financial Review 2000 Nov
13:29.
Commentary: Medicalisation of risk factors
Peter C Gøtzsche
A middle aged man with pneumonia may wonder why
the attending doctor is inserting a finger into his
rectum. This is a screening test—it has nothing to do
with the patient’s disease. The physician may find a
localised
prostate
cancer,
and
the
patient
may
subsequently undergo radical prostatectomy, although
no evidence from randomised trials shows that this
operation is effective. The patient with pneumonia
cannot be sure that the prostatectomy will increase his
chance of living longer, but his life will probably feel
longer, because the operation renders most men
impotent.
1 This disastrous consequence has received
too little attention, but when properly informed, many
men will decide not to have a screening test.
2
The man’s risk factor for prostate cancer was his
age. Increased
age
leads
to
other
unanticipated
interventions. In some countries, women are invited for
mammography in a letter in which the date and time of
the appointment have already been fixed. This puts
pressure on these women, who must actively decline
the invitation if they don’t want to be screened. Some-
times, women are asked to give reasons for not attend-
Recommendations for “de-medicalising”
normal conditions
• Move away from using corporate funded
information on medical conditions/ diseases
• Generate independent accessible materials on
conditions and diseases
• Widen notions of informed consent to include
information about controversy surrounding the
definitions of conditions and diseases
Education and debate
Nordic Cochrane
Centre,
Rigshospitalet, 2100
Copenhagen Ø,
Denmark
Peter C Gøtzsche
director
pcg@cochrane.dk
890
BMJ VOLUME 324
13 APRIL 2002
bmj.com

----- Page 6 (native) -----
ing appointments, as if it were a civic duty. In leaflets,
women get simple messages—that cancer detected
early can be cured, and early cancers can often be
treated with breast conserving surgery. The data tell
another story: no reliable evidence shows that breast
screening saves lives; breast screening leads to more
surgery, including more mastectomies; and estimates
show that more than a tenth of healthy women who
attend a breast screening programme experience con-
siderable psychological distress for many months.
3 4
Senior scientists argue that this debate should not
be taking place in public.
5 This misguided paternalism
makes us wonder why health professionals are so eager
to intervene in healthy people’s lives and about those
people’s own perspectives on risks. In Denmark, the
most common cause of death from cancer among
women is no longer breast cancer but is now lung
cancer, which is mainly self inflicted.
It seems that every person aims to balance the
rewards of taking risks against perceived hazards.
6 This
can probably explain why laws on wearing safety belts
have not reduced deaths from road crashes. Such
deaths now happen to those outside rather than inside
the vehicle—probably because drivers who wear safety
belts feel safer and drive faster or more carelessly than
those who do not.
6
Another important consideration is the reliability
of studies of risk. Increased risks are often reported in
case-control studies, which do not reliably identify
moderate increases in risk. A much quoted and
carefully done meta-analysis of case-control studies
claimed to show a 30% increase in the risk of breast
cancer after induced abortion,
7 but this was later
refuted by a large cohort study.
8 Most epidemiologists
interviewed by Science said they would not take
seriously a single study reporting a new potential cause
of cancer unless it increased the risk by at least a factor
of three; some even noted that the lower limit of the
confidence interval should exceed 3.
9 Nevertheless, lay
people are influenced by increases in risk of 50-100%,
and this leads to much public anxiety and many nega-
tive changes in lifestyle. Some people, for example, will
follow unappealing diets or quit sports when told that
their bone mineral density is low, even though these
diets may not affect bone mineral density and inactivity
increases the risk of fractures.
Mass intervention on a fragile basis may lead to
mass harm. The main outcome of cancer screening
trials—disease specific mortality—is unreliable and
biased in favour of screening.
3 4 10 It therefore seems
prudent to show an effect of a screening programme
on total mortality in good randomised trials and to
inform the public fully about the adverse effects
before the programme is implemented. The biggest
risk for the population right now may be the uncritical
adoption of screening tests for cancer—for example,
for
cervical,
breast,
prostate,
colon,
and
lung
cancer,
1 3 10 11 despite lack of evidence of an effect on
total mortality. Precursors to cancer can be seen in
most healthy people above middle age, and the
potential for screening to cause harm and lead to a
diagnosis of “pseudo-disease” is frightening. Whether
risk factors should be turned into diseases also needs
careful
reflection
for
other
screening
tests—for
example, detection of mild hypertension or mild
hypercholesterolaemia.
Perhaps it is time to rethink what life is all about
and remind ourselves that most people are willing to
run substantial risks in their ordinary life to preserve
their joy and autonomy. In Out of Africa, Karen Blixen
wrote that the European wants to get insured against
fate, whereas the African takes it as it comes. She also
wrote: “Frei lebt wer sterben kann” [Those who can die
live freely].
Competing interest: None declared.
1
Stanford JL, Feng Z, Hamilton AS, Gilliland FD, Stephenson RA, Eley JW,
et al. Urinary and sexual function after radical prostatectomy for clinically
localized prostate cancer: the Prostate Cancer Outcomes Study. JAMA
2000;283:354-60.
2
Wolf AM, Nasser JF, Wolf AM, Schorling JB. The impact of informed con-
sent on patient interest in prostate-specific antigen screening. Arch Intern
Med 1996;156:1333-6.
3
Olsen O, Gøtzsche PC. Systematic review of screening for breast cancer
with
mammography
(http://image.thelancet.com/lancet/extra/
fullreport.pdf).
4
Gøtzsche PC. Screening for breast cancer with mammography. Lancet
2001;358:2167-8.
5
Horton R. Screening mammography—setting the record straight. Lancet
2002;359:441-2.
6
Richens J, Imrie J, Copas A. Condoms and seat belts: the parallels and the
lessons. Lancet 2000;355:400-3.
7
Brind J, Chinchilli VM, Severs WB, Summy Long J. Induced abortion as
an independent risk factor for breast cancer: a comprehensive review and
meta-analysis. J Epidemiol Community Health 1996;50:481-96.
8
Melbye M, Wohlfahrt J, Olsen JH, Frisch M, Westergaard T, Helweg
Larsen K, et al. Induced abortion and the risk of breast cancer. N Engl J
Med 1997;336:81-5.
9
Taubes G. Epidemiology faces its limits. Science 1995;269:164-9.
10 Black WC, Haggstrom DA, Welch HG. All-cause mortality in randomized
trials of cancer screening. J Natl Cancer Inst 2002;94:167-73.
11 Raffle AE, Alden B, Mackenzie EF. Detection rates for abnormal cervical
smears: what are we screening for? Lancet 1995;345:1469-73.
Endpiece
On music
Music authorises, invites the conclusion that the
theoretical and practical sciences, that rational
investigation will never map experience
exhaustively. That there are phenomena “at the
centre”. . . which will endure, boundlessly alive and
indispensable, but “outside.” This is, quite
straightforwardly, the proof of the meta-physical.
Music is significant to the utmost degree; it is also,
strictly considered, meaningless. There abides its
“transgression” beyond intellect.
George Steiner. Errata: an examined life.
London: Phoenix, 1998:75-6
The dangers of our times
Both cancer and heart disease intensify our
awareness of the dangers of our times and of the
man-made sources of much misery. But the
governmental response is meant to obfuscate this
vision of sickness as meaning something is wrong
with the social order and to replace (medicalize) it
with narrowly technical questions. Is there a better
mirror of what we are about?
Arthur Kleinmann. The illness narratives.
Suffering, healing, and the human condition.
New York: Basic Books, 1988
Submitted by Iona Heath,
general practitioner, London
Education and debate
891
BMJ VOLUME 324
13 APRIL 2002
bmj.com