

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Non-contact ACL injuries in female athletes: an
International Olympic Committee current concepts
statement
P Renstrom,1 A Ljungqvist,2 E Arendt,3 B Beynnon,4 T Fukubayashi,5 W Garrett,6
T Georgoulis,7 T E Hewett,8 R Johnson,4 T Krosshaug,9 B Mandelbaum,10 L Micheli,11
G Myklebust,9 E Roos,12 H Roos,13 P Schamasch,14 S Shultz,15 S Werner,16 E Wojtys,17
L Engebretsen18
1 IOC Medical Commission and
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden; 2 IOC Medical
Commission, Lausanne,
Switzerland; 3 Department of
Orthopedics, University of
Minnesota, Minnesota, USA;
4 University of Vermont College of
Medicine, Vermont, USA;
5 Faculty of Sports Sciences,
University of Waseda, Tokyo,
Japan; 6 Sports Medicine Centre,
Duke University, Durham, North
Carolina, USA; 7 Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, University of
Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece;
8 Cincinnati Children’s Sports
Medicine Biomechanics Centre,
Human Performance Laboratory,
University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA;
9 Oslo Sports Trauma Research
Center, Norwegian School of
Sports Sciences, Oslo, Norway;
10Chivas USA and LA Galaxy,
Pepperdine University, FIFA
Medical Committee, FMARC
Member, Malibu, California, USA;
11Harvard Medical School
Division of Sports Medicine,
Children’s Hospital, Boston, USA;
12Institute of Sports Science and
Clinical Biomechanics, University
of Southern Denmark,
Denmark; 13Department of
Orthopedics, Lund University,
Lund, Sweden; 14IOC Medical
and Scientific Department,
Lausanne, Switzerland;
15Department of Exercise and
Sports Science, University of
North Carolina at Greensboro,
North Carolina, USA;
16Stockholm Sports Trauma
Research Center, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden;
17Medsport, University of
Michigan, Michigan, USA;
18Scientific Activities IOC and
Orthopaedic Center, Ullevaal
University Hospital and Oslo
Sports Trauma Research Center,
Oslo, Norway
Correspondence to:
Professor Emeritus Per
Renstro¨m, Flo¨tviksva¨gen 51,
Ha¨sselby, 16572 Sweden;
per.renstrom@telia.com
Accepted 14 April 2008
ABSTRACT
The incidence of anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injury
remains high in young athletes. Because female athletes
have a much higher incidence of ACL injuries in sports
such as basketball and team handball than male athletes,
the IOC Medical Commission invited a multidisciplinary
group of ACL expert clinicians and scientists to (1) review
current evidence including data from the new
Scandinavian ACL registries; (2) critically evaluate high-
quality studies of injury mechanics; (3) consider the key
elements of successful prevention programmes; (4)
summarise clinical management including surgery and
conservative management; and (5) identify areas for
further research. Risk factors for female athletes suffering
ACL injury include: (1) being in the preovulatory phase of
the menstrual cycle compared with the postovulatory
phase; (2) having decreased intercondylar notch width on
plain radiography; and (3) developing increased knee
abduction moment (a valgus intersegmental torque)
during impact on landing. Well-designed injury prevention
programmes reduce the risk of ACL for athletes,
particularly women. These programmes attempt to alter
dynamic loading of the tibiofemoral joint through
neuromuscular and proprioceptive training. They empha-
sise proper landing and cutting techniques. This includes
landing softly on the forefoot and rolling back to the
rearfoot, engaging knee and hip flexion and, where
possible, landing on two feet. Players are trained to avoid
excessive dynamic valgus of the knee and to focus on the
‘‘knee over toe position’’ when cutting.
The incidence of anterior cruciate ligament (ACL)
injury remains high, especially in young athletes
aged 14–19 years. In spite of the fact that some
successful
prevention
programmes
have
been
introduced, ACL injury continues to be the largest
single problem in orthopaedic sports medicine,
with the incidence of non-contact ACL tears being
much higher in female athletes in sports such as
basketball
and
team
handball
than
in
male
athletes.
As ACL injury remains a significant problem,
especially in young female athletes, procedures for
improved prevention and management are needed.
The mechanism of ACL injury is an important
focus of discussion, as an ACL tear is more often a
non-contact event with a deceleration or a change
of direction manoeuvre than a contact or direct
blow injury. A prophylactic neuromuscular and
proprioceptive training programme may reduce the
number of ACL injuries in female athletes.
The President of the International Olympic
Committee (IOC) Jacques Rogge stated in 2001
that ‘‘the most important goal of the IOC Medical
Commission is to protect the health of the
athlete’’. The IOC Medical Commission therefore
invited a group of physicians, physical therapists,
biomechanists and scientists active in ACL research
to review current evidence relating to risk factors,
prevention programmes and the need for further
research concerning non-contact ACL injury in
young female athletes.
EPIDEMIOLOGY OF ANTERIOR CRUCIATE
LIGAMENT INJURIES
The incidence of ACL injuries in the sporting
population has been estimated from a variety of
sources including data on surgical reconstructions.
Three national ACL surgical registries have been
established (Norway 2004, Denmark 2005 and
Sweden 2006)1 to gather information on the details
of ACL surgery and to monitor the outcomes of
this surgery. Information is gathered through a
registration form completed by the surgeon post-
operatively. From these registries we can estimate
an incidence of ACL injury, although this number
under-represents the true incidence as non-opera-
tive ACL injuries are not captured.
From the Norwegian data, a total of 2793
primary ACL ligament reconstruction operations
were registered by 57 hospitals during 18 months.
This corresponds to an annual population inci-
dence of primary ACL reconstruction surgeries of
34 per 100 000 citizens (85 per 100 000 citizens in
the main at-risk age group of 16–39 years). The
number of ACL operations differs between the
sexes in the second decade of life, with females
having the most ACL reconstructions in the 15–19-
year age group (fig 1).1
In looking at a possible difference between the
sexes, in 2005–6 the Swedish Registry found a
higher proportion of both primary ACL reconstruc-
tions and revisions in men than in women (59% vs
41% and 55% vs 45%, respectively). In an active
German population the overall incidence was 70
per 100 000 citizens in the more physically active
proportion of the population.2 In Sweden the
incidence of ACL injury in the population aged
10–64 years was 81 per 100 000 citizens.2
Review
394
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 2 (native) -----
ACL injuries: select sports
Looking at the ACL injury rates produced in select sports, the
National
Collegiate
Athletics
Association
(NCAA)
Injury
Surveillance System (ISS) provides us with a unique 16-year
sample of 15 sports across a college age group (typically 18–
23 years).3 The ISS is a collection of data from representative
colleges and universities (15% on average) and is not a registry.
Approximately 5000 ACL injuries were reported over 16 years,
producing an average of 313 injuries per year in the sample.
Assuming the sample represents 15% of the total population,
this equates to an average of more than 2000 ACL injuries in
these 15 activities per year. If the number of reported injuries is
considered, American football produced the greatest number of
ACL injuries. However, if ACL injuries are ranked as a percentage
of ACL injuries on a team compared with all injuries on that
team, female sports dominate the list (female football/soccer,
female lacrosse, female gymnastics and female basketball;
fig 2A). If the ACL injury rate per 1000 exposures is considered,
female gymnastics rate first with men’s spring American
football second, closely followed by female football/soccer,
female basketball and men’s in-season American football
(fig 2B).
Taken as a whole, the most common mechanism of ACL
injuries for the sports commonly associated with this injury was
non-contact in nature. The exceptions were men’s American
football, men’s ice hockey and men’s wrestling.
The NCAA data report exposures as one session of sport
(either practice or play) and do not record exposure in terms of
hours. In this data set, the largest difference in injury rate
(injury/athletic exposure 61000) between the sexes was in
football/soccer (females twice that of men) and basketball
(females three times that of men). Despite significant changes in
the pace of the game of football/soccer and basketball and the
improvement in sport-specific skills of females in general, the
rate of non-contact ACL injury has remained stable over the 16-
year period of NCAA data collection.4
For the age group slightly younger than college level (14–
18 years), the rate of non-contact ACL injuries in soccer was
twice as high in females as in males. For basketball the rate of
injury in the younger female age group is the highest—nearly
four times that of males. The ratio of male to female injuries
decreases slightly at the college level and approximates 1 at the
professional level (table 1).
Alpine skiing
There are no consistent data regarding differences between the
sexes in the incidence of ACL injuries in recreational skiing, but
female competitive alpine skiers have an incidence rate twice
that of male competitive alpine racers.5
Other studies have
reported that recreational skiers have the highest incidence of
injuries while expert skiers have the lowest incidence.6
The best longitudinal data in this sport are from a 34-year
case-control study in a single ski area in northern Vermont.
During this time there were 6 780 940 skier visits and these
were associated with 18 692 injuries, of which 2539 (14%) were
ACL tears. Since 1991 there has been a 40% decrease in the rate
of ACL injuries, with the incidence at the present time being
one ACL injury per 3101 skier visits. Women constituted 40% of
the control population but suffered 63% of all ACL injuries. The
risk ratio for women sustaining ACL injuries averaged 2.5 times
that of men in the time period of this study.5
Team handball
Several studies have reported the incidence of ACL injuries in
team handball. A retrospective study found that the incidence
of ACL injury was highest in women playing at the top level
(0.82 ACL injuries/1000 playing hours) compared with 0.31
injuries/1000
playing
hours
in
men.
The
relatively
high
incidence of ACL injuries in female players—particularly elite
Figure 1
Distribution of patients in the Norwegian National Knee
Ligament Registry by age and sex.
Figure 2
Occurrence of anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injury
expressed as (A) a percentage of all injuries and (B) the rate per 1000
exposures (games and practices combined, 1988–9 through 2003–4).
Review
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
395
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 3 (native) -----
players—has been confirmed by later prospective studies.6 7 The
highest incidence of ACL injuries occurred in female elite
handball in Norway with 2.29 ACL injuries/1000 match hours.
The incidence of ACL injury is high in team handball compared
with other team sports such as football/soccer, basketball and
volleyball. However, a direct comparison between the studies is
difficult because different methods were used to collect and
analyse the data and the way in which the incidence of ACL
injuries was reported was inconsistent. Some report the number
of injuries per 1000 playing hours while others report the
number of ACL injuries/1000 athlete exposures. Nevertheless,
all studies have found that women have a higher incidence of
ACL injuries than men.
The incidence rate of ACL injuries in all sports studied
appears to be significantly greater during competition than
during training and this finding is consistent among sports.6
RISK FACTORS FOR ACL INJURY
The fundamental basis for knee trauma prevention research is
that injuries are not random events; instead they occur in
patterns that reflect underlying causes. Understanding the
underlying causes—or risk factors—for one of the more severe
sports-related knee injuries—an ACL disruption—is important
for the development of intervention strategies and for identify-
ing those at increased risk of injury. This provides a target group
for intervention.
The risk factors for ACL injury have been considered as either
internal or external to an individual. External risk factors
include
type
of
competition,
footwear
and
surface,
and
environmental conditions. Internal risk factors include anato-
mical, hormonal and neuromuscular risk factors.
External risk factors
Competition in games versus practice
Very little is known about the effect of type of competition on
the risk of an athlete suffering ACL injury. Myklebust et al8
reported that athletes are at a higher risk of suffering an ACL
injury during a game than during practice. This finding
introduces the hypothesis that the level of competition, the
way in which an athlete competes, or some combination of the
two increases an athlete’s risk of suffering an ACL injury.
Footwear and playing surface
Although increasing the coefficient of friction between the
sports shoe and playing surface may improve traction and
sports performance, it also has the potential to increase the risk
of injury to the ACL. Lambson et al9 found that the risk of
suffering an ACL injury is greater in football athletes who have
boots with a higher number of cleats and an associated higher
torsional resistance at the foot-turf interface. Olsen et al10
reported that the risk of suffering an ACL injury is greater in
female team handball athletes who compete on artificial floors
that have a higher torsional resistance at the foot-floor interface
than in those who compete on wood floors. This relationship
did not exist for male athletes.
Protective equipment
Functional bracing appears to protect the ACL-deficient knee of
alpine skiers from repeated injury; however, the effect of these
braces on an ACL graft is inconclusive and requires more study.
Kocher et al11 studied professional skiers with ACL-deficient
knees and found a greater risk of knee injury in those who did
not wear a functional brace than in those who did use a brace
(risk ratio 6.4). McDevitt et al12 performed a randomised
controlled study of the use of functional braces in cadets
attending the US military academies who underwent ACL
reconstruction. At the 1-year follow-up the use of functional
bracing did not affect the rate of ACL graft re-injury. It is
important to point out that there were only three injuries
among those in the unbraced group and two injuries in the
braced group. This was an impressive study that required
considerable work, and a larger sample size that produces more
re-injuries may carry with it the capability to determine
whether or not functional bracing can reduce the likelihood of
ACL graft injury.
Meteorological conditions
For sports that are played on natural or artificial turf, the
mechanical interface between the foot and playing surface is
highly dependent on the meteorological conditions. However,
very little is known about the effect of these variables on an
athlete’s risk of suffering an ACL injury. Orchard et al13 reported
that non-contact ACL injuries sustained during Australian
football were more common during periods of low rainfall and
high evaporation. This work introduces the hypothesis that
meteorological conditions have a direct effect on the mechanical
interface (or traction) between the shoe and playing surface,
and this in turn has a direct effect on the likelihood of an athlete
suffering an ACL injury.
Summary and future directions for external risk factors
c
The evidence regarding an athlete’s complete external and
internal risk factor profile for ACL injury is unclear because
most of the investigations have studied isolated variables.
Only the investigation by Uhorchack et al14 used a multi-
variate approach to establish a selection of risk factors that
are associated with an athlete’s risk of suffering an ACL tear.
c
Very little is known about the effect of sport-specific factors
(eg, rules, referees, coaching), meteorological conditions (eg,
traction at the shoe-surface interface), playing surfaces and
protective equipment on the risk of suffering an ACL injury.
These potential risk factors merit further investigation.
c
Little is known about the effect of age, athleticism, skill
level, psychological characteristics and prior knee injury as
risk factors for ACL injury. For example, almost everything
that is known about the incidence rate of ACL injuries in
specific sports has come from studies performed in
Table 1
Rate of anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injuries relative to age
Exposures
Rate in females
Rate in males
Ratio of females
to males
High school
414493
0.09
0.02
4.50
Collegiate
15420034
0.29
0.08
3.63
Professional
115221
0.20
0.21
0.95
These data suggest that the rate of ACL injuries decreases as female athletes mature and the level of play increases.
Review
396
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 4 (native) -----
precollegiate (high school) and collegiate athletes. There are
very few data on the incidence of ACL disruptions in
subjects that are younger or older then this narrow age
group and, consequently, the effect of age on the likelihood
of suffering an ACL tear is not well understood.
Internal risk factors
Anatomical risk factors
Abnormal posture and lower extremity alignment (eg, hip, knee
and ankle) may predispose an individual to ACL injury by
contributing to increased ACL strain values; alignment of the
entire lower extremity should therefore be considered when
assessing risk factors for ACL injury. Unfortunately, very few
studies have studied alignment of the entire lower extremity
and determined how it is related to the risk of ACL injury. Most
of what is known has come from investigations of specific
anatomical measures.
Notch size and ACL geometry
The dimensions of the intercondylar notch have been the most
discussed anatomical feature in the published literature in
relation to acute ACL injuries. Geometric differences in the size
and shape of the ACL have not been well characterised. In
general, studies on ACL geometry and notch dimensions are
difficult to interpret because of the lack of standardised
methods to obtain the data. Despite the number of methods
for measuring the notch, notch width measurement of bilateral
knees with ACL injury is smaller than that of unilateral knees
with ACL injury, and notch widths of bilateral and unilateral
knees with injury to the ACL is smaller than notch widths of
normal controls. This implies a strong association between
notch width and ACL injury.15
In trying to understand the relationship between a small
notch and the risk of ACL injury, the size of the ACL has been
reviewed. Methods to determine both notch size and ACL
dimensions include radiographic, MRI and photographic tech-
niques. Despite these differences, recent reports have concluded
that the ACL is geometrically smaller in women than in men
when normalised by body mass index. The properties of the
ACL material may differ between the sexes, and there might be
an additional link to the association between notch width/ACL
size and ACL injury.
Posterior tibial slope
A highly significant correlation has been reported between the
posterior inferior tibial slope and anterior tibial translation.15 It
is well known in the veterinary literature that tibial plateau
levelling osteotomies are of value for the treatment of cranial
cruciate ligament ruptures.16 Although two small studies did not
find a relationship between non-contact ACL injuries and the
caudal slope of the tibia,15 17 there is new evidence to suggest
that more specific measurement of the lateral tibial slope angle
by MRI might be of value. One recent case-control study18
suggested
that
subjects
with
ACL-deficient
knees
had
a
significantly greater slope of the lateral tibial plateau and a
lower slope of the medial tibial plateau than a control group.
This paper suggests that the tibial slope of the medial and lateral
condyle should be compared separately.18 The causal relation-
ship between the posterior slope of the tibial plateau and ACL
injury, pivot shift grade, risk of re-injury and potential risk of
arthritis remain areas for future research.
Summary and future directions for anatomical risk factors
c
Although there is good evidence to suggest an association
between a smaller width of the intracondylar notch and an
increased risk of ACL injury and, on average, females have
smaller notches than males, the causal relationship between
the two are probably related to a smaller notch housing a
smaller ACL.
c
The internal-external rotatory laxity of the tibia relative to
the femur is difficult to measure. There is a spectrum of
biological variation and the threshold between normal and
pathological behaviour is not known. Its role in ACL injury
and its consequences remain unknown.
c
Anatomical risk factors may not be easy to correct; however,
it is important to understand them if we are to be able to
identify those at increased risk of an ACL injury.
Hormonal risk factors
Structure and mechanical properties of the ACL
Studies characterising the structure and mechanical properties
of the ACL indicate that women have smaller ACLs that may
have lower tensile linear stiffness, are characterised by less
elongation at failure and lower energy absorption and load at
failure than men.19 20 These differences are not explained
entirely by dimensional characteristics (ie, difference in size
between men and women). This is supported by similar sex
differences in the structure and mechanical properties (greater
elongation, greater strain and lower stiffness in women) of the
medial gastrocnemius21 and patellar22 tendons, which are also
not explained entirely by anatomical differences and tendon
size.
At the more macroscopic level, women also have greater
tibiofemoral joint laxity (ie, anterior knee laxity, genu recurva-
tum) and lower joint resistance to translation and rotation.23–27
These differences are not limited to the sagittal plane but are
also reflected in frontal and transverse plane motion.28–30
Together, these findings indicate that a broad physiological
mechanism (eg, hormone control, differences in articular
geometry, collagen turnover) may explain these sex differences,
which have been implicated in ACL injury.
Although the causes/mechanisms of these sex differences are
not
well
understood,
the
identification
of
sex
hormone
receptors (eg, oestrogen, testosterone, relaxin) on the human
ACL31–34 has prompted studies of the potential of sex hormones
to affect the structure, metabolism and mechanical properties of
the ACL. To date, no specific mechanism has been identified by
which hormones influence the biology and physiology of the
ACL, but there is enough evidence to suggest that hormones are
significant factors in the normal biology and physiology of
collagen, muscle and bone.
The conflicting findings to date are in large part due to our
poor understanding of this complex system, and unfortunately
the various models used to examine these relationships are often
not directly comparable. To understand the full effects of
hormones on soft tissue and ACL injury, researchers must:
c
Consider the effects of oestrogen, progesterone and testos-
terone (at a minimum) on knee injuries in regularly
menstruating, physically active women. The relevance of
various animal studies (because of their physiological
differences, oestrus cycles) are of unknown significance to
the human ACL and other soft tissues.15
c
Account for the individual variability in hormone profiles
and thus their effects (eg, injury, laxity and other soft tissue
differences). This individual variability is significant and
methods (especially sampling techniques) used to examine
Review
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
397
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 5 (native) -----
such parameters of menstrual cycle phase and hormone
levels must reflect this complexity. Although the question-
naire-based method of characterising ‘‘phasing’’ of the
menstrual cycle is convenient, it does not provide an
accurate representation of a female’s hormone milieu.35
Further, studies that examine joint laxity, muscle properties
and biomechanics at a single time point per cycle phase are
not adequate to identify the parameters of interest, and this
approach does not reflect the complexity of the variations in
the magnitude, timing and relative phasing of hormone
changes across the female menstrual cycle, even among
women who have a ‘‘normal’’ 28-day cycle.36 In addition,
the effects of hormones are not immediate but occur with a
time delay. It is therefore important to capture the hormone
profile on days leading up to injury or testing.
c
Understand how normal training, competition and stress
(injury, environment, etc) alter the female hormone milieu
and their ultimate effects on musculoskeletal tissue.
c
Realise that the effects of hormones and their ultimate
effects on soft tissue structures are on a continuum.
Oestrogen, progesterone and testosterone are present in
both men and women, with concentrations of individual
hormones varying widely both within and between sexes.
Similarly, men and women vary widely in joint behaviour
(joint laxity and stiffness) and neuromuscular control.
Although women are, on average, more prone to these
extremes, men also experience large variations.
It is clear that there are sex differences in muscle performance.
It is well accepted that mechanical loading will affect the
biology and physiology of tendons and ligaments. However, the
extent to which absolute hormone concentrations or variations
across the cycle augment or inhibit tissue remodelling in
response to mechanical stress is yet to be understood.
ACL injury and the menstrual cycle
There appears to be a consensus emerging from the literature
that the likelihood of incurring an ACL injury does not remain
constant during the menstrual cycle, with a significantly greater
risk during the preovulatory phase than during the postovula-
tory phase. Initial work by Wojtys et al35 used self-reported
menstrual history data to characterise the menstrual status of a
subject at the time of injury and demonstrated a significantly
greater prevalence of non-contact ACL injuries among women
athletes during the preovulatory phase of the menstrual cycle.
In a subsequent study by the same group,37 urine levels of
oestrogen, progesterone and luteinising hormone metabolites
were used to characterise a subject’s menstrual status at the
time of injury. This confirmed that significantly more ACL
injuries occurred during days 9–14 of a 28-day cycle with fewer
injuries than expected during the postovulatory phase (defined
as day 15 to the end of the cycle). Arendt et al38 found that
female athletes were at increased risk of suffering an ACL injury
during
the
preovulatory
phase
of
their
menstrual
cycle
compared with the postovulatory phase. Slauterbeck et al39 also
reported a disproportionally greater number of ACL injuries
during the preovulatory phase of the menstrual cycle, with
fewer injuries occurring as the cycle progressed. In a study of
recreational alpine skiers, serum concentrations of progesterone
and oestradiol were used to stage the phase of a skier’s
menstrual cycle at the time of ACL injury.40 Skiers in the
preovulatory phase of their menstrual cycle were significantly
more
likely
to
suffer
an
ACL
tear
than
those
in
the
postovulatory phase (odds ratio 3.22). A comparison between
this investigation and the previous study by Wojtys et al
revealed a striking similarity. In the study of recreational alpine
skiers, 74% of the women with ACL injuries were in the
preovulatory phase of their menstrual cycle and 26% were in the
postovulatory phase. Likewise, Wojtys et al37 found that 72.5%
of the women not using oral contraception experienced ACL
injuries during the preovulatory phase of their menstrual cycle
compared with 27.5% during the postovulatory phase. In
contrast, Myklebust et al8 studied competitive European team
handball players over 3 years and found an increased risk of
ACL injury during the week before or just after the onset of
menstruation.
The stabilising effect of oral contraceptives on the female
hormone profile and our understanding of their ultimate impact
(both acute and chronic) on soft tissue behaviour, injury or
performance is yet to be defined. It is important to realise that
the type (ie, progesterone only versus combined oestrogen and
progesterone compounds) and dosage varies widely among oral
contraceptives, and both endogenous and exogenous levels must
be accounted for. There is no conclusive evidence that oral
contraceptives have a protective effect specifically against ACL
injury.
Summary of hormonal risk factors
c
Women have smaller ACLs that may have lower linear
stiffness, less elongation at failure and lower energy
absorption and load at failure compared with men.
Women also have greater joint laxity and decreased
muscular stiffness. While the specific causes/mechanisms
for these sex differences are not well understood, hormonal
involvement is implicated as they extend beyond pure
anatomical differences.
c
Research to date suggests that oestrogen alone is probably
not responsible for changes in the structure, metabolism and
mechanical properties of the ACL as interactions with cyclic
loading and other hormones appear to alter the effects of
oestradiol. However, the role of other sex hormones (eg,
relaxin, progesterone, testosterone) in the biology and
pathology of the ACL are poorly understood.
c
Although animal studies have improved our understanding
of the effects of hormones on the mechanical and metabolic
properties of the ACL, their clinical relevance to the human
ACL is questionable.
c
Hormone profiles vary widely among women with regard to
the timing, phasing and amplitude of hormone changes
across the cycle. This variability suggests that some women
may experience greater effects of sex hormones on ligament
biology than others, potentially exposing those individuals
to greater changes in structural integrity and risk of injury.
c
There is a paucity of clinical research examining these effects
in women who are oligomenorrhoeic or use contraceptive
hormones, and who represent a large percentage of the
physically active female population.
c
There appears to be mounting evidence that women are at a
significantly greater risk of ACL injury during the pre-
ovulatory phase of the menstrual cycle than during the
postovulatory phase.
Future directions
c
Future basic science studies investigating the effects of
hormones on the structure, metabolism and mechanical
properties of collagen should examine all relevant hormones
at their normal physiological concentrations using models
relevant to the physically active female.
Review
398
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 6 (native) -----
c
It is critical that study designs address the complexity of the
female menstrual cycle, including the potential time delay
effects and individual variations in hormone profiles.
Sampling at multiple time points within a phase is
recommended.
c
Future studies should extend beyond normal menstruating
females and examine the effects of hormone variations
(amenorrhoea, oligomenorrhoea, oral contraceptive use) on
both acute and chronic soft tissue changes and the potential
for injury.
c
Limited evidence suggests that hormones may modify the
normal remodelling effects of collagen secondary to
mechanical loading. Future studies should examine these
effects in combination using models relevant to the
physically active female.
c
Future studies should aim to examine how normal training,
competition and stress (injury, environment) alter the
female hormone milieu and their ultimate effects on
musculoskeletal tissue.
MECHANISMS FOR NON-CONTACT ACL INJURIES
To develop specific methods for preventing sports injuries, it is
important to understand the causative event or mechanism of
injury, as outlined by Bahr and Krosshaug.41 A number of
different methodological approaches have been used to study
the mechanisms of injury in sports.42 These include interviews
with injured athletes, analysis of video recordings of actual
injuries, clinical studies (where the clinical joint damage is
studied to understand the mechanism of the injury), in vivo
studies (measuring ligament strain or forces to understand
ligament loading patterns), cadaver studies, mathematical
modelling and simulation of injury situations, or measure-
ments/estimation from ‘‘close to injury’’ situations.
Video analysis
Video analysis is essential as it is usually the only way to obtain
kinematic information from the actual event. In rare cases,
injuries have even occurred during biomechanical experiments,
but for obvious ethical reasons we cannot base our research on
this approach. Six studies have used video analysis to study non-
contact ACL injury mechanisms in sports (table 2).43–48
These studies were in general agreement that injuries
occurred in cutting or landing situations. The knee was reported
to be relatively straight at the point of injury. All the studies
agreed that knee valgus was seen frequently. Boden et al43 found
that the amount of internal/external rotation at the time of
rupture was minimal. This agrees with the findings of Olsen et
al46 where the amount of internal/external knee rotation was
10u or less in 90% of the cases. However, the interpretation of
the findings varied considerably. Olsen et al46 stated that valgus
loading in combination with external or internal knee rotation
caused the injury and proposed notch impingement as a
plausible cause of the excessive ACL loading. Boden et al43 and
Teitz,45 on the other hand, hypothesised that a vigorous
eccentric quadriceps contraction was the main cause.
Unfortunately, the reported variables among the studies
using the visual inspection approach are non-standardised,
making it difficult to compare them. Another major limitation
of these studies is that all except from one are based on visual
inspection. Krosshaug et al49 validated the visual inspection
method and found the accuracy and precision among six
experienced ACL researchers to be poor. For example, it was
found that the true knee flexion angle was generally twice as
high as the estimate. When the analysts estimated 30u knee
flexion, the true angle was 50–60u. Results from studies based
on this method must therefore be interpreted with great
caution.
To overcome the inherent difficulties of visual inspection of
human motion from video, Krosshaug et al50 developed a novel
and versatile technique using model-based image matching from
one or more camera views. In this method, 3D models of the
surroundings as well as a customised skeleton model are
manually matched to the background video footage. This
method proved to be much more accurate with a difference in
root
mean
square
from
traditional
marker-based
motion
analysis of ,12u for hip and knee flexion/extension. In a new
study, Krosshaug et al48 demonstrated the feasibility of this
method to actual injury videos. Detailed time courses for joint
kinematics and ground reaction force were obtained for a four-
camera basketball video and a three-camera European team
handball video. The valgus angle increased abruptly in both
cases, from 4u to 15u within 30 ms and from 3u to 16u within
40 ms for the basketball and handball injury, respectively.
However, in order to make general statements on typical injury
kinematics, a systematic approach to collecting and analysing
more injury videos is needed.
Biomechanical studies
Recent studies have consistently shown that the predominant
forces that affect strain in the ACL are anterior-directed shear
forces applied to the tibia (either from external sources such as
an anterior-directed force applied to the back of the lower leg or
Table 2
Use of video analysis to study mechanisms of non-contact ACL injury in sport
Reference
Total
No. analysed Methods and materials
Boden et al
43
27
15
Visual inspection and questionnaires. Videos obtained from professional and
collegiate teams: football (56%), basketball (30%), soccer (9%), volleyball
(4%). 7 women, 16 men
Ebstrup et al
44
15
3
Visual inspection. Prospective collection of videos from Danish indoor ball
games. Two representative handball injuries and one basketball injury
analysed. All women
Teitz
45
54
14
Visual inspection. Retrospective multicentre video analysis: 20 basketball, 18
football, 9 soccer injuries. Only basketball injuries analysed. 3 men, 11
women
Olsen et al
46
20
19
Visual inspection and questionnaires. Retrospective and prospective video
collection of women’s Norwegian or international handball competition
Krosshaug et al
47
39
30
Visual inspection. Retrospective video collection from high school, college and
NBA, WNBA basketball. 13 men, 17 women
Krosshaug et al
48
3
2
3D model-based image matching. One male NBA basketball player (4 camera
views), one female Norwegian elite team handball player (3 camera views)
Review
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
399
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 7 (native) -----
through internal mechanisms such as contraction of the
dominant quadriceps muscles with the knee near extension).
Important contributions to ACL strain values come from forces
applied in the coronal and transverse planes of the knee.
Biomechanical data have come from cadaveric studies of knees,
strain gauges placed in vivo at the time of surgery and from
analytical modelling. Cadaveric studies show that anterior-
directed shear forces create most strain in the ACL with some
added
increase
from
varus,
valgus
and
internal
rotation
moments.51–53 External torque applied to the knee produces
relatively low ACL strain values. Valgus torque alone creates
ACL strain only after significant injury to the medial collateral
ligament. Interestingly, complete injury to the medial collateral
ligament was necessary before significant injury to the ACL due
to valgus torques applied in isolation.54 These cadaveric studies
emphasise the importance of anterior shear forces in ACL
injury.
With the knee near full extension, contraction of the
quadriceps muscle—and the resulting force developed in the
patellar tendon—produces an anterior-directed shear force on
the proximal aspect of the tibia that strains the ACL. The ACL
strain values are proportional to the magnitude of force in
the patellar tendon and the angle of flexion of the knee. The
patella
tendon
forms
an
angle
with
the
tibia
and
its
geometric orientation is able to produce ACL strain when the
knee is near extension. An impulsive load applied to the
patellar tendon with the knee in slight flexion has the potential
to create an injury to the ACL.55 Application of patellar
tendon force alone could cause enough ACL strain to alter it
grossly and to increase anterior knee laxity. Application of
impulse to a cadaveric knee flexed at 25u increased strain in the
ACL. When the impulse was applied 15u out of the knee flexion
plane to create a valgus force, the amount of strain was
increased.56
In vivo studies have produced similar conclusions. Strain
gauges were placed on the ACL after arthroscopic surgery in
which the ACL was normal. The gauges were left in place long
enough for the subjects to recover and perform rehabilitation
exercises with moderate contraction of the leg musculature.57
Strain in the ACL is affected by anterior-directed shear loads
applied to the tibia (relative to the femur) and a little by varus/
valgus
torques.
Rehabilitation
exercises
can
also
produce
significant strain in the ACL. Exercises that include contrac-
fotion of the quadriceps in isolation with the knee near full
extension produce high ACL strain values, while co-contraction
of the hamstring muscles in combination with contraction of
the dominant quadriceps muscles reduces ACL strain values in
comparison to contraction of the quadriceps muscle group in
isolation. Strain gauges have been implanted in subjects
undergoing
a
high
speed
stop
jump.
The
ACL
was
strained before heel strike and reached a maximum value very
close to the maximal ground reaction force at landing.58
Cadaveric and in vivo studies have not clearly elucidated the
biomechanical factors seen in the motion analysis studies of
ACL injury. These studies often show a prominent motion in
the coronal plane that involves femoral adduction and internal
rotation, knee flexion and valgus, tibial rotation, and foot and
ankle
valgus.
Motion
analysis
studies
show
a
complex
connected combination of movements which appear as an
apparent valgus in the coronal plane but probably have only
a relatively small contribution from actual medial opening of
the knee, which would injure the medial collateral ligament if
all the apparent valgus was isolated to coronal plane knee
motion.
Kinematic analysis
Kinematic analysis of athletic college students revealed several
differences in motion during running, side-step cutting and
cross-over cutting. Women landed with less knee flexion and
maintained a straighter knee during the entire stance phase. In
addition to flexion, women displayed more valgus through the
entire stance phase. It should be pointed out that the flexion
occurs at the knee itself, while the valgus seen in the coronal
plane could not have come entirely from rotation of the tibia
around a stationary femur in the coronal plane but includes hip
internal and external rotation combined with knee flexion. The
muscle firing was assessed by electromyography (EMG). The
quadriceps EMG was higher in women, with activation levels
nearly twice those of the maximum EMG levels in muscle under
maximum loading conditions in a dynamometer. Hamstring
activity was less in women and the EMG values were only
about half the level of a maximum measured by a dynam-
ometer. ACL injuries appear to occur with hard and awkward
landings on the knee when it is positioned near extension. The
female knee is in more extension and has higher quadriceps
activation at initial contact with the ground. The straighter
knee and the higher quadriceps activation can combine to
produce more strain in the ACL.59
A kinetic and kinematic analysis was performed for men and
women performing a forward jump with a stop on a force plate
followed by a jump slightly behind, straight above, or slightly
ahead of the initial landing location.60 Inverse dynamics allowed
computation of anterior shear forces which would act to
produce strain on the ACL. Women had greater anterior-
directed shear forces on the tibia for all jump conditions.
Maximum ACL strains were observed near the initial contact
period.61 Fatigue studies using a similar kinetic analysis showed
that fatigue increased anterior-directed shear forces in both men
and women.62
A kinematic study of young male and female football/soccer
players showed that boys and girls land from a stop jump with a
similar amount of knee flexion and valgus at ages 11 and 12.
However, women begin to land with straighter knees progres-
sively up to age 16.63
A mechanism seen frequently in ACL injuries involves a hard
and awkward landing with the knee near extension (eg,
straight). The hard landing implies high forces that are not
‘‘dampened’’ by hip, knee and foot motions. The ‘‘awkward’
part of the landing may involve landing outside the anticipated
landing manner with higher than usual abduction or valgus
moments applied about the hip and knee joints.64
Summary and future directions for mechanisms of ACL injury
c
Whole body motions related to mechanisms of injury:
almost 80% of ACL injuries are non-contact in nature.
Injuries often occur when landing from a jump, cutting or
decelerating. A combination of anterior tibial translation
and lower extremity valgus are probably important compo-
nents of the mechanism of injury in these athletes.
c
Likely components to the injury mechanism include:
anterior translation, dynamic valgus of the lower extremity
with the joint near extension, low flexion probably due to
increased quadriceps activity (and this could also include
increased gastrocnemius activity), most or all of the force on
a single leg or foot with the foot displaced away from the
body’s centre of mass and increased trunk motion.
c
Potential neuromuscular imbalances may be related to
components of the injury mechanism: women have more
‘‘quadriceps dominant’’ neuromuscular patterns than men.
Review
400
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Hamstring recruitment has been shown to be significantly
higher in men than in women. The hamstring to quadriceps
peak torque ratio tends to be greater in men than in women.
c
Because of the likely injury mechanism, it is recommended
that athletes avoid knee valgus and land with more knee
flexion.
Lower extremity valgus (knee abduction) loading and anterior
tibial translation are likely to be involved in the mechanism.
Future research should combine several research approaches to
validate the findings such as video analysis, clinical studies,
laboratory motion analysis, cadaver simulation and mathema-
tical simulation.
EVALUATION OF ACL INJURY
Little is known about differences between the sexes in the
evaluation of ACL injury. We therefore suggest that future
studies should include large enough sample sizes to allow
detection of possible sex differences in the outcomes of
interest.
Natural history
There is a little knowledge about the natural history of an
ACL injury. The true incidence is probably not known. With
MRI as a diagnostic tool the incidence is 8 per 10 000, which
has been verified by register studies.1 65 However, it can be
assumed that many patients with ACL injuries are not
diagnosed at the time of the injury. A proportion of these
athletes will present with knee symptoms or after re-injury.
Others will never be diagnosed and are either without
symptoms or have adapted to the altered knee function.
The proportion of these categories is unknown. In a US
community-based cohort there was a prevalence of ACL
injuries of 4.8% in individuals aged 50–90 years unselected for
problems.65
The course of an ACL injury depends on many different
factors such as trauma mechanism, associated injuries, anato-
mical factors and activity level after the injury. There is no
evidence of a sex difference. Independent of treatment, some
patients will cope with their desired activity level (‘‘copers’’),
some will adapt to an activity level adjusted for the knee
function (‘‘adaptors’’) and others will be unable to cope with
being ACL-deficient (‘‘non-copers’’). Earlier reports show that
each of these groups constitutes about one-third of the
population.66 This is supported by a recent study of primarily
non-operatively treated ACLs.67
Summary and future directions for evaluation of ACL injury
c
The diagnosis is made by a history of sudden knee pain
during strenuous activity, an inability to continue, a ‘‘pop’’,
haemarthrosis.
c
The activity level is difficult to determine because there are
no solid data on the normal decrease in activity level
without injury. In the longer perspective, the level of
activity does not seem to be differ with different treatments.
The course is determined by whether they are copers,
adaptors or non-copers. There is no accurate way to define
the categories in the acute phase.
c
No good data exist on the natural history of untreated
lesions combined with a compliant training programme and
various levels of post-injury activity levels.
c
Prospective studies are needed to study the natural history
of the cohort, but these are difficult to carry out.
Associated injuries
As evaluated by MRI, an isolated ACL is an infrequent
phenomenon although associated ligament injuries may not
be very common.65 In the Norwegian National Knee Ligament
Registry (NLKR), a total of 2793 primary cruciate ligament
reconstruction surgeries were registered by 57 hospitals.1 In 27
cases (1%) a lateral collateral ligament injury was reported,
while a medial collateral ligament injury was reported in 129
cases
(5%).
Non-operative
treatment
of
medial
collateral
ligament injury is effective if combined with reconstruction of
the ACL.68
Knees with acute ACL injuries should be evaluated for
meniscus tears as these are identified in approximately 50% of
cases.69 Lateral meniscus tears are more frequent in the acute
setting while medial meniscus tears are associated with chronic
ACL deficiency.70 In the NLKR there were a total of 1287 (47%)
associated meniscus tears, 90% of which were treated surgi-
cally.1 In a study of ACL injury in 151 patients (36% women),
38% had an associated medial meniscus tear.65 ACL injury is a
major long-term risk factor for the development of osteoar-
thritis, and no currently available treatment has been shown to
reduce this risk factor.71 It is not clear if it is the associated
meniscus tear at baseline, the development of a secondary
meniscus injury, the meniscectomy or all of these that
constitute risk factors for the development of osteoarthritis of
the knee.72
Articular cartilage lesions were reported in 712 knees (26%) in
the NKLR, 59% of which were treated surgically.1 When grading
the cartilage lesions according to the International Cartilage
Repair Society classification,73 222 (31%) cases were classified as
grade 1, 283 (40%) as grade 2, 151 (21%) as grade 3 and 49 (7%)
as grade 4 (grading was missing in 7 cases).
MRI is useful in assessing associated injuries such as bone
contusions, intra-articular fractures and associated ligament
injuries. One recent study has mapped out concomitant
fractures and meniscus injuries and traumatic bone marrow
lesions in the acute ACL injured knee by MRI and quantitative
MRI (qMRI) in 121 subjects (26% women). Most of the ACL
injured knees had a cortical depression fracture which was
associated with larger volumes of bone marrow lesions.74
Clinical examination
Physical examination
Examinations appear to detect differences in end point better
than differences in displacement.75 Joint motion varies within a
normal population but there is little left-to-right variation in
normal subjects. The ACL functions as a primary stabiliser to
limit anterior tibial displacement and a secondary stabiliser to
restrain tibial motion. The accuracy of diagnostic tests for ACL
injury has been questioned. A positive pivot shift test result is
best for ruling in an ACL rupture, whereas a negative Lachman
test result is best for ruling out an ACL rupture. It is also
concluded that, using sensitivity and specificity values only, the
Lachman test is better overall for ruling in and ruling out ACL
ruptures.76
The first clinical examination after an acute knee trauma has
a low diagnostic value. For isolated ACLs, physical examination
continues to have high specificity. Instrumented testing devices
and stress radiography are used for objective measures but their
use seems to be declining. Further assessment with MRI
improves the chances of a correct diagnosis of intra-articular
pathology and is recommended in the early phase after
rotational knee trauma.65 The accuracy of MRI in predicting
ACL injuries is 95% or more.
Review
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
401
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Outcome scores and outcome after ACL injury
During the last decade, consensus has been reached within the
field of sports medicine, orthopaedics and general medicine that
the primary outcome measure in clinical trials should be
patient-relevant. Thus patient-reported outcomes with different
focus have been developed, usually categorised as generic, joint-
specific or disease-specific. For patients with ACL injury,
disease-specific, joint-specific and generic instruments are used.
Books and literature reviews outlining and comparing the
currently available instruments for patients with knee com-
plaints have been published.77–80
Validity, reliability and responsiveness
The most important property of an outcome measure is the
responsiveness. For a measure to show high responsiveness in
clinical studies, good validity and reliability are necessary
prerequisites. A safe choice is therefore to choose an outcome
measure with proven large effect sizes.
Validity is not an absolute or dichotomous property, and
validation is a continuously ongoing process. The correlation
between knee pathology and the patient’s perception is
generally weak,81 indicating that, for patient-relevant outcome
measures, the more important aspect is that the measure is
validated for patients of similar age, sex and physical activity
level rather than the specific knee pathology. A further fact in
support of this view is that knee pathologies such as ACL tear,
meniscal tear or cartilage injury often coincide and symptoms
from specific pathologies cannot be separated.82
Score aggregation and score categorisation
Structural outcomes such as joint laxity and radiographic
changes do not correlate well with patient-relevant aspects
such as pain and function. Aggregating these outcomes into one
total score will jeopardise interpretation of the results, and
outcomes on different levels need to be reported separately.
Tapper and Hoover83 introduced a system for evaluation of
symptoms and function following meniscectomy in 1969 in
which they categorised outcome into four categories: excellent,
good, fair and poor. This approach is appealing and the raw
scores
of
established
knee
scoring
scales
are
frequently
categorised into these same four categories using arbitrarily
chosen cut-off values. However, categorisation can introduce
bias and lack of precision. The Lysholm scoring scale78 is a
commonly used knee injury scoring scale which aggregates
function and symptoms into one single score from 0 to 100
(worst to best). A cut-off of 84 points is used to categorise a
good/excellent outcome. But what does a Lysholm score of 84
really represent? A patient could have a slight limp, some
problems with stairs and some pain and be categorised as good/
excellent with a total score of 89 out of 100. Alternatively, a
patient could experience frequent instability that precludes
sports activity, have some pain and yet score 85 and be
categorised as having a good/excellent outcome. Most probably
the patients themselves would not categorise either of these
scenarios as a good/excellent outcome. Categorising the raw
scores of rating scales tends to inflate the result, and the
interpretation of categorical data depends on the content of the
particular rating scale and the relative weight given to each
component aggregated into the total score.84 Individuals rated as
excellent or good on one scale may therefore be rated as only fair
on another scale. Avoidance of data generalisation remains the
optimal method for studying the outcome of knee injury.84
Administration mode of questionnaires
Substantial bias may be introduced if the operating surgeon
answers the questionnaire.85 This also holds true for ‘‘unbiased’’
observers and applies to orthopaedic conditions other than ACL
injury as well.86 87 Patient-relevant questionnaires should thus be
self-administered (ie, filled out by the patients themselves in a
neutral
setting).
The
administration
mode
needs
to
be
accounted for when comparing the patient-relevant outcomes
between studies and over time within the same group of
patients. The awareness of interviewer bias has increased over
the years and more recently developed outcome measures are
intended for self-administration.
Summary and future directions for outcome scores and outcomes
c
It is important to evaluate the patient’s perspective of ACL
injury.
c
To minimise bias, patient-administered questionnaires
should be used.
c
Aggregating structural outcomes, symptoms and function
into one total score will jeopardise interpretation of the
results, and outcomes on different levels need to be reported
separately.
c
Categorising the result of a score into good/excellent, fair
and poor should be avoided as this will inflate the results,
introduce bias and lacks precision.
Motion analysis
ACL injury increases pathological anterior tibial translation and
internal tibial rotation. Motion analysis enables detection of
subtle kinetic and kinematic changes that may influence the
final clinical outcome. There has been a gradual development of
functional
adaptations that protect
the knee joint from
excessive anterior translation episodes. Such a mechanism is
limited quadriceps function near extension (the quadriceps
avoidance pattern) and increased and prolonged hamstring
activity.
Another possible mechanism of chondral damage is increased
internal tibial rotation which can lead to excessive loads in
cartilage areas not commonly loaded and thus contribute to
future osteoarthritis. A better understanding of kinetic and
kinematic changes and their final effect on the menisci and
cartilage may provide useful information in the evaluation of an
individual’s natural course.88–90
Summary of motion analysis
c
ACL injury results in changes in kinematics, kinetics and
neuromuscular activity.
c
Anterior tibial translation, internal rotation of the tibia and
quadriceps avoidance are typical features seen following an
ACL injury. These changes most probably contribute to the
development of osteoarthritis.
MANAGEMENT OF ACL INJURY
All healthcare units that service patients with knee sprains
should have the capability to recognise the presence of a torn
ACL or should be able rapidly to refer the patient to a clinic that
can confirm the diagnosis if it is suspected.65 The treatment
goals are to restore knee function, to permit the patient to
return to a desired level of activity without experiencing giving
way and to minimise the risk of osteoarthritis. Treatment can
be either surgical with a reconstruction of the ACL followed by
rehabilitation or rehabilitation alone. The literature supports
both treatment regimes, but a recent Cochrane review91
Review
402
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 10 (native) -----
considers that good quality randomised trials are required to
determine
which
is
the
preferred
treatment
in
different
situations. The decision regarding the treatment must therefore
be individualised, and factors such as occupation, sports
activities and associated injuries must be considered. A high
activity level, specific demands and repairable meniscus injury
are relative indications for subacute ACL reconstruction. If high-
risk activities are not anticipated, the primary treatment option
for an ACL injury is rehabilitation training for 3–4 months
followed by assessment of knee function and quality of life. If
re-injury occurs or the patient is not satisfied for any reason, a
late reconstruction can be performed.
The major technical principles for an ACL reconstruction
have become less controversial in recent years with improved
knowledge of the anatomy, biomechanics and the healing
process of the ACL following reconstruction. The choice of
grafts has received much attention in the literature. In general
there is little evidence to suggest significant differences between
hamstring and bone-tendon-bone (BTB) grafts regarding short-
and mid-term outcome.92 Reports of more degenerative changes
in the tibiofemoral joint after ACL reconstruction with BTB
grafts need to be verified in randomised clinical trials.93
An increased failure rate in women compared with men has
been reported with the hamstring graft.94 In another study with
questionable power, greater anterior knee laxity over time was
found in women compared with men after reconstruction with
the hamstring graft.95 These data may support the use of a BTB
graft as the first choice in women but, importantly, it must be
pointed out that there is no clear correlation between laxity and
functional outcome.96
The double bundle technique for ACL reconstruction may
have advantages regarding the long-term results since it seems
to have the potential for diminishing rotational laxity.97 This
may reduce the risk of later osteoarthritis but no data are
available
to
support
this
theory.
There
is
currently
no
convincing evidence that this technique results in better
functional results than the single bundle procedures.
It
appears that
the
incidence
of
ACL injuries
among
prepubescent children is similar in boys and girls.98 At puberty
the incidence in girls becomes higher than in boys and,
according to the Scandinavian ACL registries, more ACL
reconstructions are performed on girls at this age.99 The
principles for treatment of ACL injuries in this age group are
not gender-specific.100
The high risk of secondary injuries after the initial injury
must be considered and, independent of the treatment choice,
these patients must be followed carefully. A specific problem is
the potential risk of growth disturbances when reconstruction
of the ACL is performed before puberty.101
Rehabilitation after ACL reconstruction
Motion and immediate weight bearing postoperatively have
been standard since the 1970s.102 Pain inhibition is a common
problem postoperatively (first days) and can result in inability
to
activate
the
thigh
muscles,
primarily
the
quadriceps,
irrespective of the graft used, and the hamstrings when the
hamstring graft is used. Electrical muscle stimulation may
therefore play an important role in the early phase of
rehabilitation after ACL surgery in order to stimulate activation
of the muscles and is more effective in women than in men for
preventing muscle hypotrophy.103
Failure to regain full knee extension after ACL reconstruction
is the most common complication.104 Range of motion exercises
with particular attention to regaining complete knee extension
are therefore important and should be started during the first
postoperative days. Full knee extension is individualised, with
some patients having normal hyperextension. Knee extension of
the contralateral leg should therefore be examined and the same
degree of knee extension should be obtained in the ACL
reconstructed knee.
Both closed kinetic chain (CKC) exercises and open kinetic
chain (OKC) exercises for the quadriceps muscle should be used
in the rehabilitation programme.105 OKC training should,
however, be introduced cautiously, starting with a range of
motion between 90u and 40u with a 10u increase every week.
CKC
exercises
are
recommended
from
the
beginning
of
rehabilitation. A recent study showed greater anterior knee
laxity when OKC quadriceps exercises were introduced 4 weeks
after hamstring ACL reconstruction than when OKC exercises
were introduced after 12 weeks.106 It is therefore recommended
that OKC quadriceps training should not begin within 8 weeks
of surgery. The same difference was, however, not found in
patients
with
patellar
tendon
ACL
reconstructions.
Strengthening of the hamstrings may be difficult when one or
more of the muscle tendons has been removed for the graft.
Quadriceps strengthening is as important in patients with
hamstring grafts as it is in patients with patellar tendon grafts.
More problems were experienced with gaining strength of the
hamstring muscles after ACL reconstruction with hamstring
grafts than gaining strength of the quadriceps muscle after
patellar tendon ACL reconstruction.107
A number of authors have emphasised the importance of
neuromuscular training to restore knee joint stability and regain
a normal motion pattern.108
When using functional performance tests for evaluation, it
has been found that a battery of at least three (or four) different
tests should be used.109 Patients should be tested during non-
fatigued muscle conditions as well as fatigued conditions.110
There is as yet no evidence that rehabilitation after ACL
reconstruction should be different for men and women.
However, in 4890 patients with ACL reconstructions, increased
laxity after reconstruction with a hamstring graft occurred
independent of sex (Werner, unpublished 2008). No significant
difference was seen between the sexes in improvement of
quadriceps and hamstring muscle torques, one-leg hop test for
distance,
clinical
outcome
as
evaluated
by
the
Knee
Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) and activity level as
evaluated by the Tegner Activity Scale 6–8 months after
reconstruction and rehabilitation. The findings of increased
laxity after ACL reconstruction with a hamstring graft may
imply
that
rehabilitation
should
be
slowed
down
after
reconstruction with this graft.
Return to sport
Shelbourne and Gray111 stated that: ‘‘It has become almost
universally accepted that rehabilitation of the healing ACL graft
with rapid return to sports that have the potential to generate
high stresses in the graft and knee does not lead any deleterious
effects’’. Early return to sports in recent years has been
advocated because of better surgical techniques and under-
standing of ACL biomechanics and the healing process.
Most articles published in recent years advocate a return to
unrestricted sports 6 months or later following ACL reconstruc-
tion. Evidence-based evaluation has not proved that an early (2–
4 months) return to sport is safe and efficacious, but it is
possible to return to sports early (2–4 months) after ACL
reconstruction.112 113 From the perspective of the graft and
rehabilitation, it is also possible to do so with acutely injured
Review
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
403
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 11 (native) -----
ACL-deficient knees without surgery.114 115 A few articles have
been published that advocate return to sports between 4–
6 months. These are case series which are unable to prove that
such an early return is more effective or safer than a more
conservative rehabilitation.116 117
High-quality evaluations have shown that early weight
bearing, early mobilisation, rehabilitation without braces and
early CKC exercises are safe.118 Return to sports following ACL
reconstruction should be based on regaining function, range of
motion, strength and patient’s desire (goal-based, not time-
based).112 118 119 However, in the long term, changes in cartilage
metabolism noted following ACL reconstruction must also be
considered. This is important when discussing the timing of a
return to demanding activities after an ACL injury/reconstruc-
tion. Cartilage metabolic MRI and synovial fluid studies
indicate that ACL-injured joints do not regain their normal
glycosaminoglycan (GAG) structure until 2 years after the
injury.120–122 A low GAG content in the cartilage matrix is
probably a risk factor for osteoarthritis, since the altered
structure of the matrix may expose the collagen network and
make the matrix more susceptible to the development of
osteoarthritis.
Only two of the recently published randomised controlled
trials and systematic reviews concerning rehabilitation follow-
ing ACL reconstruction have dealt with return to sports. In a
randomised controlled trial of rehabilitation following ACL
reconstruction in soccer athletes, Ekstrand et al119 compared a
standard 6-month protocol with an extended 9-month protocol
and found no differences in outcomes 1 year after surgery. In
another randomised controlled trial, Beynnon et al117 compared a
19-week
rehabilitation
programme
with
one
that
lasted
31 weeks. Exercises were instituted over different time intervals
based on the amount of strain produced within the normal
ACL. No differences were found in anteroposterior laxity,
International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) clinical
assessment, KOOS, one-leg hop tests, markers of cartilage
metabolism or Tegner Activity Scale 2 years after surgery. Both
accelerated
and
non-accelerated
rehabilitation
produced
increases in the synthesis of type II collagen and proteoglycan.
Both programmes appeared to affect cartilage metabolism
similarly. Changes in cartilage metabolism following ACL
reconstruction persist for up to 2 years. This warrants the
attention of all clinicians as it may have profound effects on the
eventual
development
of
osteoarthritis,
no
matter
what
rehabilitation is undertaken.
Long-term studies have shown that about 50% of patients
have radiographic osteoarthritis of the knee joint 15 years after
an ACL injury, independent of treatment.71 72 However, some
studies have shown a much lower prevalence.123 124 The study by
Neuman et al123 found no osteoarthritis after non-operative
treatment if there was no secondary meniscus injury. All these
studies had slow and controlled rehabilitation after the injury or
after surgery, which may indicate the relevance of the GAG loss
as described by Tiderius et al.122 It therefore seems possible to
reduce the risk of osteoarthritis markedly, but it is unclear
whether this is compatible with return to high demanding
sports activities.
Summary of management
c
The principles of treatment of ACL injuries in prepubescent
children are not sex-specific. A specific problem is the
potential risk of growth disturbances when a reconstruction
of the ACL is performed before puberty.
c
The high risk of secondary injuries after the initial injury
must be considered and, independent of the treatment
choice, these patients must be followed carefully.
c
High quality evaluations have shown that early weight
bearing, early mobilisation, rehabilitation without braces
and early CKC exercises are safe.
c
There is no evidence in the literature that rehabilitation
should be different for men and women after ACL
reconstruction.
c
Return to sports following ACL reconstruction should be
based on regaining function, range of motion, strength and
patient’s desire (goal-based, not time-based).
c
Long-term studies have shown that about 50% of patients
will have radiographic osteoarthritis 15 years after an ACL
injury, independent of treatment. Data are available
indicating that it is possible to reduce the risk of
osteoarthritis markedly. There is no evidence that the
method for this reduction could be surgical, except the fact
that stabilisation may lower the risk of a secondary
meniscus tear. It is unclear whether this is compatible with
a return to high demanding sports activities.
Remaining questions
c
Is it possible to reduce the risk of meniscus tears with
specific rehabilitation protocols or is the only way a surgical
stabilisation?
c
Is the subtle increased anterior knee laxity and coupled
internal rotation often noted following ACL reconstruction
safe for injured/healing articular cartilage?
c
What is the effect of rehabilitation and return to sport on
the meniscus, whether injured or not?
c
How does the prolonged alteration in cartilage metabolism
observed following ACL reconstruction affect the future
status of the cartilage surfaces?
c
How fast can rehabilitation and return to sport be advanced
without injuring the healing ACL graft?
c
What are the effects of body weight and muscle forces on
graft healing?
We need more studies with high levels of evidence to answer
these questions.
PREVENTION OF ACL INJURY
A growing number of injury prevention programmes targeted at
reducing the risk of ligamentous knee injury in general—and
ACL injury in particular—have been reported in the litera-
ture.125–144 Although a number of risk factors for ACL injury have
been proposed, only the biomechanical risk factors have been
examined in sufficient depth to support the design and
evaluation of preventive interventions.
Most prevention programmes attempt to alter the dynamic
loading of the tibiofemoral joint through neuromuscular and
proprioceptive training. The studies to date focusing on
biomechanical modifications have resulted in the reduction of
lower extremity injuries in athletes. However, the studies vary
widely both in their approach to injury prevention and the
validity of the study design. Most studies to date have been
non-randomised
and
very
few
have
been
conducted
as
randomised controlled trials. Despite this, we now have
valuable information to assist us in preventing ACL injuries in
female athletes.
Successful programmes share a number of common elements.
Most include one or more of the following: traditional
stretching, strengthening, awareness of high-risk positions,
Review
404
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 12 (native) -----
technique modification, aerobic conditioning, sports-specific
agilities, proprioceptive and balance training and plyometrics.
The relation of these components to specific risk factors for ACL
injury is summarised in table 3.
Education
Ettlinger et al125 used a relatively simple approach to prevention
of ACL injury in downhill skiers, attempting to modify high-risk
behaviour through education and increased awareness. In this
prospective non-randomised trial, 4000 on-slope alpine ski
instructors and patrollers in 20 ski areas completed training
and reporting requirements during the 1993–4 skiing season.
The training kit included a 19 min ACL Awareness Training
videotape showing 10 recorded ACL injuries sustained by alpine
skiers of various levels and various written materials. The
videotape used guided discovery, allowing viewers to visualise
carefully selected stimuli and incorporate this information into
their skiing in order to avoid high-risk behaviour and manage
high-risk
situations
to
reduce
the
risk
of
ACL
injury.
Participants also underwent an awareness training session
which included proper body positioning, understanding of the
phantom foot ACL injury mechanism, and strategies to avoid
high-risk positions as well as effective reaction strategies.
The two seasons before the intervention season served as
historical controls, during which area employees had sustained
an average of 31 serious ACL sprains per season. During the
intervention season, employees sustained 16 serious ACL
sprains (6 in the untrained group and 10 in the trained group),
a reduction of 62% compared with the normalised expected
number of ACL injuries in the trained individuals of 26.6
(p,0.005).
Isolated strengthening and conditioning
Cahill and Griffith126 looked at the effect of incorporating
weight training into preseason conditioning for high school
American football teams. Over the 4 years of the study they
noted a reduction in reported knee injuries and knee injuries
requiring surgery in the intervention group.
Isolated proprioceptive training
In a study of the effect of isolated proprioceptive training on the
risk of ACL injuries in soccer players, Caraffa et al127 conducted a
non-randomised prospective study of 600 semi-professional and
amateur soccer players in Umbria and Marche in Italy; 20 teams
(10 amateur and 10 semi-professional) underwent propriocep-
tive preseason training in addition to their regular training
session (group A) and 20 teams (10 amateur and 10 semi-
professional) continued training in their usual fashion (group B).
The intervention group (group A) was subjected to a five phase
progressive balance training programme consisting of: no
balance board; rectangular balance board; round balance board;
combination (rectangular/round); and a BAPS board (Camp
Jackson, Michigan, USA). The duration/frequency was 20 min/
day for 2–6 days/week including a minimum of 3 times per
week during the season. The groups were followed for 3 years
and all players with a potential knee injury were evaluated; 10
arthroscopically confirmed ACL injuries occurred over the three
seasons (0.15 ACL injuries/team/season) in group A compared
with 70 such injuries (1.15 ACL injuries/team/season) in group
B (p,0.001). Unfortunately, no differentiation was made
between contact and non-contact ACL injuries.
Neuromuscular training
Technique
Several studies have used a neuromuscular training programme
for injury prevention.128 Henning129 implemented a prevention
study in two NCAA Division I female basketball programmes
over the course of 8 years. He proposed that the increased rate
of ACL injury in female athletes was primarily functional and
was related to knee position and muscle action during dynamic
movement. In knee extension the quadriceps exerts a significant
anterior translational force on the tibia, thus imparting a sheer
force on the ACL. Conversely, as the knee moves into flexion,
the anterior translational force on the tibia is decreased, thereby
decreasing the torque on the ACL secondary to the contraction
of the hamstrings. To decrease the risk of ACL injury, Henning
proposed that the athletes cut, land and decelerate with knee
and hip flexion. In addition, he proposed a rounded cut
manoeuvre instead of a sharp or more acute angle during the
cut cycle. He also proposed that a one-step stop deceleration
pattern should be avoided and replaced with a three-step quick
stop. This intervention programme was geared at changing
player technique—stressing knee flexion upon landing, using
accelerated rounded turns and deceleration with a multi-step
stop. This protocol was completed on the basketball court
without any additional equipment requirements. The interven-
tion group had an 89% reduction in the rate of occurrence of
ACL injuries.130 Sadly, Dr Henning’s passing in 1991 prevented
the publication of this research. However, it served as the crucial
foundation to numerous prevention programmes that followed.
Proprioception and strengthening
Henning’s concept of athletic modulation has been widely
accepted. Wedderkopp et al131 tested a programme including
functional strengthening and balance training (use of an ankle
disc for 10–15 min at all practice sessions). Teams were
randomised into two groups with 11 teams in the intervention
group (N = 111) and 11 in the control group (N = 126). The
group using the ankle disc incurred 14 injuries compared with
66 injuries in the control group (p,0.01). The intervention
Table 3
Relation of components of prevention programmes to specific risk factors for anterior cruciate
ligament (ACL) injury
Position
Intervention strategy
How?
Extended knee at initial contact
Knee flexion
Concentric HS control and soft landing
Extended hip at initial contact
Hip flexion
Iliopsoas and rectus femoris control and soft
landing
Knee valgus with tibiofemoral
loading
Address dynamic control; decrease
dynamic valgus
Lateral hip control upon landing
Balance deficits
Proprioception drills
Dynamic balance training
Skill deficiency
Improve agility
Agility drills to address deceleration
techniques and core stability
HS, hamstring.
Review
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
405
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 13 (native) -----
group had a lower rate of injury during practice (0.34/1000 h vs
1.17/1000 h, p,0.05) and games (4.68/1000 h vs 23.38/1000 h,
p,0.01).
The intervention group suffered two knee injuries
while the control group incurred eight knee injuries. No data
specific to ACL injury were provided.
Irmischer
et
al132
developed
the
Knee
Ligament
Injury
Prevention (KLIP) programme involving 15 min of strengthen-
ing and plyometric activities for female high school soccer,
volleyball and basketball players. In the first season of a 2-year
non-randomised prospective study, 43 schools participated in
the programme (17 basketball (N = 191); 11 soccer (N = 189); 15
volleyball (N = 197)) and 69 schools served as the control group
(28 basketball (N = 319); 14 soccer (N = 244); 27 volleyball
(N = 299)). The study design included a training session for
the coaches and athletic trainers and weekly compliance
checks for athlete participation for both games and practices.
There were no significant differences between the two groups
after one season; three arthroscopically confirmed ACL injuries
in the intervention group (incidence rate 0.167) vs four in the
control group (incidence rate 0.078). Anecdotally, there were no
non-contact ACL injuries in the soccer and volleyball players in
the
intervention
group,
with
all
of
the
injuries
in
the
intervention group occurring in basketball players. Possible
explanations for the lack of impact include the abridged
duration of this intervention programme (9 weeks) and the
fact
that
the
programme
was
conducted
after
training.
Neuromuscular fatigue at the end of training may directly
affect the biomechanical technique of the athlete and limit
any potential protective benefit of ACL injury prevention
programmes.
Varied training
Other studies have incorporated additional dimensions of
neuromuscular training into ACL prevention programmes.
The Cincinnati Sportsmetric includes flexibility, strengthening
(through weight training) and plyometric activities over 60–
90 min. Hewett et al133 studied the effect of this programme on
the incidence of knee injury in high school aged soccer,
volleyball and basketball athletes. Forty-three teams (N = 1263
athletes) including 15 female teams (N = 366) implemented the
programme; 15 additional female teams (N = 463) served as
same-sex untrained controls and 13 male sports teams (N = 434)
served as the male control group. Coaches and trainers
implemented the programme based on a videotape and manual.
The programme was performed 3 days/week on alternate days.
Seventy percent of the intervention athletes (248/366) com-
pleted
the
entire
6-week
programme
and the
remainder
completed at least 4 weeks of training. The incidence of
serious knee injuries (N = 14) in the female control group
was 0.43/1000 player exposures compared with 0.12 in the
female
intervention
group
(p = 0.05)
and
0.09
in
the
male control group. The intervention group also had a lower
rate of non-contact injuries (p = 0.01) and non-contact ACL
injuries (p = 0.05). The incidence of non-contact knee injury
was 0.35/1000 player exposures in the control group compared
with 0 in the intervention group and 0.05 in the male control
group.
ACL injuries have also been problematic for European team
handball players. Myklebust et al134 conducted a non-rando-
mised prospective study among 900 division I–III competitive
female handball players over a 3-year period in Norway. The
control group comprised 60 teams (N = 942 players in 1998–9
season), and 58 teams (N = 855 in 1999–2000) and 52 teams
(N = 850 in the 2000–1 season) formed the intervention group.
The intervention consisted of a 15 min programme focused on
landing, cutting and planting technique with 5 min spent on
each of three exercise components (floor, balance mat and
wobble board). The programme lasted 5–7 weeks with different
exercises introduced each week. It was performed three times
per week during the first 5–7 weeks and then once a week
during the season. A physical therapist was designated to each
team to assess compliance during the second intervention
season (2000–1). Special equipment included an instructional
videotape, a poster delineating the tasks to be completed, six
balance mats and six balance boards. Teams were required to
conduct a minimum of 15 training sessions over the 5–7-week
period with .75% player participation. Only 15 (26%) of the 58
teams from the second season and 15 (29%) of the 52 teams
from the third season completed the necessary number of
sessions, although compliance was higher among the elite
division teams (42% and 50%, respectively). Overall, there were
29 ACL injuries during the control season, 23 injuries during the
first intervention season (odds ratio 0.87; CI 0.50 to 1.52;
p = 0.62) and 17 injuries during the second intervention season
(odds ratio 0.64; CI 0.35 to 1.18; p = 0.15). However, during the
second intervention season, 14 ACL injuries (2.2%) occurred in
players from the control group compared with 3 (1.1%) in
players who completed the intervention (p = 0.31). In the elite
division alone, 4 ACL injuries (8.9%) occurred in players from
control teams compared with 1 ACL injury (0.6%) in those who
completed the intervention (p = 0.0134). Thus, there was a
reduction in the total number of non-contact ACL injuries from
18 in the control season to 7 during the second intervention
season (p = 0.04). This intervention included elements of
plyometric activities, proprioception and agilities, but did not
include any elements of strength training. Limitations of the
study include non-randomisation of the subjects, insufficient
power and control data that were collected during an earlier
season. Strengths of the study include measures of compliance
by a medical clinician and the use of an educational videotape
and poster. The study suggests that the inclusion of a
neuromuscular balance-based training programme may impart
some protective benefit to the ACL.
Comprehensive training
Olsen et al135 studied a programme designed to prevent lower
limb injury in youth team handball. One hundred and twenty
European team handball clubs (intervention group: 61 teams,
958 players; control group: 59 teams, 879 players) participated
in an 8-month intervention programme that consisted of four
sets of exercise lasting 15–20 min. The training consisted of
warm-up exercises (jogging, backward running, forward run-
ning, sideways running and speed work), technique (plant, cut
and jump shot landing), balance (passing, squats, bouncing,
perturbation) and strength and power (squats, bounding,
jumps, hamstrings). Each club was instructed on how to
perform the programme and was issued a training handbook,
five wobble boards and five balance mats. The programme
focused on proper biomechanics during landing, core stability
and feedback on technique between paired team members. The
intervention teams consisted of boys and girls aged 16–17 years
who completed 15 consecutive training sessions at the start of
the season followed by one training session per week for the
remainder of the season. Sixty six lower limb injuries (6.9% of
players) were reported in the intervention group compared with
115 (13.1%) in the control group (relative risk 0.51; 95% CI 0.36
to 0.73; p,0.001); 19 acute knee injuries (2.0%) occurred in the
intervention group compared with 38 (4.3%) in the control
Review
406
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 14 (native) -----
group (relative risk 0.45; 95% CI 0.25 to 0.81; p = 0.007); and 3
knee ligament injuries were reported in the intervention group
compared with 14 in the control group (relative risk 0.20; 95%
CI 0.06 to 0.70, p = 0.01). All 3 knee ligament injuries in the
intervention group were ACL injuries while 10 of the 14
reported knee injuries in the control group were ACL injuries;
no data were provided on ACL injuries alone. A compliance rate
of 87% was reported. The strength of the team handball
programme is that it is a warm-up programme which makes it
easier to be performed at every training session. This may be
essential for long-term success of such a programme. The
intervention included strength, flexibility, agility, plyometric
and proprioceptive activities to address the deficits most
commonly found in female athletes.
Many of these intervention programmes require special
equipment, specialised training, or significant time commit-
ment. In 1999 the ACL ‘‘PEP Program: Prevent injury and
Enhance
Performance’’
was
developed
in
Santa
Monica,
California. This prevention programme consists of warm-up,
stretching, strengthening, plyometrics and sport-specific agili-
ties to address potential deficits in the strength and coordina-
tion of the stabilising muscles around the knee joint. It was
designed as an alternative warm-up so that the desired activities
could be performed on the field during practice without
specialised equipment for ease of implementation. The pro-
gramme
consists
of
an
educational
videotape/DVD
that
demonstrates the proper and improper biomechanical technique
for each prescribed therapeutic exercise. An entire team can
complete the 19 components in less than 20 min.136
An early non-randomised study among highly competitive
14–18-year-old female club soccer players using the programme
showed promising results.137 During the first year of the study
(2000) 1041 female club soccer players (52 teams) performed the
PEP programme and 1902 players (95 teams) served as age- and
skill-matched controls. In the intervention group there were 2
ACL tears (0.2 ACL injuries/athletic exposure (AE)) compared
with 32 ACL tears (1.7 ACL injuries/AE) in the control group, a
decrease of 88% in ACL ligament injury. In year 2 of the study
(2001) 4 ACL tears were reported in the intervention group
(incidence rate 0.47 injuries/AE) compared with 35 in the
control group (incidence rate 1.8 injuries/AE). This corresponds
to an overall reduction of 74% in ACL tears in the intervention
group compared with an age- and skill-matched control group in
year 2. The limitations of this study include non-randomisation
of the subjects, no consistent direct oversight of the interven-
tion and compliance measurements that were only completed in
a small subset of intervention teams.
The strengths of the PEP Program include the fact that it is an
on-field warm-up programme that requires only traditional
soccer equipment (cones and soccer ball). It is done 2–3 times a
week over the course of the 12-week soccer season and is 20 min
in duration. It includes progressive strength, flexibility, agility,
plyometric and proprioceptive activities to address the deficits
most commonly demonstrated in female athletes. Deceleration
patterns are addressed, stressing the multi-step deceleration
pattern, and proper landing technique is encouraged with knee
and hip flexion while landing on the ball of the foot and
avoiding genu valgum by using the abductors and lateral hip
musculature. In addition, since the programme is designed as a
warm-up, compliance rates are higher and the element of
neuromuscular fatigue does not affect the performance of the
therapeutic exercises.
This study was followed by a randomised controlled trial using
the PEP Program in Division I NCAA women’s soccer teams in the
2002 Fall season.137 Sixty-one teams (N= 1429 athletes) com-
pleted the study (35 control teams (N= 854 athletes) and 26
intervention teams (N= 575 athletes)). No significant differences
were seen between intervention and control athletes with regard
to age, height, weight or history of past ACL injuries. After using
the PEP Program during one season there were 7 ACL injuries in
the intervention athletes (rate 0.14) and 18 in control athletes
(rate 0.25; p = 0.15). No ACL injuries were reported in interven-
tion athletes during practices compared with 6 in control athletes
(rate 0.10; p = 0.01). During games the difference between the
intervention and control groups was non-significant (7 vs 12;
p = 0.76). Non-contact ACL injuries occurred at over three times
the rate in control athletes (n = 10; rate 0.14) compared with
intervention athletes (n = 2; rate 0.04; p = 0.06). Control athletes
with a prior history of ACL injury suffered a recurrence five times
more frequently than the intervention group (0.10 vs 0.02;
p = 0.06); this difference reached significance when limited to
non-contact ACL injuries during the season (0.06 vs 0.00; p,0.05).
There was a significant difference in the rate of ACL injuries in the
second half of the season (weeks 6–11) between the intervention
group (0.00) and the control group (0.18; p,0.05). This supports
the
notion
that it takes
approximately
6–8 weeks
for a
biomechanical intervention programme to impart a neuromus-
cular effect.
Overall, these studies provide evidence that prevention
training programmes can reduce the risk of ACL injury. This
has been shown in male and female athletes from various sports
and across different age groups. Nevertheless, a number of
important issues remain.
Programme specifics
Practically, there is a cost-benefit analysis that needs to be
considered before initiating an injury prevention programme on
a large scale.
Figure 3
Single leg squat. The athlete should maintain a straight line
through the hip, knee and toe. She should keep a horizontal orientation of
the hips and avoid a pelvic tilt during one-legged squat balance
exercises. The athlete should be encouraged to reach deep knee flexion
when performing this drill.
Review
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
407
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 15 (native) -----
First, what equipment is necessary and at what is its cost?
Extensive and more expensive equipment is necessary for
programmes such as the Frappier Acceleration Program,138 the
Cincinnati Sportsmetric Program133 and the various programmes
using some form of balance board.128 129 134 138 139 Other successful
programmes such as PEP136 137 and the Henning programme129
can be performed with minimal resources.
Second, what is the minimal time commitment needed to
provide adequate protection? What is the minimum duration of
an injury prevention programme or does it need to be
continued, perhaps at a lesser frequency throughout the course
of the season? When initiating a neuromuscular intervention
programme, it takes approximately 4–6 weeks to impart a
benefit to the athlete. Most of the programmes studied to date
have a relatively intense start-up period for 4–6 weeks followed
by less frequent and, in some cases, no additional training.
Maintenance of the programme in a routine manner as part of a
warm-up and ongoing training is crucial to successful reduction
of injury.
Timing of intervention
Ideally, these prevention programmes should be introduced as
early as possible in the training period. In some sports this
would be at the age of 6–10 years.
Effect on performance
One additional advantage of prevention programmes is that,
properly executed, they can serve to enhance performance as
well as prevent injury. These benefits include increased vertical
jump, improved control of dynamic load of the knee, improved
balance and increased hamstring strength, power and peak
torque.140–146
Summary of prevention programmes
c
Based on these studies, we know that there can be a
quantifiable reduction in the risk of ACL for athletes,
particularly women, who complete a well-designed injury
prevention programme.
c
Most of these programmes attempt to alter dynamic loading
of the tibiofemoral joint through neuromuscular and
proprioceptive training.
c
An emphasis is placed on proper landing technique; landing
softly on the forefoot and rolling back to the rearfoot,
engaging knee and hip flexion upon landing. Two-feet
landing is encouraged where possible.133
c
When cutting manoeuvres, athletes should avoid excessive
dynamic valgus of the knee upon landing and squatting;
they should aim to achieve the ‘‘knee over toe position’’
(fig 3).
c
Intervention programmes have focused on increasing ham-
string, gluteus medius and hip abductor strength, and
addressing proper deceleration techniques.
c
Successful implementation of these programmes requires
the collaboration of governing bodies, sports scientists,
physicians, coaches, parents and athletes.
Important factors for a successful prevention programme
c
The programme should include strength and power exer-
cises, neuromuscular training, plyometrics and agility
exercises.
c
Design as a regular warm-up programme increases adher-
ence.
c
Focus should be on performance of the hip-knee-foot line
and ‘‘kissing knees’’ should be avoided (excessive valgus
strain).
Figure 4
Drop vertical jump test. To
identify athletes at risk of severe knee
injuries, the drop vertical jump test as
described by Hewett et al148 should be
used. The athlete is instructed to ‘‘drop off
the box and immediately jump as high as
you possibly can’’. Athletes who land
with good valgus knee motion should
perform neuromuscular training before
sports participation. Training which
emphasises the ‘‘hip-knee-toe line’’
position when landing (avoid ‘‘kissing
knees’’) could prevent future ACL injuries.
Reproduced with permission from Hewett
et al.147
Review
408
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 16 (native) -----
c
Maintenance and compliance of prevention programmes
before, during and after the sports participation season are
essential to minimise injuries.
c
The drop vertical jump test should be used to identify
players at risk (fig 4).
c
The programme must be well received by coaches and
players to be successful.
c
Evaluation of success or failure of a prevention programme
requires large numbers of athletes and injuries.
OVERALL SUMMARY AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
There is consensus in the literature that female athletes have a
greater risk of incurring an ACL injury than male athletes when
they
compete
in the
same
sport
at the
same
level
of
competition. However, most studies have focused on the
prevalence of ACL injuries associated with high-risk sports;
only a limited number have calculated the incidence of ACL
injury based on time at risk and compared male and female
athletes competing in similar activities at the same level of
competition.
There appears to be mounting evidence that women have a
significantly greater risk of ACL injury during the preovulatory
phase of the menstrual cycle than during the postovulatory
phase.
While
it
remains
unclear
whether
oestradiol
and
progesterone act directly on the ACL in women and increase
the likelihood that a subject will sustain an injury, other
hormones associated with the menstrual cycle may modulate
the risk of injury.
Alternatively,
hormones may act on
structures other then the ACL. Athletes with a decreased
intercondylar notch width, as measured radiographically on a
standard notch view, have an increased risk of incurring a non-
contact ACL injury.
Little is known about how lower leg alignment variables are
related to the likelihood of suffering a knee ligament injury.
Anatomical risk factors may not be easy to correct; however,
they are important to understand if subjects at increased risk of
incurring an ACL injury are to be identified.
Female athletes who develop an increased knee abduction
moment (valgus intersegmental torque) during impact on
landing have an increased risk of ACL injury. Female athletes
have muscle activation patterns in which the quadriceps
predominates and decreased knee stiffness appears to occur.
The relative increase in knee stiffness in response to anterior-
directed perturbation of the knee is much greater in men than in
women. More research is needed into the neuromuscular risk
factors related to ACL injury.
Very little is known about the effect of sport-specific factors
(such as rules, referees and coaching), meteorological conditions
(such as the traction at the shoe-surface interface), playing
surfaces and protective equipment on the risk of suffering an
ACL injury. These potential risk factors merit further investiga-
tion.
Little is known about the effect of age, athleticism, skill level,
psychological characteristics and previous knee injury as risk
factors for ACL injury.
There is a quantifiable reduction in the risk of ACL in
athletes, particularly women, who complete well-designed
injury prevention programmes. Proper neuromuscular training
can decrease peak landing forces. Training will significantly
enhanced hamstring strength and power, and reduce hamstring
to quadriceps and side-to-side strength imbalances. It is also
important to increase gluteus medius and hip abductor strength
and to address proper deceleration techniques. Most of these
programmes attempt to alter dynamic loading of the tibiofe-
moral joint through neuromuscular and proprioceptive training.
Emphasis is placed on proper landing technique—landing softly
on the forefoot and rolling back to the rearfoot, engaging knee
and hip flexion upon landing; two-feet landing instead of one
feet should be used if possible. In cutting manoeuvres, excessive
dynamic valgus of the knee upon landing and squatting should
be avoided, focusing on the ‘‘knee over toe position’’.
Successful implementation of these programmes requires the
collaboration of governing bodies, sport scientists, physicians,
coaches, parents and athletes. Everybody can participate in the
fight to prevent the ACL injury, especially in young female
athletes. Increased and substantial support from the sports
medicine community as well as from the sporting world is
required to ensure success in this battle so that ACL injuries are
eradicated, or at least substantially reduced.
Competing interests: None.
REFERENCES
1.
Granan LP, Bahr R, Steindal K, et al. Development of a national cruciate ligament
surgery registry: the Norwegian National Knee Ligament Registry. Am J Sports Med
2008;36:308–15.
2.
Lobenhoffer P. Injuries of the knee ligaments. II. Surgical therapy of anterior and
posterior knee instability. Chirurg 1999;70:326–38.
3.
Hootman JM, Dick R, Agel J. Epidemiology of collegiate injuries for 15 sports:
summary and recommendations for injury prevention initiatives. J Athl Train
2007;42:311–19.
4.
Arendt E, Dick R. Knee injury patterns among men and women in collegiate
basketball and soccer: NCAA data and review of literature. Am J Sports Med
1995;23:694–701.
5.
Johnson R. The ACL injury in Alpine skiing: the mechanism and epidemiology.
Aviemore, UK: International Society of Skiing Safety, May 2007.
6.
Prodromos CC, Han Y, Rogwowski J, et al. A meta-analysis of the incidence of
anterior cruciate ligament tears as a function of gender, sport, and a knee injury-
reduction regimen. Arthroscopy 2007;23:1320–5.
7.
Myklebust G,Maehlum S, Holm I, et al. A prospective cohort study of anterior
cruciate ligament injuries in elite Norwegian team handball. Scand J Med Sci Sports
1998;8:149–53.
8.
Myklebust G, Engebretsen L, Braekken IH, et al. Prevention of anterior cruciate
ligament injuries in female team handball players: a prospective intervention study
over three seasons. Clin J Sport Med 2003;13:71–8.
9.
Lambson RB, Barnhill BS, Higgins RW. Football cleat design and its effect on
anterior cruciate ligament injuries: a 3 year prospective study. Am J Sports Med
1996;24:155–9.
10.
Olsen OE, Myklebust G, Engebretsen L, et al. Relationship between floor type and
risk of ACL injury in team handball. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2003;13:299–304.
11.
Kocher MS, Sterett WI, Briggs KK, et al. Effect of functional bracing on subsequent
knee injury in ACL-deficient professional skiers. J Knee Surg 2003;6:87–92.
12.
McDevitt ER, Taylor DC, Miller MD, et al. Functional bracing after anterior cruciate
ligament reconstruction: a prospective, randomized, multicenter study. Am J Sports
Med 2004;32:1887–92.
13.
Orchard J, Seward H, McGivern J, et al. Rainfall, evaporation and the risk of non-
contact anterior cruciate ligament injury in the Australian Football league. Med J Aust
1999;170:304–6.
14.
Uhorchak JM, Scoville CR, Williams GN, et al. Risk factors associated with
noncontact injury of the anterior cruciate ligament. A prospective four-year
evaluation of 859 West Point cadets. Am J Sports Med 2003;31:831–42.
15.
Griffin LY, Albohm MJ, Arendt EA, et al. Update on ACL prevention: theoretical and
practical guidelines. Am J Sports Med 2006;34:1512–32.
16.
Slocumb G, Slocumb TD. Slope in dogs. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Prac
1993;23:777–95
17.
Meister K. Caudal slope of the tibia and its relationship to noncontact injuries to the
ACL. Am J Knee Surg 1998;11:217–9.
18.
Stijak L, Herzog RF, Schai P. Is there an influence of the tibial slope of the lateral
condyle on the ACL lesion? A case-control study. Knee Surg Sports Traum Arthrosc
2008;6:112–7.
19.
Chandrashekar N, Slauterbeck J, Hashemi J. Sex-based differences in the
anthropometric characteristics of the anterior cruciate ligament and its relation to
intercondylar notch geometry. Am J Sports Med 2005;33:1492–8.
20.
Chandrashekar NJ, Mansour M, Slauterbeck J, et al. Sex-based differences in the
tensile proerties of the human anterior cruciate ligament. J Biomech 2006;39:2943–50.
21.
Kubo KH, Kanehisa H, Fukunagal T. Gender differences in the viscoelastic properties
of tendon structures. Eur J Appl Physiol 2003;88:520–6.
Review
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
409
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 17 (native) -----
22.
Onambele GN, Burgess LK, Pearson SJ. Gender-specific in vivo measurement of
the structural and mechanical properties of the human patellar tendon. J Orthop Res
2007;25:1635–42.
23.
Granata KP, Padua DA, Wilson SE. Gender differences in active musculoskeletal
stiffness. Part II. Quantification of leg stiffness during functional hopping tasks.
J Electromyogr Kinesiol 2002;12:127–35.
24.
Granata KP, Wilson SE. Padua DA. Gender differences in active musculoskeletal
stiffness. Part I. Quantification in controlled measurements of knee joint dynamics.
J Electromyogr Kinesiol 2002;12:119–26.
25.
Nguyen AD, Shultz SJ. Sex differences in lower extremity posture. J Orthop Sports
Phys Ther 2007;37:389–98.
26.
Shultz, SJ, Kirk, SE, Sander TC, et al. Sex differences in knee laxity change
across the female menstrual cycle. J Sports Med Phys Fitness 2005;45:594–603.
27.
Wojtys EM, Ashton-Miller JA, Huston AJ. A gender-related difference in
contribution of the knee musculature to sagittal-plane shear stiffness in subjects
with similar knee laxity. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2002;84-A:10–6.
28.
Hsu WJ, Fisk A, Yamamoto J, et al. Differences in torsional joint stiffness of the knee
between genders: a human cadaveric study. Am J Sports Med 2006;34:765–70.
29.
Shultz SJ, Shimokochi Y, Nguyen A, et al. Measurement of varus-valgus and
rotational knee laxity in-vivo. Part I: Assessment of measurement reliability and
bilateral asymmetry. J Orthop Res 2007;25:981–8.
30.
Wojtys EM, Huston L, Schock HJ, et al. Gender differences in muscular protection
of the knee in torsion in size-matched athletes. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2003;85-
A:782–9.
31.
Dragoo JL, Lee RS, Benhaim P, et al. Relaxin receptors in the human female
anterior cruciate ligament. Am J Sports Med 2003;31:577–84.
32.
Faryniarz DA, Bhargave AM, Lajam C, et al. Quantitation of estrogen receptors and
relaxin binding in human anterior cruciate ligament fibroblasts. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol
Anim 2006;42:176–81.
33.
Hamlet WP, Liu SH, Panossian V, et al. Primary immunolocalization of androgen
target cells in the human anterior cruciate ligament. J Orthop Res 1997;15:657–63.
34.
Liu, SH, Al-Shaikh RA, Panossian V, et al. Primary immunolocalization of
estrogen and progesterone target cells in the human anterior cruciate ligament.
J Orthop Res 1996;14:526–33.
35.
Wojtys EM, Huston LJ, Lindenfeld TN, et al. Association between the menstrual
cycle and anterior cruciate ligament injuries in female athletes. Am J Sports Med
1998;26:614–9.
36.
Shultz SJ, Sander, TC, Johnson KM, et al. Relationship between sex hormones and
anterior knee laxity across the menstrual cycle. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2004;36:1165–74.
37.
Wojtys EM, Huston L, Boynton MD, et al. The effect of menstrual cycle on anterior
cruciate ligament in women as determined by hormone levels. Am J Sports Med
2002;30:182–8.
38.
Arendt EA. Musculoskeletal injuries of the knee: are females at greater risk? Minn
Med 2007;90:38–40.
39.
Slauterbeck JR, Fuzie SF, Smith MP, et al. The menstrual cycle, sex hormones,
and anterior cruciate ligament injury. J Athl Train 2002;37:275–8.
40.
Beynnon BD, Johnson RJ, Braun S, et al. The relationship between menstrual cycle
phase and anterior cruciate ligament injury: a case-control study of recreational
alpine skiers. Am J Sports Med 2006;34:757–64.
41.
Bahr R, Krosshaug T. Understanding the injury mechanisms: a key component to
prevent injuries in sport. Br J Sports Med 2005;39:324–9.
42.
Krosshaug T, Andersen TE, Olsen OE, et al. Research approaches to describe the
mechanisms of injuries in sport: limitations and possibilities. Br J Sports Med
2005;39:330–9.
43.
Boden BP, Dean GS, Feagin JA Jr, et al. Mechanisms of anterior cruciate ligament
injury. Orthopedics 2000;23:573–8.
44.
Ebstrup JF, Bojsen-Moller F. Anterior cruciate ligament injury in indoor ball games.
Scand J Med Sci Sports 2000;10:114–6.
45.
Teitz CC. Video analysis of ACL injuries. In: Griffin LY, ed. Prevention of noncontact
ACL injuries. Rosemont, IL: American Association of Orthopaedic Surgeons,
2001:87–92.
46.
Olsen OE, Myklebust G, Engebretsen L, et al. Injury mechanisms for anterior
cruciate ligament injuries in team handball: a systematic video analysis. Am J Sports
Med 2004;32:1002–12.
47.
Krosshaug T, Nakamae A, Boden BP, et al. Mechanisms of anterior cruciate
ligament injury in basketball: video analysis of 39 cases. Am J Sports Med
2007;35:359–67.
48.
Krosshaug T, Slauterbeck JR, Engebretsen L, et al. Biomechanical analysis of
anterior cruciate ligament injury mechanisms: three-dimensional motion
reconstruction from video sequences. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2007;17:508–19.
49.
Krosshaug T, Nakamae A, Boden BP, et al. Estimating 3D joint kinematics from
video sequences of running and cutting manoeuvres: assessing the accuracy of
simple visual inspection. Gait Posture 2007;26:378–85.
50.
Krosshaug T, Bahr R. A model-based image-matching technique for three-
dimensional reconstruction of human motion from uncalibrated video sequences.
J Biomech 2005;38:919–29.
51.
Markolf KL, Graff-Radford A, Amstutz HC. In vivo knee stability. A quantitative
assessment using an instrumented clinical testing apparatus. J Bone Joint Surg Am
1978;60:664–74.
52.
Berns GS, Hull ML, Patterson HA. Strain in the anteromedial bundle of the anterior
cruciate ligament under combination loading. J Orthop Res 1992;10:167–76.
53.
Arms SW, Pope MH, Johnson RJ, et al. The biomechanics of anterior cruciate
ligament rehabilitation and reconstruction. Am J Sports Med 1984;12:8–18.
54.
Mazzocca AD, Nissen CW, Geary M, et al. Valgus medial collateral ligament
rupture causes concomitant loading and damage of the anterior cruciate ligament.
J Knee Surg 2003;16:148–51.
55.
DeMorat G, Weinhold P, Blackburn T, et al. Aggressive quadriceps loading can induce
noncontact anterior cruciate ligament injury. Am J Sports Med 2004;32:477–83.
56.
Withrow TJ, Huston LJ, Wojtys EM, et al. The effect of an impulsive knee valgus
moment on in vitro relative ACL strain during a simulated jump landing. Clin Biomech
2006;21:977–83.
57.
Fleming BC, Ohle´n G, Renstro¨m PA, et al. The effects of compressive load and
knee joint torque on peak anterior cruciate ligament strains. Am J Sports Med
2003;31:701–7.
58.
Cerulli G, Benoit DL, Lamontagne M, et al. In vivo anterior cruciate ligament strain
behaviour during a rapid deceleration movement: case report. Knee Surg Sports
Traumatol Arthrosc 2003;11:307–11.
59.
Malinzak RA, Colby SM, Kirkendall DT, et al. A comparison of knee joint motion
patterns between men and women in selected athletic tasks. Clin Biomech
2001;16:438–45.
60.
Chappell JD, Creighton RA, Giuliani C, et al. Kinematics and electromyography of
landing preparation in vertical stop-jump: risks for noncontact anterior cruciate
ligament injury. Am J Sports Med 2007;35:235–41.
61.
Weinhold PS, Stewart JD, Liu HY, et al. The influence of gender-specific loading
patterns of the stop-jump task on anterior cruciate ligament strain. Injury
2007;38:973–8.
62.
McLean SG, Felin RE, Suedekum N, et al. Impact of fatigue on gender-based high-
risk landing strategies. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2007;39:502–14.
63.
Yu B, Lin CF, Garrett WE. Lower extremity biomechanics during the landing of a
stop-jump task. Clin Biomech 2006;21:297–305.
64.
Ford KR, Myer GD, Toms HE, et al. Gender differences in the kinematics of
unanticipated cutting in young athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2005;37:124–9.
65.
Frobell RB, Lohmander LS, Roos HP. Acute rotational trauma to the knee: poor
agreement between clinical assessment and magnetic resonance imaging findings.
Scand J Med Sci Sports 2007;17:109–48.
66.
Noyes FR, Matthews DS, Mooar PA, et al. The symptomatic anterior cruciate-
deficient knee. Part II: the results of rehabilitation, activity modification, and
counseling on functiona disability. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1983;65:163–74.
67.
Englund M, Hunter DJ, Gale D. Prevalence of anterior cruciate ligament tear and its
association with knee osteoarthritis and giving way among older adults in the
community. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2006;14(Suppl 2):S121.
68.
Woo SL, Vogrin TM, Abramowitch SD. Healing and repair of ligament injuries in the
knee. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2000;8:364–72.
69.
Busam ML, Provencher MT, Bach BR Jr. Complications of anterior cruciate
ligament reconstruction with bone-patellar tendon-bone constructs: care and
prevention. Am J Sports Med 2008;36:379–94.
70.
O’Connor DP, Laughlin MS, Woods GW. Factors related to additional injuries after
anterior cruciate ligament injury. Arthroscopy 2005;21:431–8.
71.
Meunier A, Odensten M, Good L. Long-term results after primary repair or non-
surgical treatment of anterior cruciate ligament rupture: a randomized study with a
15-year follow-up. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2007;17:230–7.
72.
Lohmander LS, Englund PM, Dahl LL, et al. The long-term consequence of anterior
cruciate ligament and meniscus injuries: osteoarthritis. Am J Sports Med
2007;35:1756–69.
73.
International Cartilage Repair Society (ICRS). Newsletter 1998.
74.
Frobell RB, Roos HP, Roos EM, et al. The acutely injured knee assessed by MRI:
are large volume traumatic bone marrow lesions a sign of severe compression
injury? Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2008 Jan 16 [Epub ahead of print].
75.
Daniel D. Ligament surgery. The evaluation of results. In: Daniel DM, Akeson WH,
O’Connor JJ, eds. Knee ligaments: structure, function, injury and repair. New York:
Raven Press, 1990:521–34.
76.
Ostrowski JA. Accuracy of 3 diagnostic tests for anterior cruciate ligament tears.
J Athl Train 2006;41:120–6.
77.
Garratt AM, Brealey S, Gillespie WJ. Patient-assessed health instruments for the
knee: a structured review. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2004;43:1414–23.
78.
Lysholm J, Tegner Y. Knee injury rating scales. Acta Orthop 2007;78:445–53.
79.
Roos EM, Lohmander LS. Knee injury and osteoarthritis outcome score (KOOS):
from joint injury to osteoarthritis. Health Qual Life Outcomes 2003;1:64.
80.
Tanner SM, Tanner SM, Dainty KN, et al. Knee-specific quality-of-life instruments:
which ones measure symptoms and disabilities most important to patients?
Am J Sports Med 2007;35:1450–8.
81.
Snyder-Mackler L, Fitzgerald GK, Bartolozzi AR 3rd, et al. The relationship
between passive joint laxity and functional outcome after anterior cruciate ligament
injury. Am J Sports Med 1997;25:191–5.
82.
Roos EM, Roos HP, Ekdahl C, et al. Knee injury and osteoarthritis outcome score
(KOOS): validation of a Swedish version. Scand J Med Sci Sports 1998;8:439–48.
83.
Tapper EM, Hoover NW. Late results after meniscectomy. J Bone Joint Surg Am
1969;51:517–26.
84.
Sgaglione NA, Del Pizzo W, Fox JM, et al. Critical analysis of knee ligament rating
systems. Am J Sports Med 1995;23:660–7.
85.
Roos EM. Outcome after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction--a comparison of
patients’ and surgeons’ assessments. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2001;11:287–91.
Review
410
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 18 (native) -----
86.
Ho¨her J, Bach T, Mu¨nster A, et al. Does the mode of data collection change results
in a subjective knee score? Self-administration versus interview. Am J Sports Med
1997;25:642–7.
87.
Lieberman JR, et al. Differences between patients’ and physicians’ evaluations of
outcome after total hip arthroplasty. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1996;78:835–8.
88.
Georgoulis AD, Papadonikolakis A, Papageorgiou CD, et al. Three-dimensional
tibiofemoral kinematics of the anterior cruciate ligament-deficient and reconstructed
knee during walking. Am J Sports Med 2003;31:75–9.
89.
Stergiou N, Ristanis S, Moraiti C, et al. Tibial rotation in anterior cruciate ligament
(ACL)-deficient an ACL-reconstructed knees: a theoretical proposition for the
development of osteoarthritis. Sports Med 2007;37:601–13.
90.
Chaudhari AM, Briant PL, Bevill SL, et al. Knee kinematics, cartilage morphology,
and osteoarthritis after ACL injury. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2008;40:215–22.
91.
Linko E, Harilainen A, Malmivaara A, et al. Surgical versus conservative
interventions for anterior cruciate ligament ruptures in adults. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2005;18(2):CD001356.
92.
Spindler KP, Kuhn JE, Freedman KB, et al. Anterior cruciate ligament
reconstruction autograft choice: bone-tendon-bone versus hamstring: does it really
matter? A systematic review. Am J Sports Med 2004;32:1986–95.
93.
Pinczewski LA, Lyman J, Salmon LJ, et al. A 10-year comparison of anterior
cruciate ligament reconstructions with hamstring tendon and patellar tendon
autograft: a controlled, prospective trial. Am J Sports Med 2007;35:564–74.
94.
Hioki S, Fukubayashi T, Ikeda K, et al. Comparison of gender distinction in
postoperative stability after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction using
multiple-looped semitendinosus tendon. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc
2003;11:223–7.
95.
Gobbi A, Domzalski M, Pascual J. Comparison of anterior cruciate ligament
reconstruction in male and female athletes using the patellar tendon and hamstring
autografts. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2004;12:534–9.
96.
Kocher MS, Steadman JR, Briggs KK, et al. Relationships between objective
assessment of ligament stability and subjective assessment of symptoms and
function after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Am J Sports Med
2004;32:629–34.
97.
Muneta T, Koga H, Mochizuki T, et al. A prospective randomized study of 4-strand
semitendinosus tendon anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction comparing single-
bundle and double-bundle techniques. Arthroscopy 2007;23:618–28.
98.
Shea KG, Pfeiffer R, Wang JH, et al. Anterior cruciate ligament injury in pediatric
and adolescent soccer players: an analysis of insurance data. J Pediatr Orthop
2004;24:623–8.
99.
Micheli LJ, Metzl JD, Di Canzio J, et al. Anterior cruciate ligament reconstructive
surgery in adolescent soccer and basketball players. Clin J Sport Med 1999;9:138–4.
100.
Micheli LJ, Rask B, Gerberg L. Anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction in patients
who are prepubescent. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1999;(364):40–7.
101.
Koman JD, Sanders JO. Valgus deformity after reconstruction of the anterior cruciate
ligament in skeletally immature patients. J Bone Joint Surg 1999;81A:711–5.
102.
Eriksson E. Sports injuries of the knee ligaments – their diagnosis, treatment and
rehabilitation. Med Sci Sports 1976;8:133–44.
103.
Arvidsson I, Arvidsson H, Eriksson E, et al. Prevention of quadriceps wasting after
immobilization: an evaluation of the effect of electrical stimulation. Orthopedics
1986;9:1519–28.
104.
Petsche TS, Hutchinson MR. Loss of extension after reconstruction of the anterior
cruciate ligament. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 1999;7:119–27.
105.
Mikkelsen C, Werner S, Eriksson E. Closed kinetic chain alone compared to
combined open and closed kinetic chain exercises for quadriceps strengthening after
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction with respect to return to sports: a
prospective matched follow-up study. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc
2000;8:337–42.
106.
Heijne A, Werner S. Early versus late start of open kinetic chain quadriceps
exercises after ACL reconstruction with patellar tendon or hamstring grafts: a
prospective randomized outcome study. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc
2007;15:402–14.
107.
Risberg MA, Holm I, Myklebust G, et al. Neuromuscular training versus strength
training during first 6 months after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a
randomized clinical trial. Phys Ther 2007;87:737–50.
108.
Gustavsson A, Neeter C, Thomee P, et al. A test battery for evaluating hop
performance in patients with an ACL injury and patients who have undergone ACL
reconstruction. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2006;14:778–88.
109.
Augustsson J, Thomee R, Karlsson J. Ability of a new hop test to determine
functional deficits after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Knee Surg Sports
Traumatol Arthrosc 2005;12:350–6.
110.
Beynnon BD, Johnson RJ, Fleming BC. The science of anterior cruciate ligament
rehabilitation. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2002;(402):9–20.
111.
Shelbourne KD, Gray T. Anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction with autogenous
patellar tendon graft followed by accelerated rehabilitation. A two- to nine-year
follow-up. Am J Sports Med 1997;25:786–95.
112.
Roi GS, Creta D, Nanni G, et al. Return to official Italian First Division soccer games
within 90 days after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a case report.
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2005;35:52–61.
113.
Fitzgerald GK, Axe MJ, Snyder-Mackler L. A decision-making scheme
for returning patients to high-level activity with nonoperative treatment after
anterior cruciate ligament rupture. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc
2000;8:76–82.
114.
Hurd WJ, Axe MJ, Snyder-Mackler L. A 10-year prospective trial of a patient
management algorithm and screening examination for highly active individuals
with anterior cruciate ligament injury. Part 1: Outcomes. Am J Sports Med
2008;36:40–7.
115.
Howell SM, Taylor MA. Brace-free rehabilitation, with early return to activity, for
knees reconstructed with a double-looped semitendinosus and gracilis graft. J Bone
Joint Surg Am 1996;78:814–25.
116.
Schenck RC, Blaschak MJ, Lance ED, et al. A prospective outcome study of
rehabilitation programs and anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Arthroscopy
1997;13:285–90.
117.
Beynnon BD, Uh BS, Johnson RJ, et al. Rehabilitation after anterior cruciate
ligament reconstruction: a prospective, randomized, double-blind comparison of
programs administered over two different time intervals. Am J Sports Med
2005;33:347–59.
118.
Myer GD, Paterno MV, Ford KR, et al. Rehabilitation after anterior cruciate ligament
reconstruction: criteria-based progression through the return to sports phase.
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2006;36:385–402.
119.
Ekstrand J. Six versus eight months of rehabilitation after reconstruction of the
ACL: a prospective randomized study on soccer players. Science & Football
1990;3:31–6.
120.
Dahlberg L, Fride´n T, Roos H, et al. A longitudinal study of cartilage matrix metabolism
in patients with cruciate ligament injury. Ann Rheum Dis 1994;33:1107–11.
121.
Beynnon BD, Johnson RJ, Abate JA, et al. Treatment of anterior cruciate ligament
injuries, Part 2. Am J Sports Med 2005;33:1751–67.
122.
Tiderius CJ, Olsson LE, Nyquist F, et al. Cartilage glycosaminoglycan loss in the
acute phase after an anterior cruciate ligament injury: delayed gadolinium-enhanced
magnetic resonance imaging of cartilage and synovial fluid analysis. Arthritis Rheum
2005;52:120–7.
123.
Neuman P, Englund M, Kostogiannis I, et al. Prevalence of knee osteoarthritis 15
years after nonoperative treatment of anterior cruciate ligament injury. A
prospective longitudinal study. Am J Sports Med 2008 (in press).
124.
Myklebust G, Holm I, Maehlum S. Clinical, Functional and radiological outcome 6–
11 years after ACL injuries in team handball players – a follow-up study. Am J Sports
Med 2003;31:981–9.
125.
Ettlinger CF, Johnson RJ, Shealy JE. A method to help reduce the risk
of serious knee sprains incurred in alpine skiing. Am J Sports Med
1995;23:531–7.
126.
Cahill BR, Griffith EH. Effect of preseason conditioning on the incidence and
severity of high school football injuries. Am J Sports Med 1978;6:180–4.
127.
Caraffa A, Cerulli G, Projetti M, et al. Prevention of anterior cruciate ligament
injuries in soccer. A prospective controlled study of proprioceptive training. Knee
Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 1996;4:19–21.
128.
Soderman K, Werner S, Pietila T, et al. Balance board training: prevention of traumatic
injuries of the lower extremities in female soccer players? A prospective randomized
intervention study. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2000;8:356–63.
129.
Henning CEGN. Injury prevention of the anterior cruciate ligament (videotape).
Wichita Kansas: Mid-America Center for Sports Medicine, 1990.
130.
Griffis ND, Vequist SW, Yearout KM, et al. Injury prevention of the anterior cruciate
ligament. AOSSM Annual Meeting, Traverse City, Michigan, June 1989.
131.
Wedderkopp N, Kaltoft M, Lundgaard B, et al. Prevention of injuries in young
female players in European team handball. A prospective intervention study.
Scand J Med Sci Sports 1999;9:41–7.
132.
Irmischer BS, Harris C, Pfeiffer RP, et al. Effects of a knee ligament injury
prevention exercise program on impact forces in women. J Strength Cond Res
2004;18:703–7.
133.
Hewett TE, Lindenfeld TN, Riccobene JV, et al. The effect of neuromuscular
training on the incidence of knee injury in female athletes. A prospective study.
Am J Sports Med 1999;27:669–706.
134.
Myklebust G, Engebretsen L, Braekken IH, et al. Prevention of anterior cruciate
ligament injuries in female team handball players: a prospective intervention study
over three seasons. Clin J Sport Med 2003;13:71–8.
135.
Olsen OE, Myklebust G, Engebretsen L, et al. Exercises to prevent lower
limb injuries in youth sports: cluster randomised controlled trial. BMJ
2005;330:449.
136.
Mandelbaum BR, Silvers HJ, Watanabe DS, et al. Effectiveness of a
neuromuscular and proprioceptive training program in preventing anterior cruciate
ligmaent injuries in female athletes. 2-year follow-up. Am J Sports Med
2005;33:1003–10.
137.
Gilchrist J, Mandelbaum BR, Silvers HJ. ACL injury prevention in the Division I
NCAA female soccer athlete. AOSSM Specialty Day, San Francisco, 2004:64.
138.
Heidt RS Jr, Sweeterman LM, Carlonas RL, et al. Avoidance of soccer injuries with
preseason conditioning. Am J Sports Med 2000;28:659–62.
139.
Kraemer WJ, Hakkinen K, Triplett-Mcbride NT, et al. Physiological changes with
periodized resistance training in women tennis players. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2003;35:157–68.
140.
Ha¨kkinen K, Alen M, Kraemer WJ, et al. Neuromuscular adaptations during
concurrent strength and endurance training versus strength training. Eur J Appl
Physiol 2003;89:42–52.
141.
Kraemer WJ, Duncan ND, Volek JS. Resistance training and elite athletes:
adaptations and program considerations. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther
1998;28:110–9.
Review
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
411
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 19 (native) -----
142.
Hewett TE, Stroupe AL, Nance TA, et al. Plyometric training in female athletes:
decreased impact forces and increased hamstring torques. Am J Sports Med
1996;24:765–73.
143.
Wilkerson GB, Colston MA, Short NI, et al. Neuromuscular changes in female
collegiate athletes resulting from a plyometric jump-training program. J Athl Train
2004;39:17–23.
144.
Myer GD, Ford KR, Palumbo JP, et al. Neuromuscular training improves
performance and lower-extremity biomechanics in female athletes. J Strength Cond
Res 2005;19:51–60.
145.
Paterno MV, Myer GD, Ford KR, et al. Neuromuscular training improves single-limb
stability in young female athletes. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther
2004;34:305–16.
146.
Holm I, Fosdahl MA, Friis A, et al. Effect of neuromuscular training on
proprioception, balance, muscle strength, and lower limb function in female
team handball players. Clin J Sport Med 2004;14:88–94.
147.
Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR, et al. Preparticipation physical examination using a
box drop vertical jump test in young athletes: the effects of puberty and sex.
Clin J Sport Med 2006;16:298–304.
Additional Sports Injury Prevention research Online First
BJSM’s exciting innovation allows the advanced publication of selected articles within days of
acceptance. In addition to the Injury Prevention articles in this issue of BJSM, you can find the
following papers published Online First at http://bjsm.bmj.com/onlinefirst.dtl
c The effects of age and skill level on knee musculature co-contraction during functional activities: a
systematic review. KR Ford, AJ van den Bogert, GD Myer, et al.
c Effective prevention of sports injuries: a model integrating efficacy, efficiency, compliance and risk
taking behaviour. D Van Tiggelen, S Wickes, V Stevens, et al.
c Injury risk and socio-economic costs resulting from sports injuries in Flanders. Data derived from
Sports Insurance Statistics 2003. E Cumps, E Verhagen, L Annemans, et al.
c The epidemiology of rock climbing injuries. G Jones, A Asghar, DJ Llewellyn.
c Payments to injured professional jockeys in British horse racing (1996–2006). M Turner, G
Balendra, P McCrory.
c Hospitalisations for sport-related concussions in US children aged 5 to 18 years during 2000–2004.
J Yang, G Phillips, H Xiang, et al.
c Collegiate rugby union injury patterns in New England: a prospective cohort study. HA Kerr, CM
Curtis, LJ Micheli, et al.
c Injury trends in sanctioned mixed martial arts competition: a five-year review 2002–2007. KM Ngai,
F Levy, EB Hsu.
c A pilot study to determine the effect of trunk and hip focused neuromuscular training on hip and
knee isokinetic strength. GD Myer, JL Brent, KR Ford, et al.
These articles are available as unedited manuscripts in downloadable PDF form. They are peer
reviewed, accepted for publication, indexed by PubMed and will be published in forthcoming issues of
BJSM.
Review
412
Br J Sports Med 2008;42:394–412. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
6 June 2008. 
10.1136/bjsm.2008.048934 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as