

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Evolution of accelerometer methods for physical
activity research
Richard P Troiano,1 James J McClain,1 Robert J Brychta,2 Kong Y Chen2
1Risk Factor Monitoring
and Methods Branch, Applied
Research Program, National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA
2Diabetes, Endocrinology, and
Obesity Branch, Intramural
Research Program, National
Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA
Correspondence to
Dr Richard P Troiano,
Risk Factor Monitoring and
Methods Branch, Applied
Research Program, National
Cancer Institute, NCI Shady
Grove, 9609 Medical Center
Dr, MSC 9762, Bethesda,
MD 20892-9762, USA;
troianor@mail.nih.gov
Accepted 2 April 2014
Published Online First
29 April 2014
To cite: Troiano RP,
McClain JJ, Brychta RJ, et al.
Br J Sports Med 2014;48:
1019–1023.
ABSTRACT
The technology and application of current accelerometer-
based devices in physical activity (PA) research allow the
capture and storage or transmission of large volumes of
raw acceleration signal data. These rich data not only
provide opportunities to improve PA characterisation, but
also bring logistical and analytic challenges. We discuss
how researchers and developers from multiple disciplines
are responding to the analytic challenges and how
advances in data storage, transmission and big data
computing will minimise logistical challenges. These new
approaches also bring the need for several paradigm
shifts for PA researchers, including a shift from
count-based approaches and regression calibrations for
PA energy expenditure (PAEE) estimation to activity
characterisation and EE estimation based on features
extracted from raw acceleration signals. Furthermore,
a collaborative approach towards analytic methods is
proposed to facilitate PA research, which requires a shift
away from multiple independent calibration studies.
Finally, we make the case for a distinction between
PA represented by accelerometer-based devices and
PA assessed by self-report.
Accelerometer-based devices are now commonly
used to characterise physical activity (PA) behaviour
in research and consumer applications. In this article,
we present several topics related to the growth in use
of accelerometers that should be of interest to PA
researchers and research consumers. A review of the
history of accelerometers in PA research provides the
background. This is followed by a discussion of new
approaches to analyse acceleration data that are feas-
ible because of technological advances in devices and
computing. Two related projects of interest to the PA
research community are described: a collaborative
effort to harmonise accelerometer data analysis and
the collection of accelerometer data in the US
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES) 2011–2014. The article concludes with
further observations based on our experience with
accelerometer-based
devices
in
population
monitoring.
BRIEF HISTORY OF ACCELEROMETER-BASED
PA RESEARCH
The ﬁrst accelerometer-based PA monitor to be
adopted
by
researchers
was
developed
in
the
1980s,1 and the 1990s saw a proliferation of new
research
devices.
During
these
early
years,
accelerometer-based devices were seen as an intri-
guing, although niche, assessment technology due
to limitations that included high device cost, as well
as reliability, calibration and validity concerns.2
While many of these challenges are still being
debated today, by the early 2000s, accelerometer
technology was more accessible and the apparent
value of objective PA data collected over multiple
free-living days had grown attractive to many PA
researchers.3 The application of accelerometers as a
measure of PA has expanded exponentially. In
2004, an examination of the number of published
articles mentioning PA or exercise and accelerom-
eter or accelerometry found that the publication
rate had increased from roughly 10 or fewer per
year in 1981–1996 to nearly 90 per year in 2003
and 2004.3 A recent update of that publication
count ﬁnds that more than 600 articles per year
were published in 2012 and 2013 (ﬁgure 1).
The 2004 publication count was conducted for a
conference titled ‘Objective measurement of physical
activity: closing the gaps in the science of accelerome-
try.’ Presentations at the workshop, which were sum-
marised in a supplement to Medicine and Science in
Sports and Exercise (Med Sci Sports Exerc 2005
Nov;37(11 Suppl)), highlighted the developments of
the technologies and critical needs of the research
community. The desires included accurate assess-
ments of certain activity types, improved energy
expenditure (EE) estimation and statistical models
and uniﬁed calibration and validation studies. One
major limitation of the accelerometry technologies at
the time was minute-by-minute time resolution and
‘counts’ as the standard output. A critical mass of
behavioural and clinical researchers and engineers at
the conference made a call to manufacturers of accel-
erometer-based devices to open up their proprietary
data processing algorithms so that (count) data from
different manufacturers’ devices could be more trans-
parent and easily compared.2
The technical advances in accelerometry sensors
and other microelectronics since the 2004 confer-
ence are nothing short of remarkable. A portable
accelerometer-based PA monitor can now be built
with much larger memory and battery capacities,
wider acceleration range, better linearity, smaller
size and, in most cases, for a lower cost than
several years ago. At the same time, the potential
beneﬁts for researchers to have access to the raw
acceleration
signal
data,
rather
than
the
manufacturer-speciﬁc ‘counts’ data, have also been
realised.4 Further, increased utilisation of acceler-
ometer technology within national surveillance and
prospective cohorts has driven interest in archiving
data to support the ability to reprocess raw acceler-
ation signals based on evolving analytic methods
over a period of years or decades. Motivated by
these developments, manufacturers have responded
by providing devices that capture and store raw
acceleration signals at sampling frequencies up to
100 Hz.
Editor’s choice
Scan to access more
free content
Troiano RP, et al. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:1019–1023. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2014-093546
1 of 5
Review
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
29 April 2014. 
10.1136/bjsports-2014-093546 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Despite the technical advances in the monitor hardware,
many current study outcomes are still based on earlier analytic
approaches, such as linear regressions for predicting EE and
regression-based cut-points to classify time spent in different
activity intensities. Use of these analytic approaches is under-
standable because researchers continue to use many count-based
accelerometers from past studies for economic reasons or to
maintain comparability with earlier data collections. Not sur-
prisingly, conﬂicts and debates about which monitor(s) to use,
where to position them on the body, and how to process the
data are still common in the ﬁeld of PA research. However, the
path forward needs to be built on past experience, but must also
harness the potential advantages of the raw acceleration signal
data.
As
was
the
case
with
counts
and
regression-based
approaches, it will be important to recognise the limitations of
raw signal-based analyses, but novel approaches to analyse high-
resolution data provide the potential to expand the capabilities
of these new device technologies and to improve PA research.
PROSPECTS AND ADVANCES IN ACCELEROMETER
METHODS
The potential to model PAEE from counts was recognised at the
beginning of the development of modern accelerometers,1 and
the simplicity of linear regression approaches for developing
and applying counts made this approach exceedingly popular
with many researchers. Although most of the calibration regres-
sion equations estimate average PAEE relatively well for groups
(of generally healthy adults and children), the challenges of pre-
dicting PAEE accurately for individuals and over a wide range of
activities are also well known.5 The large errors associated with
EE estimates for individuals preclude the use of accelerometers
to calibrate dietary intake for energy balance or estimate
changes in PAEE in response to an intervention, two applica-
tions for which there is high demand.6 Moreover, multiple cali-
bration studies have generated widely divergent regression
models for converting counts to PAEE, yielding different cut-
points for PA categories.7 These diverse equations and cut-
points created considerable confusion and frustration for PA and
other health researchers who wished to select the most appro-
priate way to analyse their accelerometer data.7–9
A noteworthy shift in the past decade was the demonstration
of signiﬁcantly improved PAEE estimation compared with
regression calibrations by using signal features and patterns
extracted from raw acceleration data with machine-learning
techniques to derive more sophisticated models.10 Through the
model development processes, researchers also recognised that
PAEE was not the only outcome variable that could be extracted
from acceleration signals. With the implementation of piezore-
sistive and capacitive accelerometer transducers, static acceler-
ation (the direct current or DC component) from the raw
signals can be used to estimate limb angles and thus infer pos-
tures.11 Combining the positional information with the move-
ment
acceleration
data
(the
alternating
current
or
AC
component) in orthogonal directions provides rich feature sets
that allow modelling experts and statisticians to utilise the
power of pattern recognition, machine learning and fusion of
different techniques to respond to an ever-expanding applica-
tion ﬁeld.12 The ability to differentiate PA types is providing
new insights and promises to expand the scope of PA research
in behavioural and clinical sciences.
Accompanying the enthusiasm regarding high-resolution raw
acceleration signal capture are concerns related to storage and
transmission of the high-data volumes as well as appropriate
data modelling methods. With rapidly expanding computer
memory sizes at comparable or lower cost, storage is no longer
a signiﬁcant limitation. Data transfer from the onboard memory
of raw-data accelerometers (about 0.5 GB for each 7-day collec-
tion) can now be performed within minutes. However, it is cur-
rently challenging to translate the raw data to the desirable
results of PA types and PAEE. The raw-data-based analytic
models, particularly multidimensional algorithms, are still being
developed, validated and optimised by researchers and device
manufacturers. However, the widespread interest in ‘big data’
provides analytic approaches that are being applied to acceler-
ometer signal data.
To reduce barriers to adoption and support replication and
cross-validation of new models, the models need to be built into
easy-to-use software or in open-source shareware forms so that
they are useful for applied researchers and clinicians. A number
of efforts are currently under way within the academic, small
business and government sectors to address the speciﬁc compu-
tational requirements to implement signal processing methods
for large volumes (eg, Terabytes) of acceleration and related
sensor (eg, gyroscope or heart rate) data. For example, the US
National Cancer Institute has supported the development of
scalable systems for collection, storage, analysis and reporting of
data
from
diverse
sensor
platforms
via
Small
Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) contracts. A speciﬁc requirement of
these systems was the implementation of fully transparent (and
customisable) analytic tools to process data from raw sensor
Figure 1
Publications by year with
search terms ‘exercise or physical
activity’ and ‘accelerometer or
accelerometry,’ Scopus.com, accessed
3 January 2014.
2 of 5
Troiano RP, et al. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:1019–1023. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2014-093546
Review
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
29 April 2014. 
10.1136/bjsports-2014-093546 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 3 (native) -----
signals into outcome measures. Device manufacturers and appli-
cation developers have also continued to invest in software solu-
tions or support for open-source tools (eg, such as R-code and
libraries) in order to support their users’ analytic needs. The
availability of efﬁcient raw signal data analytic approaches will
ultimately encourage researchers towards new models of acceler-
ometer data analysis. These new models may decrease reliance
on
batch
processing
on
desktop
computers
and
increase
implementation of rolling data analysis, perhaps on cloud-based
computing platforms.
Another concern within the PA research ﬁeld is the compar-
ability and accuracy of information extracted from acceleration
signals recorded from different body locations. For example, the
correlation between activity counts and PAEE from uniaxial
accelerometers was found to be much lower when positioned
on the wrist rather than at the hip.13 However, several recent
studies that used features from triaxial raw accelerometer signals
have narrowed the gap between PAEE estimates from wrist-
worn and hip worn-accelerometers14 15 and for classifying PA
into sedentary, household, walking and running types.16 Such
efforts will certainly grow and mature over the next few years.
Current accelerometer-based devices have moved beyond
small-capacity (<1 MB) onboard memory chips and piezoelec-
tric sensors, which are now expensive and difﬁcult for device
manufacturers to ﬁnd. In the near future, the PA ﬁeld may also
move beyond reliance on count-based linear regressions and cut-
points for data extraction from accelerometers.
COLLABORATION TO STIMULATE METHODOLOGICAL
PROGRESS
As analysis methods are developed for raw acceleration signals,
it would be advantageous to PA researchers if methods evolved
towards a consensus approach. Such a consensus approach
would facilitate comparison of results across multiple and
diverse studies. With the movement towards raw accelerometer
data capture, it may even be possible to have approaches to
allow direct comparison of results from different manufacturers’
devices. This result would contrast with the previous develop-
ment of device-speciﬁc cut-point-based approaches for calibra-
tion
of
accelerometer-based
devices,
where
results
from
different devices could not be directly compared and so many
different analysis approaches existed that it was possible to
shape the outcome of a study by the choice of a cut-point.
Examples of areas where agreement could accelerate progress
are: core activities to include in protocols, standardised naming
conventions for variables in calibration studies or other data
collections, choice of machine learning approach and potential
signal features to include in algorithm development.
At
the
3rd
International
Conference
on
Ambulatory
Monitoring of Physical Activity and Movement (ICAMPAM) in
June 2013, a preconference workshop was held to propose a
collaborative approach to algorithm development. After the con-
ference, an email was sent to all attendees inviting involvement
in
the
collaborative
effort.
Approximately
90
participants
responded, indicating interest in collaboration, with many
expressing interest in sharing data to facilitate development of a
consensus analytic approach. At this time, smaller working
groups are being formed to propose solutions to issues such
as
ethical
and
privacy
issues,
harmonising
calibration
protocols, harmonising data elements for collaboration, data
management logistics, sensor technology and necessary meta-
data, machine learning and analytic methods, and evaluating
evidence for comparison of analysis methods. Efﬁcient models
for dissemination of the results of these deliberations will be
explored.
ACCELEROMETER DEPLOYMENTS AND PROTOCOLS IN THE
US NHANES
In the 2003–2004 and 2005–2006 cycles of the US NHANES,
survey, participants aged 6 years and older were asked to wear
an Actigraph 7164 on a waist belt during all non-sleeping hours
for 7 days. At the time, this data collection on nearly 15 000
individuals was the largest accelerometer deployment ever
undertaken. Partially due to the success of accelerometers in
NHANES, national studies in Canada,17
18 England19 and
Finland (Tommi Vasankari, personal communication, 2013)
have
deployed
accelerometer-based
devices
and
numerous
cohort studies have included accelerometer measures. The
NHANES
accelerometer
data
have
been
widely
used
by
researchers to explore relationships among accelerometer mea-
sures and a variety of other measures.20 Despite the success of
using an accelerometer device in NHANES and the widely used
data, participant compliance was recognised as a major issue.
Only about 25% of participants provided the requested 7 days
of data, which was mostly attributed to the discomfort or incon-
venience of wearing a device on the hip over time, and forget-
ting to put the monitor back on after taking it off at night.
Accelerometer-based devices returned to NHANES in the
2011–2012 and 2013–2014 cycles. However, the device and
protocol
used
differed
from
the
earlier
NHANES.
The
Actigraph was used, but the then-current model (GT3X+) was
waterproof and supported collection of 7 days of continuous tri-
axial accelerometer raw-signal data at 80 Hz. Rather than
repeating the waist location used in 2003–2006, wrist wear on
the non-dominant wrist was chosen. Wrist wear of a waterproof
device would allow the device to be worn around the clock for
7 days. This body location and protocol was chosen to improve
wear compliance and had the additional beneﬁt of allowing the
measurement of movement during sleep. Wrist actigraphy is a
well-validated
measure
of
sleep
duration
and
quality.21
However, for PA monitoring, use of the dominant versus non-
dominant wrist remains an open question. The selection of the
non-dominant wrist for the current NHANES protocol was pre-
dicated on a historical precedent for sleep research and early
reports of wrist-device calibration results,15 and should not yet
be considered as a standard for 24 h accelerometer-based PA
protocols. At this point, early wrist accelerometer calibration
studies do not appear to strongly favour right versus left wrist
(or dominant vs non-dominant) for PA monitoring.14–16
Preliminary data suggest that the protocol change had the
desired effect on compliance. In the 2003–2004 cycle of
NHANES, approximately 40–70% of participants by age group
provided at least 6 days of data with at least 10 h of wear time
and a large effect of age on wear compliance was evident. In
contrast, in the 2011–2012 cycle with wrist wear, 70–80% of
participants provided at least 6 days of data with at least 18 h of
wear time and little difference by age was apparent. Of partici-
pants who provided at least one acceptable wear day, 70% pro-
vided seven such days. The resulting median wear time in
2011–2012 was approximately 22 h/day.
Perhaps inﬂuenced by the protocol choice in NHANES, other
researchers have included wrist-worn accelerometer devices in
their studies.22 Many researchers across the ﬁelds of PA,
machine learning and statistics have also begun to explore
approaches to translate raw accelerometer signals from the wrist
to activity classiﬁcation.11 14–16
Troiano RP, et al. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:1019–1023. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2014-093546
3 of 5
Review
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
29 April 2014. 
10.1136/bjsports-2014-093546 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 4 (native) -----
COMPARING ACCELEROMETER AND SELF-REPORT DATA:
TIME FOR REFLECTION
The term PA is used to describe various aspects of an indivi-
dual’s daily behaviours (sports, occupation), activities (walking,
running, swimming) and bodily movements. Summary measures
of PA extracted from motion sensors and self-report instruments
have commonly been expressed using nominally the same
metrics, such as minutes/day in speciﬁc intensity categories (eg,
moderate-to-vigorous PA (MVPA) minutes or MET-minutes). As
has been repeatedly demonstrated in studies that compare ques-
tionnaires and accelerometer outcomes, the measures have a low
to moderate correlation,23
24 but these distinct assessment
methods are not equivalent.
Accelerometer-based monitors quantify acceleration resulting
from PA-associated bodily motion at a ﬁxed point of the body
(ie, hip, wrist, thigh, etc).4 Data outputs from accelerometers,
such as ﬁltered activity counts or raw acceleration signals,
provide an explicit representation of acceleration due to bodily
motion over short time periods determined by the device set-
tings, generally fractions of a second to a minute. As a conse-
quence, outputs derived from motion sensor data, such as
MVPA minutes, reﬂect the device resolution of time and
detected acceleration.
In contrast, self report instruments attempt to quantify PA
based on reported time periods engaged in speciﬁc behaviours
of longer duration. Behavioural self-report provides an inte-
grated proxy measure for bodily motion that may incorporate
elements of psychosocial and environmental context, activity
purpose, perceived time-use and intensity of effort. Many beha-
viours that are speciﬁcally queried or reported on PA self-report
instruments consist of patterns or groupings of speciﬁc activities
(eg, sitting, standing, walking, bending, lifting, throwing and
kicking) that are non-continuous in nature or activities for
which EE may be poorly quantiﬁed by a typically waist worn
accelerometer (eg, cycling). Either the high-resolution device
measure or the longer time scale of reports can be ‘correct’
within the construct assessed by each instrument (movement vs
behaviour). However, the time distinction and different levels of
aggregation
lead
to
challenges
for
direct
comparison
of
outcomes.
An example of the effect of the distinction between the types
of measure is apparent in the study by Chastin et al,25 which
found that among delivery postal workers who walked a route,
77% met the recommendation of 10 000 steps/day on ﬁve or
more days, but only 3% met the recommendation of at least
5 days of 30 min or more per day of moderate intensity activity
with a 10 min bout requirement. These workers would be very
likely to report that they walked several hours per day. The
authors note that self-reports consider the perceived total dur-
ation, but do not account for the actual fragmentation of
activity-related movement. In the Chastin et al study,23 a pause
of 10 s during walking was sufﬁcient to interrupt a walking
bout. This is one example, but there are many other instances
where a truthful report of PA behaviour will not translate to a
continuous bout of movement of similar duration measured by
an accelerometer-based device.
The inclusion of accelerometers in NHANES 2003–2004 and
2005–2006 allowed analyses that compared the prevalence of
meeting PA recommendations as measured by accelerometer to
the prevalence based on self-reported PA collected within the
survey.26
27 These analyses found dramatic differences in
the prevalence estimates by measurement method. However,
evaluation of PA guideline adherence based on accelerometer
outcomes is inappropriate because the behavioural metrics used
to develop the guidelines differ conceptually from device-based
measures of MVPA.
The epidemiological studies that are the basis for establishing
the Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans28 and earlier PA
for health recommendations29–31 primarily linked health out-
comes to self-reported PA from cohort or other observational
studies. The questionnaires used queried behaviours that often
occur within speciﬁc contexts, such as occupation, household
tasks, sports and recreation, or transportation walking or bicyc-
ling. Accelerometer-based devices accurately measure the move-
ment associated with PA behaviours that may be reported.
However, devices are not simply better measures of the same
construct captured by questionnaires, despite the reference to
both approaches as measures of PA.
Accelerometer-based devices will increasingly be used to char-
acterise the PA patterns of individuals and groups. Eventually,
health-related guidelines based on device-measured movement
will
be
developed,
and
by
that
time
incorporation
of
accelerometer-based devices into ubiquitous consumer devices
may allow easy tracking of compliance with the recommended
amount of movement. This vision will be aided by a consensus
approach to accelerometer signal analysis. However, until that
time, it is important that PA researchers understand the distinc-
tion between PA measured with an accelerometer-based device
and PA reported on questionnaires, diaries or logs. Each
approach has strengths that may be complementary, but device-
based
measures
and
behavioural
reports
are
not
interchangeable.32
SUMMARY
The technology and application of accelerometer-based devices
in PA research have experienced tremendous advances and
growth. Current hardware technology allows the capture and
storage or transmission of large volumes of raw acceleration
signal data. These data provide opportunities to improve charac-
terisation of PA, but the opportunities are accompanied by logis-
tical and analytic challenges. Researchers and developers from
multiple disciplines are responding to the analytic challenges
and advances in data storage, transmission and big data comput-
ing will minimise logistical challenges. However, the new
approaches bring the need for several paradigm shifts for PA
researchers, including a shift from count-based approaches and
regression calibrations for PAEE estimation to activity character-
isation and EE estimation based on features extracted from raw
acceleration
signals.
Furthermore,
a collaborative
approach
towards a consensus analytic
method would facilitate PA
research, but requires a shift away from multiple independent
calibration studies.
As our recognition of the different characteristics of PA
evolves and our interests in different aspects of PA behaviour
deepen and expand, the distinction between PA represented by
accelerometer-based devices and PA as reported by self-report
has to be recognised. PA researchers need to be aware that PA
estimates derived from these types of approaches are not con-
ceptually equivalent; they may be expressed in the same metrics,
but they are not assessing the same thing. As more measures
based on devices are used in PA research studies and reported in
the health literature, it will be important to recognise the likely
error of making inappropriate direct data comparisons.
4 of 5
Troiano RP, et al. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:1019–1023. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2014-093546
Review
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
29 April 2014. 
10.1136/bjsports-2014-093546 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 5 (native) -----
What this review adds?
▸Logistical challenges of storing, transmitting and analysing
raw acceleration signal data are being addressed by
technology and research advances.
▸Raw acceleration signal data inspire new paradigms of
movement data interpretation.
▸Increased understanding of movement data highlights the
distinct measurement features of devices and behavioural
reports as well as appropriate and complementary
applications of each modality.
Contributors RPT, JJM, RJB and KYC contributed to the conception and design, as
well as the drafting and revision of the article. RPT is responsible for the overall
content and is the guarantor. All the authors have approved the ﬁnal version.
Competing interests The manuscript and work described were performed by all
authors in their roles as US federal employees.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
REFERENCES
1
Montoye HJ, Washburn R, Servais S, et al. Estimation of energy expenditure by a
portable accelerometer. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1983;15:403–7.
2
Chen KY, Bassett DR Jr. The technology of accelerometry-based activity monitors:
current and future. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2005;37:S490–500.
3
Troiano RP. A timely meeting: objective measurement of physical activity. Med Sci
Sports Exerc 2005;37:S487–9.
4
Chen KY, Janz KF, Zhu W, et al. Redeﬁning the roles of sensors in objective physical
activity monitoring. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2012;44:S13–23.
5
Plasqui G, Bonomi AG, Westerterp KR. Daily physical activity assessment with
accelerometers: new insights and validation studies. Obes Rev 2013;14:451–62.
6
Welk GJ. Principles of design and analyses for the calibration of
accelerometry-based activity monitors. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2005;37:S501–11.
7
Matthews CE. Calibration of accelerometer output for adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2005;37:S512–22.
8
Freedson P, Pober D, Janz KF. Calibration of accelerometer output for children. Med
Sci Sports Exerc 2005;37:S523–30.
9
Rothney MP, Schaefer EV, Neumann MM, et al. Validity of physical activity intensity
predictions by ActiGraph, Actical, and RT3 accelerometers. Obesity (Silver Spring)
2008;16:1946–52.
10
Liu S, Gao RX, Freedson PS. Computational methods for estimating energy
expenditure in human physical activities. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2012;44:2138–46.
11
Rowlands AV, Olds TS, Hillsdon M, et al. Assessing Sedentary Behavior with the
GENEActiv: Introducing the Sedentary Sphere. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2013. [Epub
ahead of print]. doi:10.1249/MSS.0000000000000224
12
Intille SS, Lester J, Sallis JF, et al. New horizons in sensor development. Med Sci
Sports Exerc 2012;44:S24–31.
13
Swartz AM, Strath SJ, Bassett DR Jr, et al. Estimation of energy expenditure
using CSA accelerometers at hip and wrist sites. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2000;32:
S450–6.
14
Phillips LR, Parﬁtt G, Rowlands AV. Calibration of the GENEA accelerometer for
assessment of physical activity intensity in children. J Sci Med Sport
2013;16:124–8.
15
Esliger DW, Rowlands AV, Hurst TL, et al. Validation of the GENEA accelerometer.
Med Sci Sports Exerc 2011;43:1085–93.
16
Zhang S, Rowlands AV, Murray P, et al. Physical activity classiﬁcation using the
GENEA wrist-worn accelerometer. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2012;44:742–8.
17
Colley RC, Garriguet D, Janssen I, et al. Physical activity of Canadian adults:
accelerometer results from the 2007 to 2009 Canadian Health Measures Survey.
Health Rep 2011;22:7–14.
18
Colley RC, Garriguet D, Janssen I, et al. Physical activity of Canadian children and
youth: accelerometer results from the 2007 to 2009 Canadian Health Measures
Survey. Health Rep 2011;22:15–23.
19
O’Donovan G, Hillsdon M, Ukoumunne OC, et al. Objectively measured physical
activity, cardiorespiratory ﬁtness and cardiometabolic risk factors in the Health
Survey for England. Prev Med 2013;57:201–5.
20
Tudor-Locke C, Camhi SM, Troiano RP. A catalog of rules, variables, and deﬁnitions
applied to accelerometer data in the National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey, 2003–2006. Prev Chronic Dis 2012;9:E113.
21
Morgenthaler T, Alessi C, Friedman L, et al. Practice parameters for the use of
actigraphy in the assessment of sleep and sleep disorders: an update for 2007;
Standards of Practice Committee; American Academy of Sleep Medicine. Sleep
2007;30:519–29.
22
Knuth AG, Assunção MC, Gonçalves H, et al. [Methodological description of
accelerometry for measuring physical activity in the 1993 and 2004 Pelotas (Brazil)
birth cohorts] [Article in Portuguese]. Cad Saude Publica 2013;29:557–65.
23
Sallis JF, Saelens BE. Assessment of physical activity by self-report: status limitations,
and future directions. Res Q Exerc Sport 2000;71:1–14.
24
Dyrstad SM, Hansen BH, Holme IM, et al. Comparison of self-reported versus
accelerometer-measured physical activity. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2014;46:99–106.
25
Chastin SFM, Dall PM, Tigbe WW, et al. Compliance with physical activity
guidelines in a group of UK-based postal workers using an objective monitoring
technique. Eur J Appl Physiol 2009;106:893–9.
26
Troiano RP, Berrigan D, Dodd KW, et al. Physical activity in the United States
measured by accelerometer. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2008;40:181–8.
27
Tucker JM, Welk GJ, Beyler NK. Physical activity in US adults: compliance with the
Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans. Am J Prev Med 2011;40:454–61.
28
Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee. Physical activity guidelines advisory
committee report, 2008. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human
Services, 2008:683.
29
Pate RR, Pratt M, Blair SN, et al. Physical activity and public health. A
recommendation from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the
American College of Sports Medicine. JAMA 1995;273:402–7.
30
Haskell WL, Lee IM, Pate RR, et al. Physical activity and public health: updated
recommendation for adults from the American College of Sports Medicine and the
American Heart Association. Circulation 2007;116:1081–93.
31
Nelson ME, Rejeski WJ, Blair SN, et al. Physical activity and public health in older
adults: recommendation from the American College of Sports Medicine and the
American Heart Association. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2007;39:1435–45.
32
Troiano RP, Pettee Gabriel KK, Welk GJ, et al. Reported physical activity and
sedentary behavior: why do you ask? J Phys Act Health 2012;9:S68–75.
Troiano RP, et al. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:1019–1023. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2014-093546
5 of 5
Review
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
29 April 2014. 
10.1136/bjsports-2014-093546 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as