

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Gubala, V., Harris, L.F., Ricco, A.J., Tan, M.X. and Williams, D.E. (2011) 
Point of care diagnostics: Status and future.  Analytical Chemistry, 84 (2). 
pp. 487-515. ISSN 0003-2700. 
Kent Academic Repository
Downloaded from
https://kar.kent.ac.uk/45223/ The University of Kent's Academic Repository KAR 
The version of record is available from
https://doi.org/10.1021/ac2030199
This document version
Pre-print
DOI for this version
Licence for this version
UNSPECIFIED
Additional information
Unmapped bibliographic data:
LA - English [Field not mapped to EPrints]
J2 - Anal. Chem. [Field not mapped to EPrints]
C2 - 22221172 
[Field not mapped to EPrints]
AD - Biomedical Diagnostics Institute, Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland [Field not 
mapped to EPrints]
DB - Scopus [Field not mapped to EPrints] 
Versions of research works
Versions of Record
If this version is the version of record, it is the same as the published version available on the publisher's web site. 
Cite as the published version. 
Author Accepted Manuscripts
If this document is identified as the Author Accepted Manuscript it is the version after peer review but before type 
setting, copy editing or publisher branding. Cite as Surname, Initial. (Year) 'Title of article'. To be published in Title 
of Journal , Volume and issue numbers [peer-reviewed accepted version]. Available at: DOI or URL (Accessed: date). 
Enquiries
If you have questions about this document contact ResearchSupport@kent.ac.uk. Please include the URL of the record 
in KAR. If you believe that your, or a third party's rights have been compromised through this document please see 
our Take Down policy (available from https://www.kent.ac.uk/guides/kar-the-kent-academic-repository#policies).

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Point of Care Diagnostics: Status and Future
Vladimir Gubala,* Leanne F. Harris,* Antonio J. Ricco,* Ming X. Tan,* and David E. Williams*
Biomedical Diagnostics Institute, Dublin City University, Dublin 9, Ireland
’CONTENTS
Introduction
A
Why POC Diagnostics?
B
Time
B
Patient Responsibility and Compliance
B
Cost
B
Diagnostic Targets
C
Proteins
C
Metabolites and Other Small Molecules
C
Nucleic Acids
C
Human Cells
D
Microbes/Pathogens
D
Drugs and Food Safety
D
Current Context of POC Assays
E
POC Glucose Assays
E
Lateral Flow Assays
E
Limitations of “Traditional” POC Approaches
F
Enabling Technologies
G
Printing and Laminating
G
Microﬂuidic Technologies and Approaches:
“Unit Operations” for POC Devices
G
Pumping and Valving
H
Mixing
I
Separation
I
Reagent Storage
J
Sample Preparation
K
Surface Chemistry and Device Substrates
L
Physical Adsorption
L
Bioaﬃnity Attachment
L
Covalent Attachment
M
Substrate Materials
M
Detection
M
Electrochemical Detection
N
Optical Detection
N
Magnetic Detection
N
Label-Free Methods
O
Enabling Multiplexed Assays
O
Recent Innovation
O
Lateral Flow Assay Technologies
O
Proteins
P
Antibodies
P
Protein Expression and Puriﬁcation
Q
Nucleic Acids
Q
Aptamers
R
Infectious Diseases and Food/Water Safety
R
Blood Chemistry
S
Coagulation Markers
S
Whole Cells
S
Trends, Unmet Needs, Perspectives
T
Glucose
T
Global Health and the Developing World
T
Personalized Medicine and Home Testing
U
Technology Trends
U
Multiplexing
V
Author Information
V
Biographies
V
Acknowledgment
W
References
W
’INTRODUCTION
We review point-of-care (POC) diagnostics, in vitro diagnostic
(IVD) tests that do not involve the use of laboratory staﬀand
facilities to provide the result. The analytical “targets” include
proteins, nucleic acids, metabolites, drugs, dissolved ions and
gases, human cells, and microbes. Samples are blood, saliva,
urine, or other bodily ﬂuids or (semi)solids. Whether used “near-
patient” in a hospital, clinic, or doctor’s oﬃce, or administered at
home to maintain health, manage disease, or monitor therapy, or
in the ﬁeld to test the safety of water, food, or compliance with
laws and regulations, these tests accept a sample with little or no
pre-preparation and provide a result, the “answer”, in seconds to
hours.1 The tests require only elementary instruction to use and
some detect multiple analytes or markers.2 Interpretation may be
as simple as viewing a stripe or spot of color on a strip of paper or
polymer; increasingly, however, readers ranging from hand-held
devices to benchtop instruments read the analytical test, provide
a comprehensible result, and if necessary, control and operate the
sample-containing platform that executes the analytical process.
Anidealizedconceptofa POCdeviceis showninFigure1. These
devices are challenged by small sample volumes (hundreds of
nanoliters to ∼1 mL) of complex biological media with femto-
molar to millimolar concentrations of analytes.3 The devices

----- Page 3 (native) -----
should be inexpensive disposable chips or cartridges that include
microﬂuidic features to provide or control sample preparation,
ﬂow rate, mixing with reagents, reaction time associated with
binding events, ﬁltration of nonanalytical components of the
sample, separation of interfering agents and of multiple analytes,
and an eﬀective measurement capability.4
POC diagnostics have been extensively reviewed in recent
years, from the points of view of both use5 and development.6 The
reviews have included coverage of micrototal analysis systems
(μTAS),7 miniaturized isothermal nucleic acid ampliﬁcation8 and
molecular biological techniques for gene assay,9 current and anti-
cipated technology for POC infection diagnosis,10 and micro-
ﬂuidic-based systems leading toward point-of-care detection of
nucleic acids and proteins,11 including multiplexing and label-
free methods.12 Developments in this area include not only tech-
nology but also reliable measurement targets, which in some
important areas remain elusive: progress toward viable point-of-
care protein biomarker measurements for cancer detection and
diagnostics has been reviewed.13
We review here the present status of POC diagnostics, em-
phasizing in particular the past 4 years, then extrapolate their
progress into the future. Included are IVD tests for biochemical
targets of all sorts relevant to human health, diagnosis, and
therapy, as enumerated above. We begin with an overview of the
diﬀerent classes of bioanalytical targets. Then, after setting the
context using the well-established glucose and pregnancy POC
tests, recent progress in key enabling technologies is reviewed,
including traditional and advanced lateral ﬂow approaches, printing
and laminating technologies, a range of microﬂuidic advances,
progress in surface chemistry and the control of nonspeciﬁc binding,
and developments in labeled and label-free detection approaches.
A number of speciﬁc innovative examples, in both commercial
products and academic POC research, are presented, including
assays based on binding to proteins, nucleic acids, and aptamers,
with separate sections devoted to blood chemistry, coagulation,
and whole cells. We close with trends and future perspectives.
Why POC Diagnostics? Time POC measurements provide
results rapidly, where needed, and often with major time savings:
samples do not travel to a laboratory to await the attention of a
skilled technician; results do not wait to be transmitted and col-
lected. Rather, the doctor, nurse, care-giver, patient, or consumer
initiates the test and receives the results on the spot. Inevitably
this saves time, but speed must not be traded for accuracy or
reliability.
Patient Responsibility and Compliance. In primary care
settings, patients are supervised by a medical team responsible
for administering medications and monitoring responses. Although
often administered by medical professionals, POC tests are also
widely self-administered, making patients far more responsible
for managing their own condition(s).14 Concern over loss of
professional control and potential for incorrect interpretation of
results15 necessitate management systems to ensure that patients
receive reliable devices and readout training, including every-
thing from device maintenance to finger-stick sampling proce-
dures, along with general information on their medical conditions
and where to turn for support.16
In-home POC testing reduces the frequency of hospital visits,
travel expenses, and lost work time.17 The success of glucose
meters and pregnancy tests has motivated more people to opt for
self-testing,18 conferring increased responsibility to maintain
their own medical records and notify their physicians should
abnormal results arise.19 This situation can be tenuous, particu-
larly if the patient’s mental or physical faculties are compromised.
The advent of “telemedicine” or “telehealth”,14 the provision of
health services over long distances via telecommunications, is ad-
dressing this challenge by giving healthcare professionals partial
control over patient self-testing and data management.20
Empowering individuals to do their own tests can improve patient
compliance (adherence to diagnosis and treatment regimens).21
A recent study of the cost eﬀectiveness of POC testing reveals
signiﬁcant increases in testing regularity and adherence to
prescribed medications,22 as well as improvements in clinical
outcomes.23 Near-patient testing in diabetic clinics results in
greater patient satisfaction, accompanied by better understanding
of medical results24 and improved long-term prognosis relative to
a dearth of testing.21
POC testing is well established to monitor blood coagulation
time in conjunction with administration of the anticoagulant
warfarin: weekly self-monitoring of oral anticoagulation coupled
with self-dosing provides more eﬀective anticoagulation therapy
than conventional testing.25 Similarly, the quality of anticoagula-
tion therapy, managed initially in the traditional hospital setting
then switched to self-management, deteriorated when patients
returned to clinical management.26
Cost. POC diagnostic cost parameters differ from those of con-
ventional laboratory analysis. Readers (instruments) are smaller
and more specialized than laboratory systems, so they cost less
but do only one or a few different tests. Samples do not directly
contact the reader, hence self-cleaning subsystems are not needed.
The POC chip, strip, or cartridge, a consumable that contains the
sample but is not designed for cleaning or reuse, may include fluidics,
on-board reagents and dyes, optics, electrodes, even thermal
control. Relative to a blood-draw tube, the POC device’s greater
complexity and functionality make it more costly, so tests sold in
large volume derive most of their revenue from the consumable.
POC tests can indirectly, sometimes drastically, lower medical
costs: sample mislabeling and mishandling, along with misdirec-
tion of results, are less likely. Results are provided more quickly,
enabling more eﬀective treatment of rapidly progressing aﬄic-
tions, even making a life-or-death diﬀerence with some infec-
tions. Rapid POC results can obviate hospital admissions, e.g.,
when a suspected myocardial infarct is determined rapidly to be
indigestion. On the other hand, sophisticated test cartridges cost
more than basic sample tubes, and when the cost of a large
laboratory system can be amortized over hundreds of thousands
of samples, cost per test can be lower.
Figure 1. Idealized POC device. Adapted with permission from ref 6a.
Copyright 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

----- Page 4 (native) -----
’DIAGNOSTIC TARGETS
Proteins. Proteins, including enzymes, antibodies, and some
hormones, are common targets for POC diagnostics. An early
POC device developed in 1957, the urinalysis dipstick measures
urinary protein using paper strips impregnated with a pH indicator
dye.27 Diabetics and kidney-disease patients were enabled to test
their urine at home, providing a previously unrealizable degree of
feedback to manage their own health. Today, products such as
the Clinitek Status analyzer by Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics
allow semiquantitative electronic readout of urine dipsticks.
Modern POC devices utilize immunoassay technology, which
includes antigenantibody binding, whether the antibody is the
assay target or the means to capture it. These assays target disease-
speciﬁc protein markers such as glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c)
for diabetics, C-reactive protein (CRP) for inﬂammation includ-
ing cardiovascular disease, D-dimer for thrombosis, troponin I or
T for cardiac damage, prostate-speciﬁc antigen (PSA) for this
common cancer, and bacterial and viral infection-related markers
such as human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV), inﬂuenza, chla-
mydia, and hepatitis.5b Commercial POC devices that detect an-
tibodies developed by the host in response to infection include
OraQuick ADVANCE Rapid Antibody Test for HIV, QuickVue
Inﬂuenza AB, and Accustrip Strep A for group A Streptococcus.
The best-known home POC protein-detection device, the preg-
nancy test kit measures the pregnancy hormone human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG). The test’s key component, the lateral-ﬂow
test strip, is described in the Lateral Flow Assays section.
Metabolites and Other Small Molecules. Metabolites are
products of chemical processes, metabolism, that generate energy,
process nutrients or wastes, or break down and renew body
tissues.28 Because of similarities in their physiological transport
and detection approaches for POC assays, we treat them here
together with simple ionic blood chemicals (H+, Na+, K+, Cl,
HCO3
, etc.) and small-molecule organic species, including
nonprotein hormones (e.g., epinephrine, cortisol, and peptide
hormones). Levels of metabolites, hormones, and blood-borne
chemicals are often diagnostic indicators of disease. The current
panel of metabolites most often targeted by POC diagnostics
includes glucose, cholesterol, triglycerides, creatinine, lactate,
ammonia, and urea.29 One of the early and best-known clinical
POC analyzers is the i-STAT hand-held system (Abbott Point of
Care, Princeton, NJ) for blood chemistry.30
The best-known metabolite, glucose, enables diagnosis and
management of diabetes mellitus, an endocrine disorder aﬄicting
more than 125 million people worldwide;14 glucose biosensors
account for approximately 85% of the entire biosensor market.31
Diabetic complications are controllable with tight regulation of
glucose levels, prompting the development of POC glucose
sensors in the 1990s.32 Most diabetic patients now regulate their
condition at home using hand-held glucose meters that analyze a
small capillary blood sample.5a
Screening cholesterol,6b triglycerides, and other plasma lipids
is an important component in the management of cardiovascular
disease, a leading cause of mortality worldwide.33 Stroke and
diabetes are also linked to high cholesterol, bolstering its importance
as a POC diagnostic target.
Creatinine, a byproduct of kidney function, is produced at a
constant rate in healthy individuals; its level is diagnostic for
defective renal function through estimation of the glomerular
ﬁltration rate.34 Lactate measurements are often performed in the
emergency room to provide valuable information about tissue
perfusion and the presence of ischemia or hypoxia:35 elevated
lactate often suggests inadequate blood oxygenation.
Renal dysfunction, liver disease, and asthma can often be detect-
ed through the measurement of urea and ammonia levels;36
high bloodstream ammonia levels are related to slow conversion
to urea due to liver impairment.37 Uremia or kidney failure can
lead to high levels of breath ammonia,38 which is well suited to
noninvasive breath-test-based POC diagnostics.39
Other metabolites of interest include those produced as a
result of recreational drug use or illegal substance abuse. The
eﬀects of nicotine are well-known, with an astounding 4.9 million
deaths per annum; self-testing for nicotine metabolites was
suggested by Barnfather et al. as a motivational factor in smoking
cessation.40 POC diagnostics are very popular for the detection
of the metabolites of illegal drugs such as cocaine, opiates, and
cannabis in workplace or prison settings.41
Nucleic Acids. Nucleic acid diagnostics, often referred to as
“molecular diagnostics” (in seeming oblivion to the molecular
nature of proteins and metabolites), measure DNA or various
types of RNA in order to assay particular genomic or genetic
details of a patient or to assay nucleic acid sequences unique to
invading pathogens. PCR (polymerase chain reaction) and
numerous other methods of selectively copying (“amplifying”)
preselected nucleic acid sequences are often part of such assays,
rendering them at once exceptionally sensitive (to a few copies of
the target sequence), highly selective (only predefined target
sequences are amplified), but also more expensive, cumbersome,
and time-consuming than other POC assays.
In POC diagnostic devices, sample volumes are often mea-
sured in microliters, and little or no user manipulation should be
necessary. Assay design is therefore more challenging than standard
DNAmicroarray-basedassays42andideallyinvolvesjusttwospeciﬁc
binding events once any sample preprocessing has occurred:
target nucleic acid from the sample is speciﬁcally captured on a
substrate surface, usually through hybridization with a comple-
mentary, surface-bound “probe” DNA, and the captured target is
then detected through a second hybridization event between its
free end and a complementary, labeled oligonucleotide (normally
short, 1015 bases) (Figure 2). Measurement sensitivity is often
controlled by the hybridization eﬃciency of both events and by
the level of background signal in the absence of target. Binding
kinetics and target speciﬁcity can be modulated by various factors,
such as ionic strength, reaction temperature, and probe density.
Recent work has shown that low probe densities can lead to higher
hybridization eﬃciencies and more rapid binding kinetics43 at the
expense of a smaller measured signal that may be more suscep-
tible to background interference.
The time to obtain a test result is a diﬀerentiating factor for
nucleic acid tests. For example, current tests for infecting viruses,
Figure 2. Idealized nucleic acid assay: RNA in a drop of blood is
captured by complementary probe strands on the device surface, then
labeled by a 2nd complementary strand introduced from solution.

----- Page 5 (native) -----
bacteria, and fungi include culturing of organisms,44 various
forms of immunoassay,45 and nucleic acid testing.46 Culturing
microbes requires several hours to more than a week, rendering it
broadly inappropriate for POC testing. Immunoassay is accom-
plished in minutes to an hour or more (depending on incubation
times); the time for nucleic acid assay is similar, including
demonstrated best examples that take only 12 min.47
Direct detection of viruses, bacteria, or fungi by POC im-
munoassay often suﬀers from inadequate limits of detection
(LODs), which can be addressed by targeting the rRNA mol-
ecules present in high copy numbers (hundreds to thousands) in
each cell,48 often with subtyping (strain-speciﬁc) data as a bonus.
New RNA targets have been recently identiﬁed as appropriate
markers for various infectious bacteria, an excellent example
being tmRNA, present in all bacterial phyla,49 now well docu-
mented as a molecular diagnostic target.50
Improvements and new approaches in POC technologies will
enable multiparameter assays that focus beyond identiﬁcation of
individual microbial pathogens to allow multiple antibiotic
resistance determinations.51
Human Cells. The identification and enumeration of specific
human cells (and animal cells for veterinary diagnostics) in blood
and other samples is a promising and rapidly expanding field in
POC diagnostics. In addition to basic blood cell counting, it has
been widely recognized that POC cell-assay-based devices could
implement diagnostic and prognostic testing for infectious diseases,
cancers, inflammatory responses, and hematological parameters,52
and this vision is beginning to be realized.
The assay of cells in POC format is straightforward in
principle: target cells are captured or localized using antibodies,
proteins, or aptamers; labeled according to the mode of detec-
tion; then enumerated. The presence and numbers of speciﬁc
receptors on cell surfaces can be assayed by selective immuno-
labeling, and interactions with particular solution or surface
antigens or proteins can be assessed via binding; automated
counting of cells on device surfaces is often straightforward.53
Whole-cell POC assays will not supplant the clinical laboratory
ﬂow cytometer, which can assay 10 or more receptors on each of
thousands of individual cells per second, also providing cell
morphological information via light scattering. However, these
bulky, expensive, complex instruments are limited to well-
ﬁnanced central testing laboratories, providing an opportunity
for POC cell tests to ﬁll a number of specialized niches.
Microbes/Pathogens. Microbes, viruses, and parasites are an
important POC analytical target, particularly those that cause
infectious disease:54 by enabling treatment with the proper anti-
microbial agent, rapid identification of the causative pathogen of
a serious infection can save significant treatment cost, reduce
suffering, help stem the spread of disease, and save lives. Because
species and strain identification are required, pathogens are often
diagnosed using nucleic acid identification;8b in some cases they
can be diagnosed (as in tuberculosis55) via the specific antibodies
that are present in an infected host. Nonetheless, a rapid screen to
differentiate, for example, bacterial from viral infection, or simply
to detect a pathogen or a piece of it directly can be an important
diagnostic step. In some cases, bacterial assay can use antibody
capture of whole or fragmented organisms or toxins they produce
(as in staphylococcal enterotoxin B56), rather than more complex
genetic analysis.
Common POC tests for microbes or fragments thereof, along
with their applications and performance, have been reviewed by
Clerc and Greub.54 For example, group A Streptococcus pyogenes
is detected by selective binding of its carbohydrate antigen; an
immunochromatographic (lateral ﬂow) assay that detects the
C-polysaccharide common to the cell walls of all pneumococcal
serotypes of Streptococcus pneumoniae, approved by the FDA in
1999, gives a result in 15 min. The malaria parasite is also
detected by an immunochromatographic assay of a particular
antigen; each species of the parasite has its own assay.
A laboratory demonstration of immunomagnetic preconcen-
tration/localization and detection of salmonella and Staphylo-
coccus aureus using ﬂuorescent assay has been reported.57 Viruses
have also been detected: an inﬂuenza rapid POC test sensitive to
swine lineage A(H1N1) inﬂuenza viruses has been evaluated.58
Drugs and Food Safety. Recreational drug abuse and doping
in competitive sports are on the rise and constitute significant
social problems worldwide. The past decade has seen a revolu-
tion in the development of tests using alternative specimens for
drug analysis: tests utilizing sweat, saliva, and meconium (in
infants) have been cleared by the U.S. FDA.59 Oral fluid offers
significant promise when detection of relatively recent use of
drugs is sought in a noninvasive manner.60 Technological advances
do allow on-site detection of drugs, but there are technical issues
in relation to collection of oral fluid and in the variability of drug
concentrations in this fluid. One of the successful commercial
examples of an on-site test for oral fluid drugs of abuse deter-
mination is Oratect. It utilizes a colloidal gold-particle-based lateral
flow immunoassay and combines sample collection and drug
testing in a single device.61
Doping has become an issue in elite sport and sensitive detec-
tion assays that enable the identiﬁcation of small organic com-
pounds on the microscale are required. Sports drug testing
approaches can utilize paper, thin-layer, or gas chromatography
methods to reveal the presence of prohibited substances such as
strychnine, pervitine, captagone, or benzedrine in doping test
specimens.62 Most sport-doping drugs are also used to treat
various diseases such as hypertension (beta-blockers), bronchial
congestion (theophylline), congestive heart failure (diuretics),
anemia (erythropoietin); many anabolics (steroidal hormones),
growth hormone, peptides, stimulants, and narcotics are legal
only when prescribed. A brief historical overview and the deve-
lopment of detection methods for illegal substances used in
sports, including the very few rapid POC-like approaches, are
interestingly summarized in a review by Catlin et al.63
The challenge in developing drug detection devices is not only
short detection times but also the regulation of the tests to ensure
that they provide the right answers. Existing drug testing methods
often lack suﬃcient sensitivity or speciﬁcity to the diversiﬁed list
of drugs of abuse. As is the case with all immunoassays, the probe
antibody regulates speciﬁcity. Because of the similarity of chemi-
cal structures within drug classes (e.g., opiates), commercially
available antibodies tend to exhibit high cross-reactivity in im-
munoassays. As a result, immunoassay-based devices could provide
a practical means to analyze high quantities of specimens when
the majority are expected to test negative. However, conﬁrmatory
chemical analysis (e.g., gas chromatography/mass spectrometry,
HPLC, etc.) in a laboratory could be required for any specimens
that screen positive.
In the food industry, the deliberate contamination of food
materials with low-quality, cheap, nonedible, or toxic substances
is referred to as adulteration. Some adulterants are dangerous to
health and can even cause death: a recent infamous example is
melamine that was the source of a Chinese milk scandal in 2008.
Fortunately, the ﬁrst on-site adulterant detection devices are now

----- Page 6 (native) -----
commercially available. Typically dipstick devices, they oﬀer an
advantage over spot tests because an adulteration check can be
performed at the collection site.64 Intect 7 (Branan Medical
Corporation), a dipstick covered with seven dry reagent pads,
tests for creatinine, speciﬁc gravity, pH, nitrite, glutaraldehyde,
bleach, and pyridinium chlorochromate.61b,65 Overall, there are
more than 50 common adulterants that are classiﬁed based on
their chemical, bacterial, or fungal origins.
’CURRENT CONTEXT OF POC ASSAYS
POC Glucose Assays. Glucose measurement is the well-
established leader in commercial volume for point-of-care test-
ing: glucose test strips for home use are manufactured on an
astonishing scale, approaching 1010/year, with single production
lines making devices at a rate of 106/h using printing and lami-
nating technology. The science and technology of these devices
have recently been described comprehensively.31,66
The majority of commercial self-test glucose measurement
systems are now electrochemical, based on redox-couple-mediated
enzymatic oxidation of glucose with either glucose oxidase or
glucose dehydrogenase (GDH), the latter having the advantage
of faster enzyme kinetics. Several diﬀerent forms of GDH have
been used. Pyrroloquinolinequinone-GDH is not speciﬁc to
glucose, resulting in a recent warning about the use of devices
based on this enzyme for people on certain medications.67 Advances
in recent years have included the reduction in time-to-result to as
little as 5 s and necessary blood volume to as little as 300 nL,
demonstrating that submicroliter ﬂuidic devices can be repro-
ducibly mass-manufactured and applied.
Glucose detection with these devices relies on measurement of
a catalytic electrochemical current; traditionally-measured elec-
trochemical signals are inﬂuenced by enzyme reaction kinetics,
mediator concentration, and sample viscosity (through diﬀusion
coeﬃcients). Recent commercial developments have aimed
to eliminate these inﬂuences, such that the precision of mea-
surement is determined solely by manufacturing dimensional
tolerances, an example being the microcoulometer described
by Heller and Feldman.66b Calibration of strips is by statistical
sampling, with the results (encoded for example on a barcode)
used to set the reader gain and oﬀset for strips from a particular
batch.
Evaluation of the analytical and clinical performance68 of these
devices is a complex question, the result depending not only on
the performance of the device but also on the training of the person
using it, temperature, atmospheric pressure, the way the sample is
taken, and characteristics of the blood, particularly hematocrit69
(red cell content). The current analytical performance require-
ment is that 95% of individual glucose results fall within (15 mg/dL
of a reference measurement at glucose concentrations <75 mg/dL,
and within (20% at glucose concentrations >75 mg/dL. Freck-
mann et al.70 performed a laboratory evaluation of the system
accuracy of 27 blood glucose monitoring systems using two
diﬀerent reference methods; just 16 of the 27 systems satisﬁed
the performance requirements. For the tighter performance re-
quirement deemed necessary for tight glycemic control,71 (5
mg/dL for glucose concentration <75 mg/dL, the systems varied
widely in performance (Figure 3): just 4 of the 27 systems had
75% or better of their results within this range.
Some variability no doubt reﬂects limitations of the error-
compensation algorithms meant to deal with sample variability.
Unfortunately, it is not possible to identify from the literature
what speciﬁc design variables contribute most. However, a
notable design assumption is that, during the ﬁlling of the device
and in any pause period before the measurement is initiated,
glucose in the sample volume is completely converted to gluco-
nolactone as a consequence of a high concentration of enzyme
and mediator dispersed into the sample, so that the amount of
reduced mediator corresponds to the amount of glucose initially
present. By inserting a carbon ﬁber microelectrode into the sample
space in two particular commercial devices, Burt and Unwin72
measured directly the variations of mediator concentration at
diﬀerent positions within the strip during a glucose determina-
tion. They demonstrated unambiguously that the assumption
that the enzyme reaction proceeds to completion throughout the
entire sample is incorrect.
Lateral Flow Assays. The lateral-flow assay (LFA) or lateral-
flow immunochromatographic assay, introduced in 1988 by
Unipath, is the commonest commercially available POC diag-
nostic format.73 Today, POC LFA devices for pregnancy (using
hCG levels) and ovulation confirmation, screening for infectious
diseases and drugs of abuse, and for measurement of protein
markers in blood to aid rapid clinical diagnostics of life-threaten-
ing events such as heart attack, stroke, and deep-vein thrombosis
are manufactured in very large numbers: > 107/year for preg-
nancy alone.
The LFA device incorporates porous membranes, antibodies,
and a visible signal-generating system; it depends upon ﬂuid
migration or ﬂow technology as outlined in Figure 4.6b,73 Gen-
eration of a response signal begins when a particulate label
(commonly colloidal gold or dyed polystyrene or latex spheres),
detectable optically at concentration as low as order 109 M, is
dispersed by ﬂow of sample into a volume containing analyte that
speciﬁcally binds to the label through an adsorbed antibody or
nucleic acid fragment. Capture of the analyte by the label takes
place during incubation, after which the analyte-decorated label is
itself immobilized into a smaller volume. The concentration of
captured label in the detection zone thus depends upon the ﬂow
rate of the ﬂuid past the capture zone and the average number of
bound analyte molecules/particle, itself dependent on the in-
cubation time and kinetics of the capture reaction, which in turn
depends on the fraction of the particle surface covered by active
binding reagent.74 With a suitably conﬁgured system, LODs of
1012 M are relatively easily obtained.
Figure 3. Performance of commercial self-test glucose measurement
systems, determined under controlled laboratory conditions. Compiled
from data tabulated in ref 70.

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Limitations of “Traditional” POC Approaches. POC devices
with single-use test cartridges raise issues about errors and
interferences, but there has been relatively little published work
on sources of error in POC device designs nor discussion of how
errors might be affected by system configuration or particular
unit operations implemented within the device. The myriad
processes and their impacts are summarized by Figure 5.
Recently, comparison of POC results with those from labora-
tory clinical analyzers was reported for cardiac markers, particu-
larly cardiac troponin I (cTnI), a challenging analytical task since
it requires reliable classiﬁcation of whole-blood samples near
a cutoﬀof 80 ng/L (∼3 pM)75 of an antigen that requires
multiple antibody pairs targeted at diﬀerent epitopes.76 Our
analysis of the literature indicates that critical issues arise in the
dispersion of dried reagents into the sample, in the mixing of
reagents and sample, and in the control of incubation time.
Furthermore, autoantibodies, heterophilic antibodies, and rheu-
matoid factor are potentially all present at variable concentra-
tions in blood samples and can cause both positive and negative
interference in the commonly used “sandwich” immunoassays
for cTnI.73,77,78 Most modern immunoassays therefore contain
materials that block heterophilic antibodies.77b In POC test
devices, the necessary reagents must be contained within the
device, usually being deposited in dried form within a reagent pad
or on the base of a channel. The eﬃcacy with which interferences
are handled therefore depends upon the eﬃcacy with which the
blocking reagents are distributed through the sample, the con-
centration uniformity of blocking reagent achieved, and control
of time of incubation with blocking reagent. Furthermore, POC
devices necessarily feature ﬁlters to remove blood cells, raising
the possibility that interactions of blood and ﬁlter material,
inﬂuenced by nonanalyte blood components that vary between
samples, can cause variable and unanticipated adsorption of analyte.
The devices studied feature either variants on LFA—on a
nitrocellulose strip as in the RAMP (see the Recent Innovations
section) design,79 in a radial conﬁguration as in the dendrimer-
enhanced radial-partition immunoassay80 implemented in the
Stratus-CS design, or in a microﬂuidic channel as in the Biacore
design—or a microﬂuidic implementation of an enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay with electrochemical detection in the
i-STAT design (see the Blood Chemistry section for a descrip-
tion of this technology). Clinical evaluation of POC devices for
cardiac markers has focused on reliable risk stratiﬁcation, which
has two components: deﬁnition of a cutoﬀlevel for some biome-
dical marker above which the risk of a speciﬁed condition is con-
sidered suﬃcient for further action and the precision of measure-
ment methods near the cutoﬀlevel, which determines the
probability of both false-positive and false-negative results. These
two parameters are not independent: deﬁnition of a cutoﬀlevel
requires a measurement (with associated probability estimate) to
be correlated with a clinical outcome. The evaluation of POC
devices has therefore involved two diﬀerent aspects: comparison
of results with reference measurements conducted on laboratory
analyzers used to deﬁne the cutoﬀand correlation of clinical
outcome with measurement results.
The clinical consequences of variability in analytical results
have been assessed: according to Venge et al.,81 laboratory assays
identiﬁed signiﬁcantly more people with elevated cTnI levels
than did POC tests (i-STAT and Stratus-CS) and, as a con-
sequence, identiﬁed signiﬁcantly more of the people in the study
who subsequently died of cardiovascular disease (8090%) than
did the POC assays (5060%). They concluded that “the clinical
judgment of the patient with suspected myocardial ischemia
should not solely rely on results from POC assays.” This illustrates
the diﬃculties of measurement in POC devices where results
from single-use cartridges depend on batch sampling and com-
parison between diﬀerent cartridges for calibration and where
Figure 5. In POC microanalytical systems, unit operations (left-hand
side) and overall system speciﬁcations (right-hand side) interact such
that decisions on one element aﬀect all others. This pregnancy-test
device includes optical measurement with digital readout of the LFA-based
single-use stick located at left. Device image courtesy of Unipath, Ltd.
Figure 4. (a) Typical lateral ﬂow immunoassay format. (b) Sample is
applied to the sample pad. Analyte present in the sample binds to the
antibody-conjugated label, then binds to the test line to return a positive
result. If the analyte is absent, the label binds to the control line, generating a
negative control result. Adapted from from ref 7a
[http://dx.doi.org/
10.1039/b820557b] by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry and
from ref 264, copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.

----- Page 8 (native) -----
unit operations (particularly mixing, incubation timing, sample
normalization, and rinsing) may not be as well controlled as in a
laboratory machine. Over the range 017 pM cTnI, both POC
devices had roughly constant standard errors of estimate, ∼2 pM
(50 ng/L), relative to the laboratory analyzer.81 Both also had
very small oﬀset error but also a large number of outliers, which
dominated the regression and contributed to the poorer clinical
predictive value of the POC results relative to the laboratory
analyzers.
In some contrast, Apple et al.82 reported participation by three
diﬀerent hospitals in a patient specimen and analytical validation
study (n = 186) for the i-STAT cTnI assay, yielding a regression
slope between the POC device and laboratory analyzer for whole
blood of 0.9 from 1 pM to 1.5 nM. The results on the clinical
samples indicated a tendency to outliers, with the i-STAT indica-
ting low values relative to the laboratory analyzer. However, the
standard error of estimate relative to the laboratory analyzer over
the range 25 pM, assessed using spiked, pooled whole-blood
samples, was very small, ∼0.5 pM. There was no bias between
whole blood and plasma measurements, both made on the i-STAT.
Bock et al.75 compared cTnI measured by the i-STAT device
with that measured by a clinical laboratory analyzer for 557
specimens that initially tested positive by i-STAT. The study
covered a very wide concentration range, up to 2 nM. The scatter
in correlation was marked at high concentrations; the correlation
slope, also dominated by high-concentration values, deviated
signiﬁcantly from unity (∼0.6). Over the narrower concentration
range 02 pM, near the clinical cutoﬀ, Venge et al.81 show a
correlation coeﬃcient of 0.74. Bock et al.75 reported that the
i-STAT cTnI test gave generally reliable patient classiﬁcations.
However, they also noted that some 6% of values in the range
signiﬁcant for clinical decision-making, 24 pM, recorded as
negatives by i-STAT, were recorded as positives by the laboratory
analyzer. Again, this work highlights the importance of outliers in
the results.
Apple et al. concluded that the i-STAT was a satisfactory risk
stratiﬁcation tool (29 positives).83 Similarly, Lee-Lewandrowski
et al. concluded that the RAMP device was a satisfactory risk
stratiﬁcation tool.84 Examination of the results, as well as those of
Wu et al.,85 shows the importance of outliers. As noted above,
there are many aspects of the design of the current POC devices
that can give rise to such outliers, including the eﬀects of reagent
dispersion, mixing, timing control and, in lateral ﬂow devices,
fortuitous cancellation of errors.
’ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
Printing and Laminating. In LFA devices, capture agents are
printed as lines at specific locations on the device membrane,
followed by a drying process.73 In the traditional contact-printing
mode, a dispenser tip is dragged across the surface of a membrane
like a pen while a pump delivers a defined volume of liquid. This
method can deform the membrane, causing line width variation.
Noncontact printing using tools such as inkjet printers or micro-
solenoid-valve-controlled printheadshasbecomemorecommon:86
it provides accurate control of dispensing volume, accurate posi-
tioning, and flexibility in printing patterns. However, clogging of
the dispenser tip can be a problem, since the dispensing solution
can contain complex protein stabilizers and/or particles such as
micrometer-sized beads. Proper process optimization and online
vision-based inspection are usually required for the manufactur-
ing process.
It is common for capture DNA to be robotically spotted, in
eﬀect a form of printing, onto the solid substrate in predeter-
mined spatial locations. The spots, with volumes as low as 1 nL,
typically dry very quickly; spotting variability upon drying is not
fully understood and it is very likely a situation of kinetic control,
which can be a signiﬁcant source of the signal variation.91
LFA devices and many microﬂuidic POC devices are fabri-
cated using standard ﬁlm lamination techniques. In the LFA
device, the absorbent pads and porous membranes are tradition-
ally laminated to a plastic sheet for structural strength using
pressure sensitive adhesive (PSA); the stack is then cut into test
strips that are placed in plastic housings.
In recent years, lamination of polymer layers has been used for
the fabrication of a new generation of microﬂuidics-based POC
devices because of its versatility and low cost.87 In one approach,
microﬂuidic channels are formed in a PSA or thermo-bond (“hot
melt”) adhesive sheet using cutting instruments such as a CO2
laser, metal-blade die cutter, or computer-driven vinyl cutter. The
PSA is then laminated between two plastic sheets, with the PSA
material forming the sidewalls of the ﬂuidic channel and the PSA
thickness deﬁning the channel thickness.88 Fluidic channels
50 μm tall with variation of less than 5% can be achieved.66b
This is important because accurate volume control is needed for
most quantitative assays. PSA also allows bonding of diﬀerent
materials, such as polycarbonate or nylon ﬁlters and cellulose
membranes to a plastic sheet.89 Three-dimensional microﬂuidic
structures can also be formed using this approach by laminating
multiple plastic layers with via-holes together using (patterned)
PSA ﬁlms. For example, recent reports demonstrate a fully
integrated immunoassay card with dry reagent storage, conjugate
pad, and microﬂuidic channels, enabling quantitative assay with
the POC cartridge.90 The cartridge carries dry reagents that are
reconstituted upon use, eliminating the need for refrigerated
storage conditions.
A unique new approach uses paper laminated with PSA to
form 3D ﬂuidic networks for POC devices, claimed to be suited
by virtue of their low cost to applications in the developing world.92
Narrow hydrophilic conduit pads are deﬁned in cellulose paper
by hydrophobic borders formed with various techniques includ-
ing photolithography, etching, and wax printing. Various assay
reagents are printed in the microchannels on layers of paper; the
paper layers are then laminated together using PSA with via-holes
ﬁlled with cellulose powder to wick liquid between paper layers.
Sample is introduced at one end of the paper pad and wicks into
the hydrophilic ﬂuidic channels. Multiple functionalities includ-
ing sample preparation and multiplexing have been achieved with
this platform.
Typical PSA-based lamination approaches have signiﬁcant
limitations: channel widths are often larger than 400 μm and
the side walls are not particularly smooth (on a micrometer scale)
due to the limited resolution of most cutting tools. Adhesive
material compatibility and thermal compatibility can also be
problematic. Direct thermal lamination (bonding) of plastic ﬁlms
and monoliths to one another can address these limitations.93 Thin
plastic ﬁlms of poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA), polystyrene,
and cyclo oleﬁn polymer or copolymer (such as Zeonor or Topas)
can be laminated to injection-molded or hot-embossed micro-
structures using heated roller laminators;92 solvent vapor bonding
is feasible as well.94 These approaches produce sealed microﬂuidic
channels with well-deﬁned walls and tight dimensional control.
Microfluidic Technologies and Approaches: “Unit Opera-
tions” for POC Devices. Microfluidics has been a significant

----- Page 9 (native) -----
component of recent research activity in POC diagnostics.
Enabling technologies around microfluidics have been reviewed
recently,95 including centrifugal microfluidics,96 integration of
functionality into polymer-based microfluidic devices produced
by high-volume micromolding techniques,97 unconventional
low-cost fabrication and patterning techniques for point of care
diagnostics,87 rapid device prototyping,98 flexible99 and thermop-
lastic100 substrates, and laser-printer toner and paper-based
fabrication techniques.101 Microfluidic whole-blood immunoas-
say methods,3b including methods of cell and particle separation102
and methods directed at cardiac marker measurement103 have been
reviewed, as has urine analysis104 and the emerging field of salivary
diagnostics,105 with discussion of prospective POC applications.
Pumping and Valving. Micropumps and microvalves enable
precise control of sample, buffer, and reagent flow and delivery.
They are necessary for many next-generation POC devices that
integrate features such as sample preparation, complex assays
that include incubation, mixing, or separation steps and more
quantitative outputs.52b,106 Fluidic pumps and valves can either
be integrated into the disposable POC device or into the detection
instrument, provided steps are taken to avoid their contamina-
tion by diagnostic samples. Both approaches increase cost and
can add challenges to device manufacturing and introduce new
modes of potential malfunction,107 so the added performance
must be at least commensurate with these drawbacks.
To date, most common POC devices, most notably LFA test
strips, rely on capillary-force-driven, passive ﬂuidic ﬂow. LFA
strips move samples and analytes using the wetting properties of
capillaries in porous substrate materials or integrated wicking
pads86 or, more recently, arrays of microfabricated pillars or
posts.108 Their advantages include simplicity in design, compact
form, low cost, disposability, absence of moving parts, and no
need for external power. Their limitations are variations in ﬂow
rate due to sample viscosity variations, site temperature, changes
in the surface properties of the device over time, and poor batch-
to-batch reproducibility of substrate materials such as nitrocellu-
lose. To control the ﬂow rate precisely, Cesaro-Tadic et al. used
Peltier elements to modulate the evaporation rate at the end of a
capillary network.109 In microﬂuidic devices, rates of capillary-
pressure-driven ﬂow can also be manipulated by controlling
channel geometry, using integrated microstructures, and via
surface chemistry, as reviewed in detail by Eijkel et al.110 Recent
work by Gervais et al. demonstrated a one-step immunoassay
with a fully integrated microﬂuidic device consisting of a sample
collector, delay valves, ﬂow resistors, and capillary pump.111
Wang et al. also demonstrated a quantitative multiplexed protein
barcode-readout assay including on-chip plasma puriﬁcation
from whole blood samples, all with capillary force generated via
absorbent paper.3a
External pumps, such as diaphragm pumps, peristaltic pumps,
and syringe pumps, are common in research-based POC devices.89b
They oﬀer the advantage of precise ﬂow rate control, but integration
of a pump into the detection instrument can limit home care or
ﬁeld use.112 Miniaturized peristaltic pumps (http://www.takasago-
elec.com/products_pump/peristaltic/) provide a much smaller
version of this laboratory workhorse, with its advantage of tubing
being the only wetted material but without the capability to
replace the tubing as in larger pumps. Microfabricated reciprocal
and rotary displacement pumps113 can be integrated directly into
ﬂuidic cartridges and oﬀer advantages of compact size and large
ﬂow rate and pressure ranges; however, their complexity, cost,
and power needs can be an issue for POC applications.
Low-cost pumping mechanisms that can be built into POC
devices without electrical power or moving parts are discussed in
a pair of excellent reviews.52b,112 They include human-powered
on-chip ﬁnger pumps, chemically induced pressure/vacuum pumps,
and spring-based pumps.114 Commercial diagnostic products
based on such mechanisms include POC cards by Micronics.115
Poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS)-based ﬂuidic networks con-
nected to arrays of external pneumatic valves, extensively devel-
oped by Quake and colleagues, can provide both valving and
peristaltic pumping to control on-chip liquid ﬂow precisely.116
While the instruments required to control the networks and the
need for a pneumatic pressure source limit the use of such devices
for POC applications,117 these devices may be suitable for benchtop
diagnostic applications, such as DNA analysis.118 Recently, Lee et al.
demonstrated incorporation of silicone tubing in an injection-
molded plastic device for use as a micropinch valve for RT-PCR-
based HIV detection.119 Zhou et al. (at Rheonix, Ithaca, NY) also
reported fabrication and characterization of micropumps through
pneumatic actuation of thin polystyrene ﬁlm.120
Spinning CD-like ﬂuidic disks transport samples and reagents
by the interplay of centrifugal, capillary, and Coriolis forces; their
application in POC and POC-relevant applications has been
detailed.4c,96,121 This technology has been used for clinical
analysis for some 4 decades;96,122 currently, Abaxis, Inc. sells
the Piccolo portable clinical chemistry system (Figure 6) for on-
site patient testing of multichemistry panels in 100 μL of whole
blood, serum, or plasma (http://www.piccoloxpress.com/).
Fluids can be pumped toward the rim of the disk at a wide
range of ﬂow rates through control of the spin speed, channel
dimensions and surface energy (contact angle), and various
geometric details, with temporary capillary “stop valves” (created
where a channel abruptly widens or enters a chamber) opened to
ﬂuid passage simply by increasing rotational velocity. Steigert
et al. demonstrated a system with integrated sample preparation
including separating plasma from whole blood, mixing, metering
of liquid, and integrated signal enhancement. Rapid detection of
glucose, hemoglobin, and alcohol in human whole blood was
reported.123 New developments in the ﬁeld include integration of
the ﬂuidic CD platform with other technologies, such as carbon
electrodes for dielectrophoresis,124 and reports of new immu-
noassay-based assays from whole blood.125
Fluid droplet-based (or “digital”) microﬂuidics has many
(potential) applications in POC diagnostics.126 Droplets moved
by the electrowetting-on-dielectric (EWOD) method are parti-
cularly promising, oﬀering electrically controlled liquid move-
ment and adaptability to a range of diﬀerent bioassays.127 Droplet
Figure 6. Abaxis Piccolo Blood Analyzer and CD platform. Reprinted
with permission from Abaxis, Inc.

----- Page 10 (native) -----
generation, mixing, sorting, and splitting are controlled by a
network of electrodes covered with a dielectric coating. Sista et al.
demonstrated rapid immunoassay and on-chip extraction and
PCR using whole-blood samples with a hand-held instrument
and disposable chips.47 There are, however, some limitations on
the use of the device for whole blood samples due to protein
surface adsorption, which was avoided by encasing whole blood
sample droplets in silicone oil. Companies such as Advanced
Liquid Logic are developing POC products based on such
technologies.
Electrokinetically based approaches for ﬂuidic movement and
separation of charged species have been used many years for a
range of applications, including diagnostic assays,128 with explicit
consideration of suitability for POC application of electroosmo-
tic pumping, capillary electrophoresis, electrochromatography,
or electrokinetically controlled immunoassay.7b,129 In addition
to traditional DC-powered systems that require high voltages
(tens to hundreds of volts, easily supplied by small, high-
eﬃciency power supplies), recent developments in AC approaches
such as electrothermal ﬂow and AC electroosmosis also oﬀer
potential for POC applications.107 Sample salt concentration can
aﬀect the ﬂow rate and, if high enough, can prevent electrokineti-
cally based approaches, but Huang et al. demonstrated low-power
AC-based electroosmotic pumps that move ﬂuid in a high-salt
DNA solution without passing current through the salty ﬂuid.130
Mixing. Resuspension of dried regents, sample dilution, and
reaction of multiple reagents in POC devices often require rapid
and efficient mixing. However, mixing in microfluidic platforms
is difficult because Reynolds numbers are low (<1) so that flow is
laminar and mixing is dominated by diffusion unless special
measures are taken; efficient micromixing can be achieved through a
number of active and passive mixing mechanisms.131 In active
mixing, external driving forces such as acoustic waves, magnetic
beads coupled to moving permanent magnets, or actuated air
bubbles enhance mixing of samples. In passive mixing, liquids are
driven through microstructures designed to increase contact area
between the different streams and to speed diffusive or induce
chaotic mixing. For example, structures such as the staggered
herringbone132 or modified Tesla structure, which divides a flow
into two streams that collide from opposite directions,133 have
been demonstrated to enhance mixing efficiency. There are some
excellent recent reviews on mixing in microfluidic platforms in
the context of POC devices.6a,52b,131,134 Some recent advances in
mixer design relevant to POC devices are presented here.
Lien et al. presented a membrane-based micromixer relying on
air actuation to expand and compress a series of chambers,
creating gentle mixing in ﬂuidic channels as part of a platform for
leukocyte puriﬁcation, DNA extraction, and genotyping from
whole blood.135 Air-induced actuation of multilayer PDMS
chambers is also used for mixing in urine analysis devices as
reported by Lin et al.118 In acoustic mixing, Ahmed et al. intro-
duced a new mechanism using an external piezoelectric transdu-
cer to oscillate bubbles trapped along the side walls of micro-
ﬂuidic channels to produce rapid mixing.136 Recently, Nath et al.
demonstrated a mixing component by direct integration of a PZT
(lead zirconate titanate) disk with a laser-cut PSA-based mixing
chamber to achieve rapid mixing using trapped air bubbles.137
POC platforms that utilize electrical connections or centrifu-
gal forces for pumping, separation, and detection often utilize
platform-speciﬁc mixing strategies. For example, systems that use
electroosmotically driven ﬂow can enhance mixing by introducing
restrictions in the microchannel and using an AC electric ﬁeld
to generate alternating thin crescent-shaped layers of the two
ﬂuids that signiﬁcantly increase the contact area between the two
streams.134a In droplet-based microﬂuidic platforms, mixing is
achieved easily by merging individual droplets.47,127,138 Unique
approaches to solving mixing issues in CD platforms using
Coriolis-force-induced mixing, rapid oscillation of the disk, and
magnetic beads have been reviewed in detail.4c,96
Recent advances in passive mixing focus on design optimiza-
tion to enhance mixing eﬃciency in short ﬂuidic channel
lengths.139 Tofeberg et al. presented a new design that combines
both splitting and recombining liquid streams with microfabri-
cated structures in the channels to enhance mixing.140 Tsai et al.
demonstrated the use of a combination of baﬄes and a curved
channel to enhance mixing;141 Long et al. presented a 3D vortex
micromixer consisting of a single mini-cylinder mixing chamber.142
Improvement in mixing eﬃciency also can be achieved through
modiﬁcation of channel surface energy: Swickrath et al. demon-
strated high-eﬃciency passive mixing by a checkerboard pattern
of hydrophobic andhydrophilic regions in a microﬂuidic channel.143
Photopatterned porous polymer monoliths in channels144 are
another approach to enhance mixing and improve overall chemical
reaction rates. Micromixers with passive intestine-inspired ser-
pentine structures were integrated with capillary electrophoresis
for pathogen DNA detection at the single-cell level.145 Choi et al.
reported a disposable agglutination device for clinical diagnostics
using a serpentine micromixer.146 The use of micromixers
containing a combination of nozzles and 3D pillars reportedly
shortened DNA ligation time from 4 h to 5 min.147
Mixing mechanisms that are simple, requiring few or no moving
parts, are particularly important for in-home POC devices and
developing-world applications. Mixing was demonstrated on a
paper-based POC platform by simply stacking porous paper strips
on top of each other in a ﬂat Y-geometry mixer (Figure 7).148
Cotton threads with knots used for routing and mixing were
demonstrated for potential urine and blood analysis applications.149
Separation. The genesis of modern microfluidic and lab-on-a-
chip devices is closely linked to separations of bio/chemical
species on chip, in particular using electrophoresis. LFA, a dominant
POC technology, is often referred to as lateral-flow immuno-
chromatographic assay, emphasizing its separations functional-
ity. Separation is important for POC devices: it can increase
Figure 7. Demonstration of mixing in a ﬂat Y-geometry paper mixer.
Reproduced from ref 148 [http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/c004821f] by permis-
sion of The Royal Society of Chemistry.

----- Page 11 (native) -----
target purity, in the process improving LODs and removing
interfering agents, background and potential false positives, by
separating them from the analytical target prior to detection.
Separation is also increasingly critical to POC methods as
detection of multiple analytes in one device gains importance
(see the Trends, Unmet Needs, and Perspectives section).
Several reviews have described the present state of chip-based
separations methods in the context of the components, or “unit
operations”, of microﬂuidic devices.7a,6a,118,134b,150 Recent devel-
opments in electrophoretic separations on microﬂuidic devices
have also been reviewed;151 Hou and Herr reviewed lab-on-chip
aﬃnity-based electrokinetic separations for quantitation of pro-
teins and integration of preparatory functions needed for sub-
sequent analyses of biological samples.7b The use of microﬂuidic
methods to separate cells has been reviewed as well.152 Immuno
separations are an inherent component of LFA, which has been
reviewed recently.5c,73,153
Separation methods applied to POC devices and POC-pre-
cursor microﬂuidic devices include capillary electrophoresis (CE),
dielectrophoresis (DEP), isoelectric focusing, various types of
liquid (electro)chromatography including micellar electrokinetic
chromatography (MEC), optical ﬁelds including tweezers and
various particle-motivating ﬁelds, magnetic motivation and cap-
ture, acoustic waves and ﬁelds, size-based ﬁltration (using ﬁlters,
nanostructures, and microstructures), and various combinations
of ﬂow, diﬀusion, and sedimentation-based phenomena, the last
of these particularly in centrifugal devices. Some of these methods
are better suited to separating molecules, others to particles
(including cells), and some work for both.
Separation is based on one or more parameters including
charge, polarizability/dielectric properties (at AC or optical fre-
quencies), pK/pH of minimum charge, mass, size, magnetic
properties, and physical/chemical/immuno binding interactions.
Immuno- or chemical binding is often used to selectively tether
the analyte to a particle or label, which may then enable its se-
paration. Common separation metrics include resolution, eﬃ-
ciency, purity, and throughput.
Two processes closely related to separations, because they use
many of the same phenomena to implement diﬀerential aﬃnity,
are treated in the next section, Sample Preparation. Here we
summarize some relevant recent advances in separations, a
number of which are essentially eﬀorts to integrate established
separation methods with various ﬂuidic components or unit ope-
rations rather than the development of new separation methods
per se.
Jung et al. reported a single-cell-level, multipathogen detection
device using a DNA barcode assay. It includes target pathogen
magnetic separation as well as capillary electrophoretic separa-
tion of DNA barcodes, with a total analysis time of 30 min.145
The use of an ion-permeable membrane for chip-based elec-
trophoretic preconcentration followed by CE separation of
cancer marker proteins was described by Nge et al.154 A nega-
tively charged membrane, photopolymerized near the injection
intersection of a chip-based CE separation structure, concen-
trated the target components: cancer markers α-fetoprotein and
heat-shock protein 90 were concentrated over 10-fold in 1 min,
then separated by CE.
In a system designed to detect biological toxins using chip-
based immunoassays, polymeric gels with large pores were
located adjacent to a size-exclusion membrane in order to
electrophoretically separate the antibodyanalyte complex from
the excess antibody prior to detection.1
Laurell and colleagues reviewed the transition of acoustic
standing-wave techniques from the macro to the micro scale,
describing diﬀerent particle separation modes and surveying
potential applications in the medical clinic.155
Reagent Storage. To make the leap from lab-on-a-chip to
practical POC devices, an often-overlooked necessity is the
means to store reagents for extended time periods on or in the
device.118 Reagents, including “fragile” molecules like enzymes
and antibodies, can be stored in the wet or dry state. The latter is
often preferred in those cases where drying (or lyophilization)
does not cause total and unrecoverable loss of activity, because
reagents that are successfully dried typically exhibit improved
stability relative to those stored wet.52b,112,156 The importance of
such storage in the context of global health diagnostics was cited
by Yager.89b
In many regards, on-chip storage of dry reagents is well
developed: LFA strips are dry and include reagents, typically at
least one type of antibody and often two, and other reagents as
well. Glucose sensors include dried glucose oxidase and electron-
transfer catalysts. There is not, however, a single best process for
freeze-drying, lyophilizing, or otherwise depositing and drying
reagents in a form from which they are readily reconstituted; the
successful approach often depends upon details of the reagents,
the sample, and the assay. The addition of sugars, trehalose being
a favorite, is a widely utilized method to improve bioreagent
stability and retention of activity.52b,112,156 Immobilization of
reagents on beads can facilitate storage of reagents in the dry
form while removing a solution spotting step from the manu-
facturing process. For example, protein G beads dried with 80%
sucrose were shown to be stable for at least 1 month of storage at
45 C by McKenzie et al.157
An approach reminiscent of LFA methods for on-chip re-
agents was reported by Stevens et al.89a in their microﬂuidic
device implementation of a ﬂow-through membrane immunoas-
say with on-card dry reagent storage. It utilized both a porous
membrane patterned with capture molecules and a ﬁbrous pad
containing an anhydrous analyte label; unlike LFA strips, this
device relies upon an external pumping and imaging instrument
to deliver sample and rehydrated reagent at controlled ﬂow rates,
thereby producing more quantitative results. With developing-
world applications in mind, the malarial antigen Plasmodium
falciparum histidine-rich protein II was stored and reconstituted;
goldantibody conjugates were dried in sugar matrices, retaining
8096% of their activity after 60 days of storage at elevated
temperatures. The integrated system gave a respectable detection
limit in the subnanomolar range in under 9 min.
A plasma ﬁbrinogen assay was implemented on a polymer
micropillar-based LFA platform by drop-casting a mixture of
bovine thrombin and the surfactant Triton X-100 onto the
dextran-coated platform and air drying.158 The on-chip thrombin
successfully stimulated generation of ﬁbrin from ﬁbrinogen in
plasma, leading to clot formation, but chips had to be stored at
4 C to ensure reagent stability. Using the same dextran-coated
pillar-based platform, an assay for CRP was implemented by
immobilizing αCRP antibody in 1% trehalose solution in a line
across the chip using a multipass nanodroplet spotting approach
to reduce band broadening.108 This pillar platform was also used
for an interferon-γ LFA assay via deposition and drying of anti-
interferon-γ capture antibodies and rabbit antimouse antibodies
for the target and control lines, respectively.159
Despite an ever-expanding menu of success in storing biolo-
gical reagents onboard POC devices, ﬂuid in excess of that

----- Page 12 (native) -----
contained in a blood, saliva, or urine sample is often required for
more complex assays. Large ﬂuid volumes require oﬀ-chip
storage, but small volumes can be stored within the device with
appropriate sealing and release methods. Blister pack technology,
well developed by the pharmaceutical industry, has long been a
part of POC technology and has recently been reported as a
component of lab-on-chip systems.160 Caution must be exercised
when implementing liquid storage using polymer ﬁlms, many of
which have signiﬁcant permeability to water vapor; PDMS is
among the very worst in this regard. Some ﬂuorocarbons and
cyclic oleﬁn (co)polymers are signiﬁcantly better, and most any
polymer can be rendered impermeable by vacuum deposition of
a thin ﬁlm of metal such as aluminum. Garcia-Cordero et al.
reported long-duration ﬂuid storage using integrated CD-laser-
openable thin-ﬁlm cyclo oleﬁn polymer valves.161
Sample Preparation. Sample preparation, a necessary analy-
tical step in POC devices prior to analyte measurement, en-
compasses sample concentration, diffusion, filtration, purification,
and fractionation of analytes from analytically noisy background
matrices. Although large numbers of POC devices accommodate
unprocessed blood samples, the range of assays that can be
performed is limited by a lack of well-developed on-chip sample
preparation methodologies.162 Blood, plasma, serum, urine, saliva,
and other exudates are all targeted in the development of rapid
microfluidic-based diagnostics,89b and, according to the details of
the assay and measurement to be performed, pre-preparation of
the sample may be necessary.
Phase Extraction and Sample Concentration. The separa-
tion or concentration of analytes based on their physical and
chemical properties can improve detection sensitivity in micro-
fluidic formats.104 Reviews published on sample-concentration
techniques104,163 include developments in liquidliquid-phase
extraction, solid-phase extraction (SPE), isotachophoresis (ITP),
immunoconcentration, dialysis, and many more. Lin et al. re-
viewed many purification and enrichment techniques used in
microfluidic urine analysis.104 Sikanen et al. developed a droplet-
membrane-droplet-extraction system to extract acidic analytes
from urine, followed by capillary electrophoresis and laser-
induced fluorescence detection on-chip.164 The use of metal
ions to separate urea from urea-rich protein samples has also
been explored.165 A five-layer microfluidic system based on
diffusion, followed by facilitative diffusion using metal ions such
as Mn2+, Zn2+, and Fe3+ allowed for efficient urea removal.
Another droplet-based microfluidic system for the passive isola-
tion of T lymphoma cells used PEG droplets that completely
encapsulated dextran droplets within a microfluidic channel,
partitioning the cells into the PEG phase as they remained in
the aqueous droplet.166
Capture and puriﬁcation of RNA via its aﬃnity for SiO2, using
silica beads immobilized in polymer microﬂuidic devices, was
accomplished for viral RNA from mammalian cells infected with
inﬂuenza-A (H1N1)167 and for E. coli RNA with pathogen-
speciﬁc response in under 3 min from the RNA of 100 bacteria
using real-time NASBA (nucleic acid sequence-based ampliﬁcation)
for speciﬁcity and ampliﬁcation.50c The application of solid-phase
extraction to separate and detect psychotropic drugs in plasma
samples in a microﬂuidic format was evaluated.168 Microﬂuidic
HPLC separation of proteins and peptides has also been established
using both methacrylate and styrene-based monoliths.169
Cell Selection and Sorting. Accurate, fast, and affordable
analysis of whole blood is important in clinical diagnostics;
however, most analyses require the pre-separation of red blood
cells from plasma due to the interference caused by the cellular
components of blood with some measurement techniques,
e.g., absorbance and fluorescence. Centrifugal microfluidics
offers on-chip autonomy: red blood cells can be separated from
plasma using differences in cell density and centrifugally-driven
sedimentation.96,117,121c,125 Plasma separation as part of a cen-
trifugal whole-blood immunoassay system has been reported as
well.125
Diﬀusion phenomena have been used in combination with
ﬂow in microﬂuidics to separate smaller, faster-diﬀusing mol-
ecules from larger ones that diﬀuse more slowly, for example, to
extract small molecules from whole blood.170 A recent paper
revisited the concepts of the so-called H-ﬁlter and T-sensor
technologies and their potential use in size-based extraction of
molecules from complex mixtures.148
Toner and Irimia summarized the unique requirements and
challenges of blood cell separation in the context of whole-blood
diagnostic devices.52 An integrated microﬂuidic blood analysis
system that allows for the separation of plasma from whole blood
samples (<5 μL in volume) using channels and gravitational
sedimentation of red and white cells into ﬁltering trenches
(99.9% separation eﬃciency) on a PDMS chip was recently
reported.171 Separation of plasma from whole blood by a
“skimming” process was reported in an integrated device using
barcodes for multiplexed protein analysis from microliter blood
samples.172 Continuous enrichment of platelets from diluted
whole blood using DEP exploited the fact that platelets are
signiﬁcantly smaller than other blood cells.173
Cell selection also encompasses the use of antibodies to
capture target cells in miniaturized devices. Shah et al. reported
the speciﬁc binding of CD8+ T-lymphocytes on an EWOD
platform using antibody-conjugated magnetic beads. Fluid move-
ment controlled by electric signals allowed for close contact
between cells and magnetic beads in the droplet, allowing for
high binding eﬃciencies.174 Magnetic beads coated with anti-
body have been used in the capture and separation of Salmonella
and Staphylococcus aureus57 with an eﬀective enrichment factor of
∼7001600, depending on the starting concentrations and
ratios of the two cell types. Though signiﬁcant, this ratio
illustrates the challenge of detecting a rare target in the presence
of a very common one: a 1000-fold advantage in many cases is
inadequate.
Cell Lysis. The disruption of cells can be achieved on-chip by a
variety of different mechanisms including mechanical or chemi-
cal lysis. Vandeventer et al. recently reported on the efficiency of
the OmniLyse, a small battery-operated disposable bead blender
for lysis of thick-walled Bacillus spores and Mycobacterium cells in
nucleic-acid testing.175
A combined chemical/mechanical method for lysis of bacterial
cells was reported, where bacterial samples are sheared as they
pass through a porous polymer monolith containing detergent
lytic conditions, resulting in a concentrated DNA eluent for PCR
diagnostics.176 Stachowiak et al. used thermochemical lysis, a
combination of lysis buﬀer and high temperatures, for protein in
their autonomous microﬂuidic chip for protein proﬁle-based
detection of Bacillus subtilis cells and spores.177
Electroporation allows for the disruption of cell membranes
and is used for lysing cells in microﬂuidic devices. Bao et al.178
used electroporation to release calcein and protein kinase from
cells in a PDMS microﬂuidic chip.
Cell lysis by means of a low-voltage electrical device on chip
was demonstrated by Lee et al.179 and another group explored

----- Page 13 (native) -----
the electrolysis of saline solution to generate hydroxide ions
(OH) at the cathode of the electrochemical device as alkaline
lytic agents.180 In another innovative approach, laser irradiation
of magnetic particles (Figure 8) was used for rapid lysis in the
extraction of DNA from E. coli and hepatitis B virus.181
Cell lysis has been performed using an optically induced electrical
ﬁeld in a microﬂuidic chip.182 Fibroblasts and oral cancer cells were
exposed to an external electric ﬁeld, which induced a transmem-
brane potential causing disruption of the cell membrane.
Nucleic Acid Purification. In conventional PCR diagnostics,
sample preparation steps such as DNA extraction are time-
consuming procedures requiring experienced personnel. Recent
developments to overcome sample preprocessing include the
incorporation of sample purification steps on-chip for DNA
extraction from whole blood. An integrated microfluidic platform
that incorporates rapid leukocyte purification, genomic DNA
extraction, and gene analysis has been reported.135 Magnetic
beads coated with CD15/45 allowed for purification and con-
centration of leukocytes; DNA was then extracted using surface-
charge-switchable DNA-specific magnetic beads in the lysis
solution; finally, PCR amplification yielded a turnaround time
of 20 min.135 The use of silica-coated magnetic beads to extract
DNA in a microfluidic chip has been reported. DNA binding
affinity is high in the presence of high salt concentrations; the
captured DNA is released when the salt concentration is reduced.183
A chip without complex DNA purification steps was introduced
by Manage et al.: unprocessed genomic and viral DNA from a
whole blood sample was amplified on a three-layer glass chip
containing a PDMS membrane for pumping, which interfaced
with a miniaturized PCR instrument.184
Protein Preparation.154 Martino et al. investigated the use of
microdroplet technology to analyze intracellular proteins:185
cells were introduced onto the microchip and electrically lysed,
followed by incubation with antibody-labeled beads in water-in-
oil droplets. Protein binding to the beads was then monitored
fluorescently within the droplets. Isoelectric focusing has been
incorporated into a microfluidic device for the separation of
proteins suspended in a microvolume droplet between two Pd
electrodes using pH gradients created by electrolysis of buffers
with low voltage.186 The anode fraction was found to be depleted
of high-pI proteins and the cathode fraction of low-pI fractions,
indicating this technique’s utility in the purification of proteins in
small-volume samples.
Surface Chemistry and Device Substrates. Despite the
important technological innovations described above, consider-
able progress is required to realize the selective, high-affinity,
high-binding-capacity analyte capture methods necessary to push
the performance of POC diagnostic devices forward and so
enable new applications. Nonspecific adsorption of proteins and
other compounds is a critical problem: typically, it effectively
controls the background response, directly regulating the device
LOD.
Recent trends in the development of immunoassays and
biosensor surfaces favor polymer materials over glass, mainly
for reasons of cost,187 although in some cases, e.g., whole-blood
assays, where silica surfaces trigger rapid clotting, for biochemical
compatibility as well. Although existing chemical methods to pre-
pare biomolecule microarrays on glass can and have been modiﬁed
to suit polymer substrates, new immobilization strategies have
been developed to adapt and often to take advantage of the speciﬁc
physicochemical properties of the plastic materials.4a,188
Physical Adsorption. Random interfacial adsorption of bio-
molecules represents by far the most common immobilization
technique in the POC device industry. Molecules typically
adsorb on surfaces through ionic bonds, hydrophobic, polar, or
electrostatic interactions.189 While this is the simplest method for
capturing biorecognition elements, different antibodies raised
against the same antigen can show very heterogeneous binding
affinity, undergoing structural changes and exhibiting inadequate
orientation of binding epitopes upon adsorption.
The emergence of surface-speciﬁc analytical systems has
enabled the study of the eﬀects of several factors such as pH,
salt concentration, and surface excess of antibodies on the
binding capacity for its speciﬁc antigen.190 It is generally accepted
that when the activity of physically adsorbed biomolecules is low,
this is due to structural unfolding associated with interfacial
adsorption. Williams and co-workers reported that the main
factor aﬀecting the antibodyantigen binding is related to the
surface packing density.191 Apart from random orientation, loss
of activity, and low binding density, an additional drawback of
adsorption-based attachment is low bond strength: physically
adsorbed proteins may be removed by some buﬀers or washing
detergents during assays.
Bioaffinity Attachment. The most common bioaffinity im-
mobilization reaction is based on the specific binding of biotin to
avidin and streptavidin. This approach exploits the strongest
noncovalent bond found in nature (Kd = 1.3  1015 M).192
Biotin-functionalized (“biotinylated”) molecules can be captured
using the appropriate (strept)avidin conjugates even in complex
media and under harsh conditions during assays.193 The protein
maintains its structural integrity and activity even in 8 M urea or 3
M guanidinium chloride. One of the very few disadvantages of
using (strept)avidin is its propensity to bind nonspecifically with
compounds other than biotin due to its high carbohydrate con-
tent and high isoelectric point. The use of the (strept)avidin
biotin concept in assays has been reviewed extensively.194
Other popular aﬃnity immobilization techniques, some of
which are highlighted in a pair of recent reviews,195 include re-
combinant proteins with genetically engineered histidine-tag sys-
tems for site-speciﬁc attachment, protein A/protein G-mediated
immobilization for speciﬁc interactions with Fc fragments of IgG,
and immobilization of glycoproteins through their carbohydrate
moiety, which is typically not involved in speciﬁc activity.
Eﬀorts have been made to produce artiﬁcial ligandreceptor
pairs that mimic naturally occurring aﬃnity systems, such as the
Figure 8. Magnetic beads conjugated to target-speciﬁc antibody mixed
with sample solution. Target pathogens are selectively captured on the
magnetic beads and laser irradiation (808 nm, 1.5 W) for 30 s enables
DNA extraction from captured pathogens. Reproduced from ref 181
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/b616115d] by permission of The Royal
Society of Chemistry.

----- Page 14 (native) -----
(strept)avidinbiotin interaction. For example, Hwang et al. and
Rekharsky et al. showed an approach for protein immobilization
on gold surfaces based on strong noncovalent interactions
between a host cucurbit[7]uril with a hydrophobic cavity and
ferrocenemethylammonium or adamantylammonium ions: very
good hostguest aﬃnity was demonstrated with high binding
constants (up to 1015 M1) and good speciﬁcity in aqueous
conditions.196 Other potential strategies based on reversible
hostguest interactions exploiting the use of polylysine and
cyclodextrin derivatives,197 supramolecular interactions between
an adamantane unit and β-cyclodextrin,198 and other hydropho-
bic interactions199 have been reported.
Covalent Attachment. Proteins can be coupled to surfaces by
a range of chemical reactions between an appropriately func-
tionalized solid support and many of the complementary func-
tional groups in the amino acid side chains. The most common
methods for covalent attachment of proteins to surfaces include
the use of amine groups of the lysine residues, carboxy groups of
aspartic and glutamic acids, or thiol groups of cysteine residues.
Typical examples of compatible groups on the surfaces and the
functional group they react with and the related surface perfor-
mance issues for both nucleic acid and protein microarrays are
summarized in several reviews.42,195 Unfortunately, because of a
relatively high abundance of both amine and carboxy groups on
the surfaces of proteins, this strategy can lead to problems related
to increased heterogeneity and restricted flexibility owing to
multipoint attachment.
Substrate Materials. Many current and emerging POC plat-
forms are based on substrates made from organic polymers rather
than silica.200 Thermoplastics and new polymeric materials
including derivatives of polyacrylates, polystyrenes, polyethy-
lenes, and cyclo olefin (co)polymers (COPs, COCs) stand out as
excellent candidates for micrototal analysis system platforms and
POC diagnostic devices. Their structures can be selected or
modulated to provide excellent optical, thermal, chemical, and
biocompatibility properties.201,202 Plastics are used as structural
materials for fluidic chips and cartridges made by methods such
as molding, embossing/imprinting,201,203 etching/micromilling,
laser ablation,204 or die cutting. For the commonly used materi-
als, the pristine polymer surfaces are relatively inert, hydrophobic
in nature, and do not possess groups suitable for reactions with
capture biomolecules. They are functionalized, therefore, by
chemical methods including photografting, oxygen plasma, or
UV/ozone treatment, all resulting in formation of a thin, oxi-
dized, hydrophilic layer that can adsorb proteins and oligonu-
cleotides.188c,205 Such surface films, however, contain many
highly reactive and unstable oxidized species that are readily
quenched by any impurities and gases/vapors present in air.
Moreover, such prepared surfaces provide a low degree of
flexibility of the functional groups, and flexibility may be needed
for proper orientation of captured biomolecules. A typical
solution is to functionalize plastic substrates with organic com-
pounds that can cross-link, polymerize, and form a film from one
to a few hundred nanometers in thickness.206 Because most
polymeric substrates are characterized by low chemical resistance
to many nonpolar organic solvents and relatively low melting
temperatures, the choice of chemical reactions suitable for
functionalization of their surfaces is limited.
In general, substrates modiﬁed with a range of organosilanes
have suitable physicochemical properties for immobilizing pro-
teins and other biologically relevant molecules. The organosilane
precursor covalently couples to the surface via formation of
SiOSi bonds with the functional group extending from the
surface.207 A number of articles have been published on this
subject, most of them addressing the eﬀect of diﬀerent deposition
conditions such as reaction temperature, incubation time, concen-
tration, role of solvent, catalyst, adsorbed water, or curing.206c,208
The most common techiques rely on activation of the disposable
substrate by plasma or UV/ozone followed by immersion into an
aqueous or organic solution of the organosilane. Such methods
may suﬀer from a lack of reproducibility in ﬁlm quality, often due
to the fact that organosilanes with multiple SiX moieties (X =
Cl, Br, methoxy, ethoxy, propoxy) tend to polymerize in the
presence of even trace quantities of water. The necessity of
eliminating water from nonaqueous solvents, along with the
solvent waste generated, makes this technique less attractive
when bulk quantities of coated substrates are required.
Coatings produced by chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
techniques are generally performed at elevated temperatures208b
and therefore are more suitable for silica-based materials than
plastics. Signiﬁcant advances have been made in the development
of a one-step process of surface functionalization based on
plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). This
technique has a number of advantages over multistep, wet
chemical methods or conventional CVD: it can be used to coat
a large number of substrates in a single batch, it avoids direct
contact with solvents, reducing chemical waste, and importantly
it operates at room temperature. Also, no major limitations have
been observed in the preparation of homogeneous coatings on
curved or patterned surfaces or inside microﬂuidic channels.209
This method makes it possible to provide better-deﬁned struc-
ture as well as the desired chemical functionality using one
material on the device surface.210
An issue of particular importance to POC devices, due to the
increasing prevalence of microﬂuidic structures, is loss of sample
analyte by nonspeciﬁc adsorption on channel walls.188b,211 The
manufacturing methods and cost constraints required for making
microﬂuidic systems beyond laboratory volumes constrain the
materials that can be used, which in turn constrains the nature of
the surfaces that can be engineered, both to minimize nonspeciﬁc
adsorption and to maximize speciﬁc binding activity for target
capture. Plasma polymerization is an industrially scalable method
for surface layers with a variety of diﬀerent chemical functional-
ities, and its application to biochip preparation has recently been
reviewed.212 Alternating current plasma polymerization has been
used to deposit poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-like coatings from
an 18-crown-6 precursor, and the nonfouling characteristics of
these coatings have been demonstrated.213 The applicability of
low-energy plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition to pre-
pare surfaces with high speciﬁc binding activity and low non-
speciﬁc adsorption has been demonstrated.188c,206 Signiﬁcant
protein analyte adsorption onto untreated PMMA surfaces has
been demonstrated, and a low-energy PECVD method of making
a PEG-like coating from diethylene glycol dimethyl ether pre-
cursor proved eﬀective as a means of minimizing such analyte
loss.188b
Detection. In annual manufactured volume, electrochemical
(billions of glucose strips, millions of blood chemistry cartridges)
and optical (tens of millions of LFA devices for pregnancy and
other tests; millions of fluorescence-based assays for cardiac and
other disease markers) technologies are the clear leaders. The
glucose technology (see above) is an example of label-free,
indirect detection: the amperometrically detected product is a
proportionate surrogate for glucose concentration in the blood

----- Page 15 (native) -----
sample. LFA pregnancy tests are labeled assays: antibody-based
binding of gold nanoparticles produces a colored line if sufficient
hCG is present in the urine sample.
Detection has been reviewed as one component of POC or
“towards POC” devices.6a,11a,106,214 Some reviews with substan-
tial detection sections are more speciﬁcally focused on immu-
noassay and protein/biomarker-based diagnostics;3b,103,118,215
nucleic acid testing for infectious disease;8b cancer diagnostics;216
lateral ﬂow153 and centrifugal96 platforms; and for global health
and limited-resource settings, where instrumental complexity
should be minimized.52b,112
Electrochemical Detection. Electrochemical detection meth-
ods include amperometric, potentiometric (including self-ampli-
fied ion-sensitive field-effect transistors, ISFETs), and impedi-
metric215,217 measurements. The first, used for glucose assays, is
most common and typically generates current in proportion to
the concentration of the detected species; all three methods are
used by the modern version of the i-STAT chemistry analyzer,
depending on the target analyte.52b
While some analytes are electroactive and can be measured
directly without labeling,218 electrochemical detection often
utilizes tagging for analyte speciﬁcity with either an electroactive
species or an enzyme that converts an electrochemically silent
species into electroactive one; this approach also provides signal
ampliﬁcation of multiple orders of magnitude, with detection
limits below 1 pM readily accessible. For example, Hoegger et al.
reported an electrochemically measured ELISA determination of
the folic acid content of food products.219 Staphylococcal
enterotoxin B was captured with speciﬁc antibodies and detected
via the enzymatic production of an electrochemical signal from a
second speciﬁc antibody labeled with horseradish peroxidase.220
Label-free impedimetric sensing was demonstrated for detec-
tion of salmonella at the 1000 cfu/mL level using antibody
binding to capture the bacteria on electrodes.221 Myoglobin,
indicative of cardiac damage, was detected at 100 ng/mL via con-
ductivity changes resulting from its antibody-based capture,222
and similar speciﬁc capture of the stroke marker neuron-speciﬁc
enolase, without addition of a label, was reported at the 0.5
pg/mL level.223 Such impedance changes can be measured using
microfabricated electrodes or, in a device that is more a “bio-
resistor” than an electrochemical device, via binding to carbon
nanowires.224
Assays based on nanoparticles bearing DNA barcodes225 have
been used to speciﬁcally detect proteins with electrochemical
transduction,226 and a disposable electrochemical immunodiag-
nostic device based on nanoparticle probes, stripping voltam-
metry, and LFA technology was reported.227 An amperometric
immunosensor system was developed, with onboard reagent
storage, for the detection of the breast cancer markers carci-
noembryonic antigen and cancer antigen 15-3; it was demon-
strated for the analysis of patient serum samples.228 A thrombin-
generation amperometric assay in plasma and whole blood has
been reported.229 The use of electrochemical detection means
for LFAs in general has been explored.230
Optical Detection. Optical detection methods used for POC
applications include fluorescence111 with such variants as F€orster
resonance energy transfer (FRET231) and up-converting phos-
phor technology;232 (chemi)luminescence;57,233 absorbance
(colorimetry); surface-plasmon resonance (SPR); and various
categories of light scattering: Rayleigh (particles much smaller
than wavelength), Mie (particles comparable to wavelength;
shape-dependent), geometric (particles larger than wavelength),
resonant (wavelength overlaps an electronic transition of the
particle), and Raman (vibrational quanta added to or subtracted
from the excitation wavelength). Absorbance is by far the
commonest due to its use in LFAs based on gold or polymer
(nano)particles, while fluorescence is used for the broadest range
of different types of POC assays111 for reasons of sensitivity and,
more recently, the ready availability of a range of different colors
of efficient fluorophores, including quantum dots,231a,234 quan-
tum-dot barcodes,235 and fluorescent nanoparticles,236 providing
improved limits of detection, in some cases reaching single-
particle LODs, and enabling multitarget multiplexing. A recent
review by Myers and Lee surveys those recent innovative optical
detection techniques that meet such POC-relevant criteria as
reasonable cost, ruggedness, and ease of integration with fluidic
technologies.237
A recent variant of ﬂuorescence, so-called supercritical angle
ﬂuorescence (SAF), detects only ﬂuorescence emitted in close
proximity to a ﬂuorophore-supporting optically transparent chip
surface.238 This method provides substantial enhancement of
ﬂuorescence collection eﬃciency while rejecting background
from unbound ﬂuors or impurities, as it conﬁnes the ﬂuorescence
detection volume to material within about one wavelength of the
chip surface. An imaging SAF scanner to detect multiple assays
on one chip was developed and demonstrated using 200 nm-
diameter ﬂuorescent beads.
Major recent advances in the variety, quantum eﬃciency,
output power, and aﬀordability of light-emitting diodes and
diode-pumped solid-state lasers (e.g., as in laser pointers and
DVD players) is bringing a wide range of excitation wavelengths
to compact POC readers without requiring major compromises
to LODs that would be imposed by low-intensity light sources.
Electroluminescence excitation has also been explored, in one
example for detection of botulinum neurotoxin A.239 In another
example of utilization of recent technological development,
colorimetric and ﬂuorescent readers utilizing smartphone inte-
grated cameras have been reported.240
Most optical methods are based on labeling the analyte by
attaching a chromophore, ﬂuorophore, or particle241 (dye-
containing, semiconductor/quantum dot, noble metal,231b or
scattering) to an antibody or nucleic acid strand that confers
speciﬁc recognition. The use of gold nanoparticles in molecular
diagnostics was reviewed by Radwan and Azzazy.231b SPR is an
exception, requiring only speciﬁc adsorption of the analyte onto
an optically appropriate, target-selective surface; examples are
reported below in the Label-Free section.
Nanoparticles including quantum dots are ﬁnding increasing
application. For example, determination of cancer biomarkers in
serum and saliva using quantum dot bioconjugate labels was
recently reported.234 Quantum dots were employed on-chip for
CD4+ T-cell counting in a POC application.160 Aptamers were
tethered to gold nanoparticles as part of an LFA-like dry-reagent
assay strip to detect thrombin.242
Thermal-lens microscopy (TLM), an alternative to ﬂuores-
cence detection, also beneﬁts from dye labeling. TLM detection
was integrated into a miniaturized ELISA device including all
optical, electronic, and ﬂuidic components necessary to provide
an LOD of 2 ng/mL for total IgE measurement.243
Magnetic Detection. Magnetic particles are a promising
technology for POC diagnostics because they can be used to
preconcentrate and localize analytes and, although the beads may
have different optimal sizes or compositions according to their
function, they can also be used as a labeling technology for detection

----- Page 16 (native) -----
without the requirements of fluors for optical transparency.
Spurred by advances in memory devices, magnetic particle
detection technology has evolved rapidly,244 the most promising
and sensitive methods now using the giant magnetoresistance
(GMR) effect with detectors based on so-called spin valve (SV)
or magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) methods.245 The particles
must be in close proximity to the detector for good sensitivity,
placing some constraints on fluidic device design. Wang and
Li review GMR SV sensors for magnetic nanotags for biosensing,
showing from their own results that as few as 14 monodisperse
16 nm superparamagnetic ferrite nanoparticles can be detected by
submicrometer SV sensors at room temperature.244 Tang et al.
reported on the feasibility of siloxane-coated CoFe2O4 nano-
particles as the basis for a GMR-SV biosensor, with the goal of
single-molecule detection.246
Philips Research (Eindhoven, NL) reported the development
of a compact biosensor platform to detect biomolecules with
superparamagnetic particle labels using GMR sensors with
integrated ﬁeld-generating wires.247 The silicon detection chip
is packaged in a disposable cartridge that integrates electrical
connections for readout and ﬂuidic subsystem. Philips recently
reported sensitive detection of ampliﬁed DNA on this system
using a miniaturized detection platform suitable for POC appli-
cation: using various tag-antibody combinations speciﬁc for
individual genes, they demonstrated multianalyte detection of
several antibiotic resistance-associated genes of the pathogen
salmonella.248
Label-Free Methods. Methods appropriate for label-free POC
detection include SPR, devices based on mechanical transduc-
tion, and direct electrochemical and optical transduction for
analytes possessing suitable characteristics. Wang et al.249 devel-
oped a magnetic nanoparticle-enhanced biosensor in conjunc-
tion with SPR: a sensor surface was modified with antibodies to
capture the target analyte, β hCG. Another microfluidic device
based on SPR was developed by Nilsson et al.250 for the detection
of influenza, where recombinant hemagglutinin proteins were
immobilized on the chip surface and a change in the SPR
response was detected upon binding of the target. An immu-
noassay incorporating an electro-microchip, gold nanoparticle
detection, and silver enhancement for signal amplification was
documented by Su et al.251 High detection sensitivities were
shown with both IgG and protein A immobilized on the chip
surface.
Mechanical transducers for POC applications oscillate or
resonate, including micro- and nanocantilevers (reviewed by
Waggoner and Craighead for environmental and biological
applications252), as well as various acoustic wave devices such
as the quartz-crystal microbalance (QCM) and a range of devices
in the surface acoustic wave family (reviewed by Rocha-Gaso
et al. for biosensor applications253). Operating characteristics
such as frequency and signal attenuation for piezoelectric devices
or resistance and amplitude for piezoresistive (silicon) devices
are aﬀected by the mass and mechanical properties of mole-
cules and materials linked to their oscillating surfaces: like SPR,
they require only an immobilized selective recognition layer.
Nonetheless, “mass tags”, dense particles (typically Au) that bind
selectively to the target, can signiﬁcantly enhance sensitivity.
So-called “bond rupture sensors,” reviewed by Hirst et al., use
acoustic energy to rupture bonds between immobilized capture
antibodiesandtargetmicrobes.Becausetheenergyandfrequencyof
added energy can be adjusted, nonspeciﬁcally and speciﬁcally
captured particles can be desorbed diﬀerentially according to the
bond strengths and masses, providing a unique discrimination
mechanism.254
The use of aptamers as biorecognition moieties tethered to
QCM biosensors,255 as well as in cantilever-based biosensors, has
been described.256 Silicon microcantilevers are challenged when
operating in liquids due to damping of their motion, but Ricciardi
et al. report better performance for microplates than micro-
beams, with a Q factor of 140 determined for a device that senses
the tumor marker angiopoietin-1.257
Enabling Multiplexed Assays. Detection of multiple analytes
with a single POC test is well established in select cases: e.g., for
blood chemistry (the i-STAT device) and for cardiac damage
markers (Biosite’s Triage system). Multiplexed detection is a
positive differentiating feature in many cases and is a necessity in
others: many assays are unreliable without a positive control, and
some require a negative control as well.
Multiplexing can be achieved spatially: detection of diﬀerent
analytes occurs in diﬀerent locations on a substrate, e.g., by
patterning spots of diﬀerent selective-capture antibodies or
nucleic acid oligomers; by separation prior to detection, e.g., by
capillary electrophoresis followed by ﬂuorescence detection; or
by diﬀerentiable labels, e.g., diﬀerent emission-wavelength ﬂuors
or particles, spectrally distinct Raman tags, or distinguishable
nanobarcodes. One well-developed tool (from Luminex, Inc.) is
based upon a series of deﬁned ratios of two diﬀerent dyes
dissolved in polymer beads: the antibody or capture oligomer
for a given target is immobilized on beads with a particular dye
ratio, and readout in a cytometry-like fashion includes identifying
the bead type according to the ratio of the two dyes (excited by a
common wavelength) and quantifying the bound target using a
diﬀerent excitation wavelength for a ﬂuorescent label. This
method was used in a feasibility demonstration of a POC multi-
plexed saliva-based biochip test for acute myocardial infarction.258
Other multiplexed POC examples are presented in the Trends,
Unmet Needs, and Perspectives section.
’RECENT INNOVATION
Lateral Flow Assay Technologies. The limitations of LFAs
were discussed above, and efforts to address the critical issues of
error and accuracy should target control of the sample volume
into which the label is dispersed, uniformity of dispersion, and
flow rate, which is the main determinant of contact and incuba-
tion times. In fact, a fortuitous cancellation of errors can occur
because the flow rate determines the total volume of label-
containing sample that passes over the measurement zone within
the fixed measurement time while it also determines the contact
time of sample with label before the capture step (a higher flow
rate means a shorter incubation time and hence smaller capture
efficiency). Thus, a simple strip design can give satisfactory
semiquantitative results, a feature exploited by the recently
developed “digital” pregnancy test system wherein measurement
of optical density on the capture zone259 is used to estimate the
hCGconcentration260inthesample,providingbothanindicationof
pregnancy and an estimate of the time since implantation67 (http://
www.clearblue.com/uk/new-clearblue-digital-pregnancy-test-with-
conception-indicator.php).
Diﬀerent commercial designs for quantitative LFA utilize
diﬀerent implementation strategies to improve measurements.
In the case of cardiac marker detection using the Rapid Analyte
Measurement Platform (RAMP, from Response Biomedical
Corp., BC, Canada; www.responsebio.com), the sample is mixed

----- Page 17 (native) -----
and incubated with label and buﬀer in a separate tube before
application to the strip, signiﬁcantly improving this aspect of the
test. A ratiometric measurement of the intensity of the test line
relative to a control line is also made, small variations in the ﬂow
rate being expected to aﬀect the two lines similarly.
Materials are another area of recent development. Standard
LFA materials—nitrocellulose, polyester, rayon—suﬀer from
varying degrees of nonspeciﬁc binding, brittleness, and sensitivity
to humidity.261 One study of more reliable alternatives imple-
mented a coagulation assay on glass and microstructured COP
lateral ﬂow platforms.262 As microclots formed around the pillars,
ﬂuorescently labeled ﬁbrinogen was incorporated into the clot.
The sensitive detection of ﬂuorescence on this device was
correlated to the heparin concentration in blood samples.
A recent advance in traditional LFA devices, driven by the
demands of increasingly quantitative POC applications, is inte-
gration of new materials with 3D pore structures having well-
controlled pore-size distributions that enable more consistent
protein binding and control of ﬂuid ﬂow rates. For example,
Whatman’s Fusion 5 can act as a sample pad, conjugate release
pad, and membrane for test and control lines, consolidating the
various materials previously used in LFA devices into a single
material, generally simplifying assay and manufacturing process
development.86 Capture lines are formed by printing 2 μm latex
beads conjugated with capture agents. The beads are conﬁned in
the porous material and form capture lines with the sample and
labeled conjugate mixture.
Challenges with nonspeciﬁc adsorption and batch-to-batch
reproducibility of nitrocellulose and other traditional LFA device
substrates have driven the development of injection-molded
plastic chips with well-deﬁned microfabricated pillars as an alter-
native to porous membranes.108 This is the basis of the 4Cast-
Chip developed by Åmic AB (Uppsala, Sweden); the technology
was subsequently purchased by Johnson & Johnson/Ortho
Clinical Diagnostics. The molded cylindrical pillars, typically a
few tens of micrometers in diameter and with similar spacing, are
made hydrophilic by dextran coating to drive capillary ﬂow of the
sample and conjugate. The pillars also allow covalent linkage of
capture proteins for a ﬂuorescence-based assay.
Traditional LFA labels, colored or ﬂuorescent particles includ-
ing colloidal gold and latex or polystyrene beads,73,261 have on
occasion been replaced with carbon or selenium.7a More recent
advances include the use of quantum dots, paramagnetic parti-
cles, upconverting phosphors, and electrochemiluminescent
labels.6b,153 Carbon nanostrings, elongated nanoparticles con-
taining smaller spherical particles, were used for the ultrasensitive
detection of DNA in a lateral-ﬂow hybridization assay.263
A sensitive LFA for the detection of trichloropyridinol, a
metabolite marker for exposure to pesticides, was developed
using quantum dots, advantageous in this assay for their higher
brightness, resistance to photobleaching, and simultaneous ex-
citation of multiple ﬂuorescence colors.264 Quantum dots have
also been employed in the quantitative detection of ceruloplas-
min, a biomarker for cardiovascular disease and lung cancer.265
Ceruloplasmin was combined with quantum-dot-labeled antini-
trotyrosine and captured by anticeruloplasmin antibodies in the
test zone of the LFA to produce a ﬂuorescence signal. A LFA for
protein biomarker detection using a portable ﬂuorescence sys-
tem with quantum dot labels was reported.265
Song and Knotts reported an LFA using time-resolved
(ﬂuorescence) measurement of bright, long-lifetime europium-
containingphosphorescentnanoparticlesconjugatedtoamonoclonal
antibody for CRP (an inﬂammatory marker) in serum over a
0.2200 ng/mL working range.266 Their portable reader proto-
type detects 2.5 ng of immobilized phosphorescent particles with
a 1000-fold dynamic range.
Upconverting phosphor technology (UPT) has been used to
label targets in LFAs.232,267 UPT uses rare-earth-doped ceramic
(nano)particles, often coated with silica for improved bio/
chemical compatibility and ease of functionalization, that absorb
near-infrared light and emit a visible signal. This approach
minimizes background signal relative to conventional ﬂuores-
cence labeling. Two studies adapted UPT for increased sensitiv-
ity in the detection of infectious diseases in saliva232,267 and a
third integrated UPT with microfabricated COP pillar-based
ﬂuidic devices, instead of the typical nitrocellulose support
matrix, to detect the cytokine interferon-γ with a 3 pM LOD.159
Detection in LFAs is no longer limited to optical measure-
ments. One study detected prostate-speciﬁc antigen (PSA) using
an electrochemical transducer: immunochemical events on the
assay strip were detected as shifts in capacitance.269
Development of an LFA/ELISA system based on superpar-
amagnetic nanobeads as labels, linked to a monoclonal antibody,
for rapid detection of cTnI, was recently reported by Xu et al.270
Magnetic detection measured cTnI binding to the test zone; the
LOD was 10 pg/mL.
Commercially available lateral ﬂow assays using ﬂuorescent
labels and FRET for increased sensitivity include the RAMP (see
above) and theTriageCardiacPanel fromBiosite, Inc.(San Diego,
CA). Both enable sensitive detection of cardiac proteins such as
myoglobin and cTnI in whole blood or plasma.6b,18
Digital readout LFA systems now integrate the means to
calculate and display analyte concentrations, oﬀering quantitative
data not available from standard visual color-change readouts.
Examples include Metrika’s (Sunnyvale, CA) Digital Response
(DRx) for measuring hemoglobin levels6b and the Clearblue Easy
digital pregnancy test system described above.
Proteins. Antibodies. Most POC diagnostics are based on
affinity techniques, with the target analyte captured by antibodies.271
An extensive array of antibody-based POC devices currently
exists, as outlined under Diagnostic Targets. Recent develop-
ments in the area of antibody-based POC diagnostics include
research into a broad panel of disease markers, novel detection
methodologies, and new microfluidic formats.
Commercial antibody-based POC devices have most com-
monly used traditional LFA technology. In addition to ultrahigh-
volume pregnancy and glucose tests, LFA tests have been deve-
loped for markers of celiac disease: CeliacSure from GlutenPro
(Mississauga, ON, Canada); BioCard Celiac Disease from Ani
Biotech (Vantaa, Finland). Raivio et al.272 reported that whole-
blood POC devices compare favorably with conventional se-
rological central lab-based tests in their comparison study of the
BioCard Celiac Disease microﬂuidic device. For the diagnosis
of hepatitis C, Lee et al.273 evaluated the use of the OraQuick
Rapid HCV Antibody Test from OraSure Technologies, Inc.
(Bethlehem, PA). This technology is an indirect immunoassay
method in an LFA device format and can be used with venous/
capillary blood, serum, plasma, and oral ﬂuid samples.273
HIV diagnostics continue to be an active area in antibody-
based testing. The Dual Path Platform (DPP) chromatographic
immunoassay, developed for HIV and syphilis (Chembio Diag-
nostic Systems, Medford, NY; www.chembio.com), combines a
speciﬁc antibody-binding protein conjugated to colloidal gold
dye particles and HIV 1/2 antigens bound to the membrane solid

----- Page 18 (native) -----
phase. The INSTI HIV1/HIV2 rapid antibody test (bioLytical,
Richmond, BC, Canada; www.biolytical.com) detects HIV anti-
bodies in blood, plasma, or serum by sample application to the
on-chip membrane, which contains HIV-speciﬁc proteins; HIV
antibodies cause a color change of the membrane spot.
Commercial devices using latex agglutination technologies
include the Prolex-Blue from Pro-Lab Diagnostics (Richmond
Hill, ON, Canada), which allows for serogrouping of β-hemolytic
streptococci. Well-known commercially available immunoﬁltra-
tion devices include the NycoCard and Aﬁnion systems from
Axis-Shield (Oslo, Norway) for blood and urine testing of CRP,
D-dimer, HbA1c, U-albumin, and creatinine.6b These devices
work on the principle of ﬁltration through porous membranes
containing immobilized antibodies that detect the target analyte.
Companies working on the development of POC devices
incorporating immunoassay technology include Vivacta (Kent,
U.K.; www.vivacta.com), who have brought POC devices to the
market for the detection of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
and cardiac markers including troponin and brain natriuretic
peptide (BNP); Chirus (Watford, U.K.; www.chirus.com), who
have developed the DXpress reader for measuring cardiac and
pregnancy biomarkers as well as drugs of abuse; and Philips
(Best, The Netherlands), who supply the Magnotech device for
cardiac and sepsis markers (http://www.business-sites.philips.
com/magnotech). POC optical immunoassays are also available
from ThermoBioStar (Louisville, CO; www.thermoﬁsher.com)
for the detection of Neisseria gonorrhea and group B Streptococcus.
Immunoassay cardiac marker POC detection-based products
launched in the past 3 years include Cardio 3 (Alere Interna-
tional, Waltham, MA), a triple-analyte test for troponin I, BNP,
and CK-MB (creatinine kinase MB).
Blood testing has seen several recent POC advances. Verax
Biomedical (Worcester, MA; www.verax.biomedical.com) devel-
oped the platelet PGD test to address bacterial contamination of
red blood cells: a preprepared platelet sample is applied to the
plastic chip with a colored line appearing in the presence of
Gram-positive or Gram-negative bacteria. Instrumentation La-
boratory (Bedford, MA) received FDA approval in 2011 for
infant bilirubin (tBili) testing, an immunoassay performed on
their GEM Premier 4000 critical care analyzer. The ABORhCard
(Micronics, Seattle, WA; www.micronics.net) contains anti-A,
anti-B, and anti-D antibodies in its microﬂuidic channels for
blood type (A/B/O and Rh factor) determination upon blood
sample application.
Rapid diagnostics for monitoring protein levels, enzymatic
activities, and modiﬁcations of mitochondrial proteins in mito-
chondrial disease have been reported by Marusich et al.274 This
device has a lateral ﬂow dipstick immunoassay format with four
spatially separated two-site immunocapture assays, with one
monoclonal antibody (mAb) speciﬁc for the target protein on
the capture zone, while the second labeled mAb speciﬁc for a
diﬀerent epitope on the same protein is introduced with the
sample. Unlike mass spectrometry, this approach can be adapted
into functional POC tests in the characterization and diagnosis of
disease.
A microﬂuidic electrochemical immunoassay for urinary hip-
puric acid (HA) was integrated with a PDMS chip attached to a
glass substrate with patterned electrodes.275 The chip contains a
chamber to store antibodies that bind to HA antigens. Unbound
antigens enter the reaction chamber, resulting in a redox reaction
on the electrode surface that correlates with the concentration of
HA.275Anothernovelmicroﬂuidicformatincludesthedevelopment
of a portable disk-based fully automated ELISA based on
colorimetric detection through integrated photodiodes and
LEDs for infectious disease detection.125
Protein Expression and Purification. To characterize specific
gene products, it is necessary to express and purify recombinant
proteins in a variety of expression hosts quickly and efficiently.
Such recombinant proteins are then required for the production
of antibodies, development of functional assays, identification of
interacting proteins, and characterization of their native struc-
tures. The need for fast and efficient preparation of active
proteins and the relevant determination of the optimal condi-
tions for expression and purification of recombinant proteins is
mainly fueled by the pharmaceutical industry, but progress in this
area is beneficial to POC test development. A POC device for
quantification of recombinant proteins was described by Enomoto
et al.276 They reported a novel double-epitope tag approach,
composed of 19 amino acids, that provides a rapid method to
detect recombinant proteins via a homogeneous sandwich
immunoassay.
Nucleic Acids. Nucleic acid assays are the fastest growing
component of biomedical diagnostics, replacing or complement-
ing culture-based, biochemical, and immunological assays in
microbiology laboratories and, very recently, at the point of
care. Detection of viruses and other pathogenic microorganisms,
mutations causing human genetic disorders, cancer, hyperten-
sion, and other lifestyle-related diseases widely rely upon genetic
testing. In this section we present advances in amplification
(replication) of nucleic acid targets, the synthetic nucleic acids
known as aptamers, and two rapidly growing application areas:
infectious diseases and food safety.
The most commonly used technique for gene ampliﬁcation,
necessary in many cases to keep sample sizes reasonable and to
reduce the complexity of the analytical task, is PCR with optical
detection. The PCR process is complex, requiring a thermal
cycler for the reaction; if multiple targets are to be detected in one
reaction, electrophoresis and ﬂuorescent labeling separates the
ampliﬁcation products and renders them detectable. Only a few
years ago, this combination of techniques appeared inappropriate
for applications requiring a small footprint and ease of use, but
signiﬁcant eﬀort has been invested in the development of
compact, cost-eﬀective methods to detect nucleic acids.
A recent report on real-time PCR assays for inﬂuenza A and B
viruses describes the determination of type (A or B) and subtype
(H1,H3,orH5) usingasingle-step/single-reactionvesselformat.277
Archived reference strains were compared to uncultured primary
clinical samples (throat swab/nasal wash). The A- and B-speciﬁc
assays detected all 16 inﬂuenza type-A viruses and both currently
circulating inﬂuenza type-B lineages (Yamagata and Victoria).
The assay has a detection threshold of approximately 100 target
molecules. These assays are said to be appropriate for ﬁeld
deployment for POC screening during a pandemic inﬂuenza
outbreak.
An application of a quadruple-allele dipstick assay for the
simultaneous visual genotyping of the two key components of
the innate immune system, responsible for initiating an inﬂam-
matory response against microbial pathogens, was recently
presented by Litos et al.278 The method involves PCR ampliﬁca-
tion of the region spanning the two polymorphic sites, followed
by a single primer-extension reaction for all four alleles, requiring
only minutes.
Tomita et al.279 employed an alternative ampliﬁcation method
to classical PCR. Their detection system, using loop-mediated

----- Page 19 (native) -----
isothermal ampliﬁcation (LAMP), allows for visualization of sub-
stantial alteration of the ﬂuorescence during the one-step ampli-
ﬁcation reaction, requiring some 3060 min. Another sensitive
ampliﬁcation technique, isothermal rolling circle ampliﬁcation
(RCA), was reported by Stougaard et al. to provide single-molecule
detection and quantitative results. RCA has enabled the detec-
tion of biomarkers at the attomolar concentration level.280
In DNA microarrays, optical methods based on ﬂuorescence
detection are the standard for quantifying hybridization between
surface-immobilized probes and ﬂuorophore-labeled analytical
targets. Electrochemical detection techniques are emerging that
can replace physically bulky optical instrumentation in support of
portable devices for POC applications. Defever et al.281 described
proof-of-principle real-time PCR using cyclic voltammetry to
indirectly monitor the ampliﬁed DNA product generated in the
PCR reaction solution after each PCR cycle. The design requires
the addition of only a minute amount of redox catalyst to the
PCR mixture; rapid detection is claimed despite poorer sensitiv-
ity than optically based real-time PCR (the exponential ampliﬁ-
cation provided by PCR can often compensate for limitations in
sensitivity). An electrochemical DNA microarray system has
been available for several years from Combimatrix (http://
www.combimatrix.com/).
Multiplexed and speciﬁc detection of ferrocene-conjugated
DNA targets, as well as real-time monitoring of hybridization on
an active electrochemical biosensor array, was reported by Levine
et al.282 This approach, based on fully integrated standard
complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technol-
ogy, is a potential basis for portable DNA diagnostic platforms.
An interesting overview of the technologies of colorimetric
biosensors based on DNA-nanoparticle (NP) aggregation assays
was presented by Sato et al.283 The authors compared two types
of DNA-NP aggregation assays: aggregometry based on the cross-
linking of gold NPs and a more novel noncross-linking system.
Aptamers. Aptamers, a synthetic alternative to biologically
derived antibodies, are single-stranded oligonucleotides that can
be DNA or RNA or can be peptide-based; they are synthesized in
a combinatorial variety of base sequences, then screened to
discover those that bind specifically to target molecules.11
Aptamers have desirable properties including increased stability
(relative to many antibodies), ease of production (relative to
biological production of antibodies), ease of manipulation, and
ease of modification.242,268 The application of aptamers to
biosensors was recently reviewed in depth by Iliuk et al.269
Cass and Zhang describe how the access of a solution-phase
redox species, or the impedance at an electrode, is modulated by
the binding of a target nucleic acid oligomer to an immobilized
selective capture aptamer to produce an analytical signal.271
Similar strategies were used to detect platelet-derived growth
factor284 and thrombin285 using aptamer probes. The electro-
chemical detection of bacteria using carbon nanotubes coated
with aptamers has also been reported.286
Optical biosensors are appropriate for use in conjunction with
aptamers, which are easily labeled with ﬂuorophores and chro-
mophores. Xu et al.242 presented aptamer-functionalized gold
nanoparticles in a dry reagent lateral ﬂow biosensor for thrombin
analysis, with excellent selectivity due to the lack of interference
from casein, IgG, or IgM, which often interfere with antibody-
based assays.
Novel optical biosensor platforms using near-infrared ﬂuor-
escent single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs), functionalized
with aptamer DNA for the real-time detection of cell-signaling
molecules, such as insulin released from pancreatic cells, have
been reported (Figure 9).287
Infectious Diseases and Food/Water Safety. New and re-
emerging infectious diseases, including pandemic viruses and drug-
resistant bacteria, represent serious health and global security
threats: more than 25% of 57 million annual deaths worldwide
are related directly to infectious diseases (see Figure 10), not
including the millions of deaths due to past infections.288 Toxicity
Figure 9. Optical nanosensor for insulin measurement from pancreatic
cells. SWNTs are functionalized with insulin-binding aptamer DNA to
recognize target insulin, which is optically detected in the near IR via
quenching. Reprinted from ref 287. Copyright 2011 American Chemical
Society.
Figure 10. More than 25% of total annual deaths are caused by
infectious diseases, with respiratory infections and HIV/AIDS being
responsible for the majority of the deaths. Published by the World
Health Organization and reprinted from ref 288 by permission from
Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature 2004, 430, 242249, copyright
2004.

----- Page 20 (native) -----
and infections caused by foodborne pathogens also represent an
increasing public health problem, and diagnostic tests in multi-
plex format are needed for the rapid identification of food con-
tamination caused by such microbial species as Escherichia coli
O157:H7, Listeria monocytogenes, and Salmonella spp. (40 000
cases/year in the United States alone).289
Most state-of-the-art diagnostic devices suitable for pathogens
rely on PCR-based procedures.290 They are typically sensitive
and accurate; in particular, real-time PCR (qPCR), in addition to
being an automated high-throughput-compatible technique,
allows quantiﬁcation of foodborne pathogens.291 Other promis-
ing pathogen-detection techniques include an isothermal target-
and-probe ampliﬁcation method based on a combination of
isothermal chain ampliﬁcation and FRET cycling probe tech-
nology289 as well as automated DEP-facilitated image analysis292
that targets single-cell LODs.
Blood Chemistry. The principles of the i-STAT device, an
electrochemically based POC blood chemistry analyzer with
cartridges consumed by the millions each year, have been
described by Lauks30 and in the patent literature.293 It features
an electrochemical cell in a microchannel, with buffer and reagent
pouch and diaphragm pump, operated by a plunger incorporated
in the reader. Air bubbles separate reagents, sample, and wash
solutions. An enzyme label (e.g., alkaline phosphatase) converts
an electrochemically inactive substrate (e.g., p-aminophenol
phosphate) to an electrochemically active one (e.g., p-aminophenol).
An interesting aspect of the design, not discussed in the literature,
is the use of convective effects in the meniscus of a moving fluid
to promote mixing and dispersion of reagents dried into the
channel. A recent description in the patent literature reveals
significant improvements in device design: Lowe et al.294 de-
scribe a system in which a step in a fluidic channel is used to form
an interface between a whole blood sample and a buffer, stored in
a pouch on the test cartridge. Antibody-sensitized magnetic
beads, dried onto the walls of the inlet channel, are incubated
with the sample by agitation using a motor-driven magnet. After
the incubation period, the beads are drawn into the buffer, further
washed by agitation, and then moved to the detection zone. An
electrochemical scheme using horseradish peroxidase, coupled to
the oxidation of glucose, acts as amplifier and signal generator.
Coagulation Markers. Coagulation testing has joined the
leaders in POC testing due to the well-defined need for antic-
oagulation monitoring295 after such common procedures as hip
surgery. Devices include clot-based assays that measure the
physical clotting time of blood and clotting-factor assays that
allow for more accurate diagnoses of clotting factor deficiencies
using immunoassay.
Conventional clot-based assays have been on the market for
many years, including prothrombin (PT), activated partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT), activated clotting time (ACT), and
thrombin clotting time (TCT) assays and have been reviewed
in detail.18,296 The most common commercial coagulation POC
format is the HemoSense INRatio system (HemoSense Inc.) for
PT/INR (international normalized ratio) home-testing, which
uses electrochemical impedance to measure the onset of clotting
via the interaction of a blood sample with a PT activator.295 One
of the cartridges for the i-STAT analyzer measures PT/INR
amperometrically: thrombin generated during clotting cleaves an
electrochemical substrate. Many POC coagulation devices use
mechanical or optical detection or a combination of both such
as the Hemochron Signature (ITC), GEM PCL Plus sys-
tem (Instrumentation Laboratory) or the Thrombotrack Solo
(Axis-Shield). These systems can execute a range of clot-based
tests using the appropriate clotting reagent (PT/aPTT/TT) and
measuring such parameters as the physical changes that occur
during clot formation or the increasing occlusion of light as
clotting progresses.296a
Hereditary thrombotic disorders resulting in clotting factor
deﬁciencies cannot be detected using conventional clot-based
tests, which has led to the development of more speciﬁc factor
assays, now trending toward immunoassays. Assay targets in-
clude D-dimers and ﬁbrinogen degradation products (FDPs),
with increasing interest in developing POC devices that target
coagulation markers such as protein C, protein S, antithrombin,
and factor V Leidin. Numerous POC devices for measuring
D-dimer exist on the market. The CARDIAC D-dimer assay
from Roche Diagnostics (Indianapolis, IN) is a quantitative POC
device where two D-dimer recognition antibodies form a sand-
wich complex with the D-dimer, which is taken up by a streptavidin
line in the detection zone via the biotinylated antibody. This
gold-labeled antibody results in a color change and a red signal
line is quantitatively recorded by the reader.297
The SimpliRED D-dimer assay from BB International (Cardiﬀ,
U.K.) is a whole-blood agglutination assay where the on-chip
reagent causes the red blood cells to visibly coalesce (www.
d-dimer.co.uk). Immunoturbidimetry is used in the MiniQuant
D-dimer assay from Kordia (Leiden, The Netherlands; www.
kordia.nl), in which antibody particles agglutinate, increase
turbidity, and cause changes in light scattering. The AQT90 Flex
D-dimer assay from Radiometer (Brønshøj, Denmark; www.
radiometer.com) uses time-resolved ﬂuorescence detection.298
In the laboratory, whole-blood aggregometry is considered the
gold standard for platelet function testing. POC devices that
assess platelet function have been reviewed extensively.296a,b,299
Two commonly used POC platelet function assays include the
PFA-100 (Siemens Medical Solutions, Malvern, PA), which uses
shear to induce platelet adhesion, activation, and aggregation,296b
while the Plateletworks device from Helena Laboratories
(Beaumont, TX) uses an impedance-based cell counter.296a,300
Thromboelastography (TEG), a global test of hemostasis, gen-
erates information about clot strength and stability.301 TEG is
now being adapted for mapping platelets through platelet
inhibition and activation, as with the TEG Platelet Mapping
System from Hemoscope Corporation (Niles, IL).296a,300
In the research arena, a rapid POC device for measuring
plasma ﬁbrinogen concentration based on a single-use lateral
ﬂow microﬂuidic chip has been developed.158 As a plasma sample
comes into contact with a thrombin-coated polymeric micro-
structured LFA device, ﬂow is arrested and the distance traveled
by the sample can be correlated with ﬁbrinogen concentration.
An immunosensor for the detection of FDPs using quartz
crystal microbalance technology combined with latex agglutina-
tion was reported by Aizawa.302 Thuerlemann et al.229 have
developed an amperometric test strip for the detection of
thrombin, whereby cleavage of the substrate is detected electro-
chemically. This approach could be used for factor V Leidin and
activated protein C resistance screening in plasma and whole
blood samples. More recently, an aptamer-based polymer micro-
ﬂuidic device for measuring thrombin was developed incorpor-
ating the use of magnetic beads and quantum dots.303
Whole Cells. Cell-based analyses implemented in miniatur-
ized devices suitable for POC application now range from red
and white blood cell counts to platelet function and platelet
protein interaction assays in whole blood. VanBerkel et al.

----- Page 21 (native) -----
recently reported a microfluidic device for three-part differential
leukocyte count (granulocyte/lymphocyte/monocyte) plus ery-
throcyte (red cell) and thrombocyte (platelet) counts in human
blood; data were corroborated with clinical laboratory analyses.304
Neutrophil (the most abundant white cell) migration is a key
phenomenon in the immune response to bacterial infection, and
assays have been developed using less than 10 μL of whole blood
to perform chemotaxis under the influence of competing
chemokines.305
Platelet function is critical to hemostasis, and platelets are
implicated in everything from cardiovascular disease to the
hematogenous spread of cancer. Platelet function analysis,
including POC methods, was surveyed in 2005,299d and platelet
function is now assayed clinically using the commercial Verify-
Now POC system,306 which infers function from platelet aggre-
gation measurements. A suﬃcient volume of clinical results has
been amassed for concerns over limitations of this approach to be
expressed.299c
The microﬂuidic means to directly assess platelet function in
whole blood via dynamic interactions with immobilized proteins
under conditions of arterial shear ﬂow have been reported
recently.307 Platelet activation statistics have been assayed (and cor-
related with antiplatelet drug eﬀects) from their binding occupancy
on arrays of platelet-sized surface spots of proteins and antibodies.53
Counting T lymphocytes (particularly CD4+, in some cases
supplemented by CD3+ or CD8+, cells) is an eﬀective means to
stage and monitor HIV-infected patients.308 A label-free POC-
appropriate CD4-cell-counting device using microﬂuidics309
aims to keep costs low enough for developing world applications.
Integration of semiconductor quantum dots into nanobiochip
systems for enumeration of CD4+ T-cell counts in a POC-type
device has been reported as well.160
Assaying the small numbers of circulating tumor cells (CTCs),
sometimes just a few per milliliter of blood, that are present in
early stages of metastasis or cancer recurrence is particularly
challenging. Although point-of-care measurement is not a pre-
requisite for such assays, microﬂuidic technologies are none-
theless being applied to this needle-in-a-haystack problem, with
limited preliminary success. Aptamers have been used for capture
and gold nanoparticles for labeling to detect cancer cells in just 15
min,310 although a minimum of 800 cancer cells must be captured
for detection. Arrays of crescent-shaped capture structures were
employed to isolate CTCs from blood, at a very realistic cell
density of 13 CTCs/mL, with impressive capture eﬃciencies
for three cancer cell types.311
The use of microﬂuidics for cell separations of all sorts was
recently reviewed.152 In a recent application of so-called digital
microﬂuidics, a droplet-based device was used to isolate human T
lymphoma cells.166 A diagnostic device for bovine mastitis was
demonstrated using a compact-disk-format centrifugal platform
to separate white cells from whole milk samples by centrifugal
sedimentation.312
’TRENDS, UNMET NEEDS, PERSPECTIVES
Glucose. The trends in glucose POC devices are toward
higher accuracy and minimally- or noninvasive devices directed
at continuous monitoring. Advances in electrochemical device
technology and the technology for protective membranes have
been significant.66b Noninvasive measurement has progressed
based on advances using infrared or Raman313 spectroscopy.
While it is relatively simple to measure a noninvasive signal that
correlates with in vivo glucose concentrations, it is considerably
more difficult to construct glucose calibration models that
prospectively provide accurate glucose concentrations in human
subjects:314 calibration requires a significant number of invasive
measurements covering a range of glucose concentrations and
needs to account for many confounding variables. Caduff et al.
demonstrated some success using nonspecific measurements of
dielectricresponseinthree frequencyranges(kilohertztogigahertz)
and optical reflectance at three different wavelengths.315 Progress
has been significant toward autonomous closed-loop control of
insulin levels—effectively, an artificial pancreas combining con-
tinuous glucose sensing with an insulin pump—and a system
from Medtronic is undergoing testing, but challenges remain.316
Global Health and the Developing World. The develop-
ment of POC diagnostic devices for limited-resource settings,
including the developing world, is a very active area52b,112,317 due
to the remarkable need and substantial funding from public and
private sources: the U.S. Global Health Initiative, the Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation (Seattle), the Program for Appro-
priate Technology in Health (PATH; Seattle), the UK Department
for International Development, the Foundation for Innovative
New Diagnostics (FIND; Geneva), and the European Union’s
Seventh Framework Programme (FP7) are some of the major
initiatives. Infectious diseases have attracted particular attention
and activity in the context of global health POC diagnostics,
including HIV, tuberculosis (TB), and malaria.
The current status318 and emerging issues319 relevant to tackling
HIV through robust diagnostics in the developing world have
been reviewed. The status of research and barriers for develop-
ment of point-of-care tests for infectious diseases prevalent in
developing countries317c,320 and particularly for active TB have
been reviewed.55 Studies of the antigens used for TB diagnosis
have been analyzed,321 with a conclusion that POC tests are
urgently needed, particularly where TB is endemic. To do this, a
number of very speciﬁc challenges must be overcome: robust-
ness, storage, cost, and ease-of-use. The context in which the
diagnostics must operate, appropriate diagnostic technologies
already in distribution, opportunities for innovation, adaptation,
and cost reduction, along with some emerging technologies that
promise to address this challenge, have been reviewed.317b One
issue, highlighted by Peeling and Mabey, is that substandard tests
have undermined conﬁdence in the use of POC devices; they
conclude that appropriate systems for quality control of POC
tests needs to be developed if they are to achieve their maximum
potential.322 In this context, system design is clearly important,
and one principle is, arguably, that people are more reliable than
machines in limited-resource environments: the operation of this
idea can be seen in the system presented by Chin et al.,323 which
used silver enhancement of captured gold colloid-labeled anti-
bodies, where the device itself is very simple, no more than a set
of channels carrying antigen characteristic of speciﬁc diseases
(HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases) and a simple
optical reader, but the ﬂow control is done with a hand-operated
syringe. Reagents (which hence deﬁne speciﬁc aspects of the
technique) are chosen for their stability, are stored separately
from the chip, and ﬂow sequentially through the chip separated
by air bubbles.
Stimulated in part by a drive to overcome issues of cost and
to improve performance of simple devices designed for use
in limited-resource economies, there has been much recent
work on assay conﬁgurations that use inexpensive substrates
and readily available reader devices such as camera phones.

----- Page 22 (native) -----
Breslaueretal.describemobilephone-basedclinical microscopy.324
Weigl et al. have reviewedprogress toward development of disposable,
low-cost, easy-to-use microﬂuidics-based diagnostics that require
no instrument at all. They present examples of microﬂuidic
functional elements, including mixers, separators, and detectors,
as well as complete microﬂuidic devices, that function entirely
without any moving parts or external power sources.112 In a
similar vein, a lab-on-a-tube (LOT) device for POC measure-
ment of multiple analytes was described.218b It uses passive
capillary force or active suction to avoid the need for a pump
or injection components, making it in some sense a microfabri-
cated implementation of the passive LFA approach. Evolving
low-cost technologies for the control and measurement electro-
nics associated with POC devices is quite relevant.325
Paper, one of the original substrates conceived for lateral ﬂow
assays but subsequently displaced by porous nitrocellulose on
account of the control that this material oﬀers over ﬂow and
protein adsorption,326 has experienced a resurgence of interest in
academic research.327 Patterning is easily achieved by impreg-
nating the paper with a hydrophobic material by printing,327f and
hence structures for precise control of the ﬂow can be realized.328
One of the central questions in bioactive paper development is
the impact of the properties of the cellulosic support on both
immobilization and functionality of biomolecules. A recent
review on inkjet printing of biomolecules for bioactive paper
applications reports progress made in understanding factors that
aﬀect the activity of biomolecules physically immobilized on
cellulosic supports.329 Paper-based microﬂuidic devices have
been combined with optical detection using a mobile phone camera
for telemedicine.317a The use of multiple colorimetric indicators
to extend the dynamic range has been reported.330 Channel
networks can be set up to enable the automated sequential
delivery of multiple reagents to a detection region with a single
user-activation step, for example, to implement signal enhance-
ment with comparable ease of use to conventional lateral ﬂow
tests.331 96- and 384-Microzone plates fabricated in paper as
alternatives to conventional multiwell plates fabricated in molded
polymers have been illustrated; quantitative colorimetric correla-
tion using a scanner or camera to image the zones has been
demonstrated.332 Electrochemical detection and measurement
on paper-based devices, using simple apparatus similar to the
reader for a commercial glucose device, has also been demon-
strated as an alternative low-cost technology.218a,333 Impedance
measurements in ﬂuidic devices have been implemented using a
portable music player and a laptop soundcard.334
Thread has been explored as a means for low-cost device
construction,149a,335 with ﬂuid moving through the thread by
capillary action. Networks can be constructed by weaving, and if
the thread is sewn through a hydrophobic material, complex
ﬂuidic structures can be constructed and devices incorpora-
ted into bandages, for example. Colorimetric assays have been
demonstrated on thread-based devices to detect ketones, nitrite,
protein, glucose in artiﬁcial urine and alkaline phosphatase in
artiﬁcial plasma.149a “Switches” that control when or where ﬂow
can occur, or allow the mixing of multiple ﬂuids, have been
successfully prototyped from multiﬁlament threads, plastic ﬁlms,
and household adhesive.335b
Personalized Medicine and Home Testing. Personalized
medicine tailors healthcare to individuals, using their genotypic
and phenotypic details to complement generic guidelines derived
from large-cohort studies, e.g., for choices of medication and
dosage. Driving this trend are the potential for better healthcare
for the patient at lower cost, along with the salvaging of thousands of
orphan drugs that are safe and effective only for some of the
population, who can typically be identified by genotyping. For
some drugs, personalization may be as simple as adjusting the
dosage to a patient’s own metabolism as well as current physio-
logical status: home POC measurement of clotting time, for
example, keeps a patient’s anticoagulant level in the important
window between spontaneous internal clotting and a dangerous
propensity to bleed. Huckle concludes that anticoagulant therapy
monitoring is now joining diabetes and pregnancy as a significant
POC success.336
Antiplatelet drugs, including aspirin and Plavix, are intended to
diminish the risk of vascular occlusion. These agents are not
uniformly eﬀective for all patients and eﬃcacy may vary with a
patient’s health status, suggesting a role for POC platelet function
testing to personalize dosage or choice of drug.307,337
Selected infectious disease testing could save time and money
through POC home testing. The home market for POC HIV,338
chlamydia, and other sexually-transmitted disease (STD) tests is
signiﬁcant and growing. Streptococcal pharyngitis (“strep throat”)
home diagnosis in children would save many doctor visits, as would
reliable diﬀerentiation between rhinoviral and upper respiratory
bacterial infection, an important ancillary beneﬁt being to diminish
untold numbers of prescriptions for antibiotics, written inappro-
priately and usually under patient-exerted duress, for a common
cold with no proven bacterial component. This practice currently
causes problematic antibiotic resistance.
As the average population of the developed world ages,
healthcare and well being will increase their economic and
social importance. Signiﬁcant markets for home testing could
emerge for everything from cardiovascular health to osteo-
porosis to a range of nutritional deﬁciencies, once the right
combinations of biomarkers and aﬀordable technologies are
developed.
Technology Trends. Low-cost polymer substrates, paper and
thread microfluidics, and low-cost readers using smart phones
were discussed above. Digital/droplet microfluidic devices are
actively researched and just beginning to reach the POC. The line
between “traditional” (e.g., porous nitrocellulose) lateral flow
assay devices and microfluidic platforms is blurring; in most
cases, clever design of the platform will result, for high-volume
manufacture, in the onboard reagents and packaging costing
more than the fluidic consumable.
While PCR remains a workhorse for nucleic acid ampliﬁcation,
the trend in diagnostics research is to consider a range of related
techniques as well, including RCA, LAMP, NASBA, MDA, TMA,
SDA, and LCA (rolling-circle ampliﬁcation, loop-mediated iso-
thermal ampliﬁcation, nucleic acid sequence-based ampliﬁcation,
multiple-displacement ampliﬁcation, transcription-mediated am-
pliﬁcation, strand-displacement ampliﬁcation, and ligase chain
reaction, respectively), as well as cleavase Invader. Importantly,
many of these methods are isothermal and operate at lower
temperatures than PCR, making their integration with micro-
ﬂuidic technologies more straightforward.
In detection, new optical methods exploit phenomena including
up-conversion, high-brightness nanoparticles, total-internal-reﬂection
ﬂuorescence (TIRF), SAF, FRET, and a range of plasmon-based
eﬀects. In many cases, nanoparticles are the reporter for optical
detection. The above technologies enhance signal, reduce back-
ground, or both; combined with low-cost, compact high-intensity
solid-state light sources, this drives POC LODs ever lower. The
trend now is for either nonspeciﬁc response or limitations of

----- Page 23 (native) -----
antibodyantigen binding aﬃnity to determine the LOD, rather
than the performance of the detection system.
The signiﬁcant trend in selective recognition is the use of
aptamers in place of antibodies for the speciﬁc binding of
proteins. Despite a fairly small number of high-target-speciﬁcity
successes, this technology has generated considerable activity
because it replaces highly complex biomolecules produced by
living organisms and often varying from batch to batch and
vendor to vendor, with synthetically generated reagents.
A number of POC-suitable applications of nanobiotechnology
are surveyed by Jain.339 Nanotechnology for membranes, ﬁlters,
and sieves has been reviewed as well.110
Multiplexing. Detecting multiple analytes in a single POC test
is an important trend: many of the most promising new POC
opportunities are in multianalyte tests or panels, including cancer
markers, cardiac health, and infectious disease. Testing for
infection-causing pathogens in a blood sample is a particularly
important future POC application: it could replace laboratory
culture-based analysis requiring hours to days for organism
growth, the results of which sometimes arrive too late for a
patient with a bloodstream infection that leads to septic shock
and death. To identify the causative pathogen and thus select the
proper antibiotic, genetically specific testing for ∼830 different
microbial strains should provide identification for 8090% of all
serious infections. Quantum-dot barcodes are one approach that
has been studied for multiplexed infectious disease diagnostics.340
Sexually transmitted infectious diseases are a challenge in both
low-resource and developed environments. A single POC device
that includes the commonest of the STDs will save time and
money, and rapid results can help reduce the spread of STDs by
ensuring that patients learn their status and how to treat it before
leaving the clinic or hospital.
Monitoring cancer treatment eﬃcacy or checking for recur-
rence usually requires tracking multiple biomarkers. The deter-
mination of cancer markers in serum and saliva using quantum
dot bioconjugate labels has been reported.234 A ﬂuorophore-based
biobarcode ampliﬁcation protein assay has been researched,225
and multiantigen ﬂuorescence immunoassays also have been
demonstrated using a microﬂuidic device to provide 100 separate
assay chambers.341
’AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
*Vladimir Gubala, Leanne F. Harris, and Antonio J. Ricco:
address, Biomedical Diagnostics Institute, Dublin City Univer-
sity, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland; e-mail, vladimir.gubala@dcu.ie
(V.G.), leanne.harris@dcu.ie (L.F.H.), ajricco@stanford.edu
(A.J.R.). Ming X. Tan: address, Ming Tan Consulting, Danville, CA
94506; e-mail, mtc.ming@gmail.com. David E. Williams: ad-
dress, Dept. of Chemistry, Auckland University, Auckland 1010,
New Zealand; e-mail, david.williams@auckland.ac.nz.
’BIOGRAPHIES
Vladimir Gubala obtained his B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in
organic chemistry from the Slovak University of Technology,
Bratislava, in 1999 and 2001, respectively. He then moved to the
University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras, where in 2006 he received
his Ph.D. in chemistry. He was working on a novel nanostruc-
tures based on self-assembly of 8-aryl-20-deoxyguanosine analo-
gues. After his ﬁrst postdoctoral year at the University of Florida,
he joined the research team at the Biomedical Diagnostics
Institute (BDI) at Dublin City University (DCU). He’s been
working at BDI for nearly 5 years, managing a group of scientists
working on novel surface chemistry approaches for the design of
low cost diagnostics platforms.
Leanne F. Harris graduated from Trinity College Dublin in
2001 with a primary degree in Natural Sciences, specializing in
Zoology. From there she completed her M.Sc. in University
College Dublin in 2002 and received her Ph.D. in Biological
Sciences from the Dublin Institute of Technology (DIT) in 2006.
Her Ph.D. focused on the development of immunodiagnostics
and molecular assays for pathogen detection and control in
shellﬁsh. She subsequently lectured on the Biomedical B.Sc. and
the Medical and Molecular Cytology M.Sc. courses throughout
2006. From DIT, she moved to DCU in 2007 and began working
as a postdoctoral researcher in the Biomedical Diagnostics
Institute under the supervision of Prof. Anthony J. Killard. Her
work for the last 4 years has involved the development of point-
of-care coagulation-based assays and devices using impedimetric,
colorimetric, and ﬂuorometric techniques. Her research interests
and expertise range from biological assay development and
clinical testing to the development of miniaturized biosensors,
device fabrication, and reagent printing methodologies.
Antonio J. Ricco is Chief Technologist for Small Spacecraft
Payloads and Technologies at NASA’s Ames Research Center,
on leave from Stanford University, and he is Adjunct Professor at
the Biomedical Diagnostics Institute in Dublin, Ireland. Ricco
received B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in Chemistry from the University
of California at Berkeley (1980) and the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (1984). He developed chemical microsensor
technologies and systems at Sandia National Laboratories from
1984 to 1998 and was guest professor for a semester at the
University of Heidelberg’s Applied Physical Chemistry Institute
in 1996. From 1999 to 2003 at ACLARA BioSciences, he led
development of single-use plastic microﬂuidic systems for genetic
analysis, high-throughput pharmaceutical discovery, proteomics,
and pathogen detection. He was Director of Stanford’s National
Center for Space Biological Technologies from 2004 to 2007;
since 2007, he has been at NASA’s Ames Research Center,
on leave from Stanford. From 2003 to the present, he has been
involved in the founding, planning, and growth of the Biomedical
Diagnostics Institute at Dublin City University as an Adjunct
Professor.
Ming X. Tan is an independent consultant, specializing in
rapid prototyping, assay validation, and scale-up production of
disposable ﬂuidic cartridges. She received her B.S. in Chemistry
from UC Irvine and Ph.D. in Chemistry from the California
Institute of Technology. She has worked in the ﬁelds of biotech-
nology,chemicalsensing,andinterfacialscienceforover17years.As
consultant or employee, she has worked with BD Biosciences,
Bio-Rad, Zyomyx, Wafergen, IntegenX, NASA Ames Research
Center, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, and Sandia
National Laboratories. Her research interest is in the develop-
ment of innovative, cost-eﬀective microﬂuidic-based diagnostic
products to improve quality of life and quality of care.
David E. Williams is a graduate of the University of Auckland.
He developed his research career in electrochemistry and chemical
sensors at the UK Atomic Energy Research Establishment,
Harwell, in the 1980s. He became the Thomas Graham Professor
of Chemistry at University College London (UCL) in 1991 and
cofounded Capteur Sensors Ltd. He was Head of the Chemistry
Dept at UCL from 1999 to 2002 and cofounded Aeroqual Ltd.

----- Page 24 (native) -----
(www.aeroqual.com). He was Chief Scientist of Inverness Medical
Innovations (www.invernessmedical.com/), based at Unipath, Ltd,
Bedford, U.K., from 2002 to 2005. He joined the faculty of the
Chemistry Dept. at Auckland University in February 2006.
’ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The preparation of this article was supported in part by the
Science Foundation Ireland under Grant No. 10/CE/B1821.
’REFERENCES
(1) Meagher, R. J.; Hatch, A. V.; Renzi, R. F.; Singh, A. K. Lab Chip
2008, 8, 2046–2053.
(2) (a) Tang, Y. W.; Li, H.; McCormac, M. A.; Estes, R. W.; Sefers,
S. E.; Dare, R. K.; Chappell, J. D.; Erdman, D. D.; Wright, P. F. J. Clin.
Microbiol. 2007, 45, 2105–2109. (b) Birtwell, S.; Morgan, H. Integr. Biol.
2009, 1, 345–362. (c) Schudel, B. R.; Tanyeri, M.; Mukherjee, A.;
Schroeder, C. M.; Kenis, P. J. A. Lab Chip 2011, 11, 1916–1923. (d)
Schulze, H.; Giraud, G.; Crain, J.; Bachmann, T. T. J. Biophotonics 2009,
2, 199–211.
(3) (a) Wang, J.; Ahmad, H.; Ma, C.; Shi, Q.; Vermesh, O.; Vermesh,
U.; Heath, J. Lab Chip 2010, 10, 3157–3162. (b) Jiang, H.; Weng, X.; Li,
D. Microﬂuid. Nanoﬂuid. 2010, 10, 941–964.
(4) (a) Melin, J.; Jonsson, C.; Aronsson, M.; Rundstrom, G.;
Pettersson, C.; Mendel-Hartvig, I.; Bakker, J.; Martinsson, E.; Liedberg,
B.; MacCraith, B.; Ohman, O. Lab Chip 2008, 8, 1191–1197. (b)
Madou, M.; Zoval, J.; Jia, G. Y.; Kido, H.; Kim, J.; Kim, N. Annu. Rev.
Biomed. Eng. 2006, 8, 601–628. (c) Ducree, J.; Haeberle, S.; Lutz, S.;
Pausch, S.; von Stetten, F.; Zengerle, R. J. Micromech. Microeng. 2007,
17, S103–S115.
(5) (a) Lewandrowski, K. Clin. Lab. Med. 2009, 29, 421–432. (b)
Melanson, S. E. F. Point Care 2011, 10, 63–68. (c) Durner, J. Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 2010, 49, 1026–1051.
(6) (a) Gervais, L.; de Rooij, N.; Delamarche, E. Adv. Mater. 2011, 23,
H151–H176. (b) Warsinke, A. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2009, 393, 1393–1405.
(7) (a) Mark, D.; Haeberle, S.; Roth, G.; von Stetten, F.; Zengerle, R.
Chem. Soc. Rev. 2010, 39, 1153–1182. (b) Hou, C.; Herr, A. E.
Electrophoresis 2008, 29, 3306–3319. (c) Arora, A.; Simone, G.; Salieb-
Beugelaar, G. B.; Kim, J. T.; Manz, A. Anal. Chem. 2010, 82, 4830–4847.
(d) Rivet, C.; Lee, H.; Hirsch, A.; Hamilton, S.; Lu, H. Microﬂuid. Eng.
2011, 66, 1490–1507. (e) Yeo, L. Y.; Chang, H.-C.; Chan, P. P. Y.;
Friend, J. R. Small 2011, 7, 12–48.
(8) (a) Asiello, P. J.; Baeumner, A. J. Lab Chip 2011, 11, 1420–1430.
(b) Niemz, A.; Ferguson, T. M.; Boyle, D. S. Trends Biotechnol. 2011,
29, 240–250.
(9) Lien, K.-Y.; Lee, G.-B. Analyst 2010, 135, 1499–1518.
(10) Bissonnette, L.; Bergeron, M. G. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 2010,
16, 1044–1053.
(11) (a) Choi, S.; Goryll, M.; Sin, L. Y. M.; Wong, P. K.; Chae, J.
Microﬂuid. Nanoﬂuid. 2010, 10, 231–247. (b) Henares, T. G.; Mizutani,
F.; Hisamoto, H. Anal. Chim. Acta 2008, 611, 17–30.
(12) Ng, A. H. C.; Uddayasankar, U.; Wheeler, A. R. Anal. Bioanal.
Chem. 2010, 397, 991–1007.
(13) Rusling, J. F.; Kumar, C. V.; Gutkind, J. S.; Patel, V. Analyst
2010, 135, 2496–2511.
(14) Lehmann, C. A. In Point-of-Care Testing; Price, C. P., St. John,
A., Hicks, J., Eds.; American Association for Clinical Chemistry Inc.:
Washington, DC, 2004; Vol. 2, pp 269277.
(15) Dempﬂe, C. E.; Borggrefe, M. Semin. Thromb. Hemost. 2008,
34, 445–450.
(16) Braun, S.; Spannagl, M.; Voller, H. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2009,
393, 1463–1471.
(17) Ryan, F.; O’Shea, S.; Byrne, S. Thromb. Res. 2010, 126, e345–e348.
(18) Pugia, M. J.; Price, C. P. In Point-of-Care Testing; .Price, C. P., St.
John, A., Hicks, J. M., Eds.; American Association for Clinical Chemistry
Inc.: Washington, DC, 2004, Vol. 2, pp 1330.
(19) Hicks, J. In Point-of-Care Testing; Price, C. P., St. John, A., Hicks,
J., Eds.; American Association for Clinical Chemistry Inc.: Washington,
DC, 2004; Vol. 2, pp 215218.
(20) Von Lode, P. Clin. Biochem. 2005, 38, 591–606.
(21) Price, C. P. Br. Med. J. 2001, 322, 1285–1288.
(22) Laurence, C. O.; Moss, J. R.; Briggs, N. E.; Beilby, J. J. BMC
Health Serv. Res. 2010, 10, 165–165.
(23) Douketis, J. D. Am. J. Cardiovasc. Drugs 2001, 1, 245–251.
(24) Grieve, R.; Beech, R.; Vincent, J.; Mazurkiewicz, J. Health
Technol. Assess. (Winchester, Eng.) 1999, 3, 1–74.
(25) Watzke, H. H.; Forberg, E.; Svolba, G.; Jimenez-Boj, E.;
Krinninger, B. Thromb. Haemost. 2000, 83, 661–665.
(26) Piso, B.; Jimenz-Boj, E.; Krinninger, B.; Watzke, H. H. Thromb.
Res. 2002, 106, 101–104.
(27) Unold, D.; Nichols, J. H. Clin. Chem. 2010, 56, 1893–1894.
(28) Clarke, J. T. R. A Clinical Guide to Inherited Metabolic Diseases;
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, U.K., 2006; Vol. 3.
(29) Luppa, P. B.; Muller, C.; Schlichtiger, A.; Schlebusch, H. Trends
Anal. Chem. 2011, 30, 887–898.
(30) Lauks, I. R. Acc. Chem. Res. 1998, 31, 317–324.
(31) Wang, J. Chem. Rev. 2008, 108, 814–825.
(32) Wilkins, E.; Atanasov, P. Med. Eng. Phys. 1996, 18, 273–288.
(33) Rapi, S.; Bazzini, C.; Tozzetti, C.; Sbolci, V.; Modesti, P. A.
Transl. Res. 2009, 153, 71–76.
(34) Shephard, M.; Peake, M.; Corso, O.; Shephard, A.; Mazzachi,
B.; Spaeth, B.; Barbara, J.; Mathew, T. Clin. Chem. Lab. Med. 2010,
48, 1113–1119.
(35) Taylor, R. P. In Point-of-Care Testing; Price, C. P., St. John, A.,
Hicks, J., Eds.; American Association for Clinical Chemistry Inc.:
Washington, DC, 2004; Vol. 2, pp 227238.
(36) Wang, C.; Sahay, P. Sensors 2009, 9, 8230–8262.
(37) Davies, S.; Spanel, P.; Smith, D. Kidney Int. 1997, 52,
223–228.
(38) Miekisch, W.; Schubert, J. K.; Noeldge-Schomburg, G. F. E.
Clin. Chim. Acta 2004, 347, 25–39.
(39) Cao, W.; Duan, Y. Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem. 2007, 37, 3–13.
(40) Barnfather, K. D.; Cope, G. F.; Chapple, I. L. BMJ [Br. Med.
J. Clin. Res. Ed.] 2005, 331, 999–1001.
(41) Watson, I. D. In Point-of-Care Testing; Price, C. P., St. John, A.,
Hicks, J., Eds.; American Association for Clinical Chemistry Inc.:
Washington, DC, 2004; Vol. 2, pp 435443.
(42) Grainger, D. W.; Wu, P.; Castner, D. G. J. Biomater. Sci., Polym.
Ed. 2008, 19, 725–753.
(43) Georgiadis, R. M.; Peterson, A. W.; Heaton, R. J. Abstr. Pap. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2000, 220, U273–U273.
(44) Kowalski, R. P.; Karenchak, L. M.; Romanowski, E. G.; Gordon,
Y. J.; Pittsburg, C. O. Ophthalmology 1999, 106, 1324–1327.
(45) (a) Ginocchio, C. C.; Lotlikar, M.; Falk, L.; Arora, S.; Kowerska,
M.; Bornfreund, M.; Manji, R. J. Clin. Virol. 2009, 45, 146–149. (b)
Grondahl, B.; Puppe, W.; Weigl, J.; Schmitt, H. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect.
2005, 11, 848–850.
(46) Pabbaraju, K.; Tokaryk, K. L.; Wong, S.; Fox, J. D. J. Clin.
Microbiol. 2008, 46, 3056–3062.
(47) Sista, R.; Hua, Z.; Thwar, P.; Sudarsan, A.; Srinivasan, V.;
Eckhardt, A.; Pollack, M.; Pamula, V. Lab Chip 2008, 8, 2091–
2104.
(48) (a) Stewart, D. S.; Reineke, K. F.; Tortorello, M. L. J. AOAC Int.
2002, 85, 395–403. (b) Bourbeau, P. P.; Heiter, B. J.; Figdore, M. J. Clin.
Microbiol. 1997, 35, 144–147.
(49) Keiler, K. C.; Shapiro, L.; Williams, K. P. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 2000, 97, 7778–7783.
(50) (a) O’grady, J.; Lacey, K.; Glynn, B.; Smith, T. J.; Barry, T.;
Maher, M. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2009, 301, 218–223. (b) McGuinness,
S.; McCabe, E.; O’Regan, E.; Dolan, A.; Duﬀy, G.; Burgess, C.; Fanning,
S.; Barry, T.; O’Grady, J. Meat Sci. 2009, 83, 555–562. (c) Dimov, I. K.;
Garcia-Cordero, J. L.; O’Grady, J.; Poulsen, C. R.; Viguier, C.; Kent, L.;
Daly, P.; Lincoln, B.; Maher, M.; O’Kennedy, R.; Smith, T. J.; Ricco, A. J.;
Lee, L. P. Lab Chip 2008, 8, 2071–2078.

----- Page 25 (native) -----
(51) Vickers, I.; O’Flanagan, D.; Caﬀerkey, M.; Humphreys, H. Eur.
J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis.: Oﬃcial Publ. Eur. Soc. Clin. Microbiol. 2011,
30, 447–453.
(52) (a) Toner, M.; Irimia, D. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2005,
7, 77–103. (b) Chin, C. D.; Linder, V.; Sia, S. K. Lab Chip 2007, 7, 41–57.
(53) Basabe-Desmonts, L.; Ramstrom, S.; Meade, G.; O’Neill, S.;
Riaz, A.; Lee, L. P.; Ricco, A. J.; Kenny, D. Langmuir 2010, 26, 14700–14706.
(54) Clerc, O.; Greub, G. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 2010, 16, 1054–1061.
(55) McNerney, R.; Daley, P. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2011, 9, 204–213.
(56) Yang, M.; Sun, S.; Kostov, Y.; Rasooly, A. Anal. Biochem. 2011,
416, 74–81.
(57) Qiu, J.; Zhou, Y.; Chen, H.; Lin, J. M. Talanta 2009, 79, 787–795.
(58) Hurt, A. C.; Baas, C.; Deng, Y. M.; Roberts, S.; Kelso, A.; Barr,
I. G. Inﬂuenza Other Respir. Viruses 2009, 3, 171–176.
(59) Vearrier, D.; Curtis, J. A.; Greenberg, M. I. EXS 2010,
100, 489–517.
(60) (a) Barnes, A. J.; Scheidweiler, K. B.; Kolbrich-Spargo, E. A.;
Gorelick, D. A.; Goodwin, R. S.; Huestis, M. A. Ther. Drug Monit. 2011,
33, 602–608. (b) Wang, I. T.; Feng, Y. T.; Chen, C. Y. J. Chromatogr., B:
Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 2010, 878, 3095–3105. (c) Gjerde, H.;
Normann, P. T.; Christophersen, A. S. J. Anal. Toxicol. 2010, 34,
416–419.
(61) (a) Wong, B.; Wong, R. C.; Fan, P.; Tran, M. Clin. Chem. 2003,
49, A125–A125. (b) Wong, R. C.; Tran, M.; Tung, J. K. Forensic Sci. Int.
2005, 150, 175–180.
(62) (a) Deventer, K.; Roels, K.; Delbeke, F. T.; Van Eenoo, P. Anal.
Bioanal. Chem. 2011, 401, 421–432. (b) Jelkmann, W.; Lundby, C. Blood
2011, 118, 2395–2404. (c) Moller, I.; Wintermeyer, A.; Bender, K.;
Jubner, M.; Thomas, A.; Krug, O.; Schanzer, W.; Thevis, M. Drug Test.
Anal. 2011, 3, 609–620. (d) Thomas, A.; Solymos, E.; Schanzer, W.;
Baume, N.; Saugy, M.; Dellanna, F.; Thevis, M. Anal. Chim. Acta 2011,
707, 107–113.
(63) Catlin, D. H.; Fitch, K. D.; Ljungqvist, A. J. Intern. Med. 2008,
264, 99–114.
(64) Peace, M. R.; Poklis, J. L.; Tarnai, L. D.; Poklis, A. J. Anal.
Toxicol. 2002, 26, 500–503.
(65) Peace, M. R.; Tarnai, L. D. J. Anal. Toxicol. 2002, 26, 464–470.
(66) (a) Heller, A.; Feldman, B. Chem. Rev. 2008, 108, 2482–2505.
(b) Heller, A.; Feldman, B. Acc. Chem. Res. 2010, 43, 963–973.
(67) http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/AlertsandNotices/
PatientAlerts/ucm177189.htm, 2009.
(68) (a) Kristensen, G. B. B.; Monsen, G.; Skeie, S.; Sandberg, S.
Diabetes Technol. Ther. 2008, 10, 467–477. (b) Kristensen, G. B. B.;
Sandberg, S. Clin. Chem. Lab. Med. 2010, 48, 963–972.
(69) Hirsch, I. B.; Bode, B. W.; Childs, B. P.; Close, K. L.; Fisher,
W. A.; Gavin, J. R.; Ginsberg, B. H.; Raine, C. H.; Verderese, C. A.
Diabetes Technol. Ther. 2008, 10, 419–439.
(70) Freckmann, G.; Baumstark, A.; Jendrike, N.; Zschornack, E.;
Kocher, S.; Tshiananga, J.; Heister, F.; Haug, C. Diabetes Technol. Ther.
2010, 12, 221–231.
(71) (a) Boyd, J. C.; Bruns, D. E. Clin. Chem. 2001, 47, 209–214. (b)
Karon, B. S.; Boyd, J. C.; Klee, G. G. Clin. Chem. 2010, 56, 1091–1097.
(72) Burt, D. P.; Unwin, P. R. Electrochem. Commun. 2008,
10, 934–937.
(73) Davies, R. J.; Eapen, S. S.; Carlisle, S. J. Handb. Biosens. Biochips
2007, 2, 1151–1165.
(74) Gubala, V.; Crean, C.; Nooney, R.; Hearty, S.; McDonnell, B.;
Heydon, K.; O’Kennedy, R.; MacCraith, B. D.; Williams, D. E. Analyst
2011, 136, 2533–2541.
(75) Bock, J. L.; Singer, A. J.; Thode, H. C. Am. J. Clin. Pathol. 2008,
130, 132–135.
(76) James, S.; Flodin, M.; Johnston, N.; Lindahl, B.; Venge, P. Clin.
Chem. 2006, 52, 832–837.
(77) (a) Ismail, A.; Walker, P.; Cawood, M.; Barth, J. Ann. Clin.
Biochem. 2002, 39, 366–373. (b) Reinsberg, J. Clin. Chem. 1998, 44,
1742–1744. (c) Selby, C. Ann. Clin. Biochem. 1999, 36, 704–721.
(78) Parry, D. M.; Krahn, J.; Leroux, M.; Dalton, J. Clin. Biochem.
1999, 32, 667–669.
(79) Lu, J. R.; Xu, H.; Zhao, X. B.; Grant, C.; Williams, D. E.;
Penfold, J. Langmuir 2006, 22, 6313–6320.
(80) (a) Giegel, J. L.; Brotherton, M. M.; Cronin, P.; Daquino, M.;
Evans, S.; Heller, Z. H.; Knight, W. S.; Krishnan, K.; Sheiman, M. Clin.
Chem. 1982, 28, 1894–1898. (b) Singh, P.; Moll, F.; Lin, S. H.; Ferzli, C.;
Yu, K. S.; Koski, R. K.; Saul, R. G.; Cronin, P. Clin. Chem. 1994, 40,
1845–1849.
(81) Venge, P.; Ohberg, C.; Flodin, M.; Lindahl, B. Am. Heart
J. 2010, 160, 835–841.
(82) Apple, F. S.; Murakami, M. M.; Christenson, R. H.; Campbell,
J. L.; Miller, C. J.; Hock, K. G.; Scott, M. G. Clin. Chim. Acta 2004,
345, 123–127.
(83) Apple, F. S.; Ler, R.; Chung, A. Y.; Berger, M. J.; Murakami,
M. M. Clin. Chem. 2006, 52, 322–325.
(84) Lee-Lewandrowski, E.; Januzzi, J. L.; Green, S. M.; Tannous, B.;
Wu, A. H. B.; Smith, A.; Wong, A.; Murakami, M. M.; Kaczmarek, J.;
Apple, F. S.; Miller, W. L.; Hartman, K.; Jaﬀe, A. S. Clin. Chim. Acta 2007,
386, 20–24.
(85) Wu, A. H. B.; Smith, A.; Christenson, R. H.; Murakami, M. M.;
Apple, F. S. Clin. Chim. Acta 2004, 346, 211–219.
(86) O’Farrell, B.; Bauer, J. http://www.ivdtechnology.com, IVD
Technology, 2006.
(87) Sharma, H.; Diep, N.; Chen, A.; Lew, V.; Khine, M. Ann.
Biomed. Eng. 2011, 39, 1313–1327.
(88) Levine, L. http://www.ivdtechnology.com, http://www.ivd-
technology.com/print/1135, 2009.
(89) (a) Stevens, D. Y.; Petri, C. R.; Osborn, J. L.; Spicar-Mihalic, P.;
McKenzie, K. G.; Yager, P. Lab Chip 2008, 8, 2038–2045. (b) Yager, P.;
Edwards, T.; Fu, E.; Helton, K.; Nelson, K.; Tam, M. R.; Weigl, B. H.
Nature 2006, 442, 412–418. (c) Ricco, A. J.; Parra, M.; Niesel, D.;
Piccini, M.; Ly, D.; McGinnis, M.; Kudlicki, A.; Hines, J. W.; Timucin, L.;
Beasley, C.; Ricks, R.; McIntyre, M.; Friedericks, C.; Henschke, M.;
Leung, R.; Diaz-Aguado, M.; Kitts, C.; Mas, I.; Rasay, M.; Agasid, E.; Luzzi,
E.; Ronzano, K.; Squires, D.; Yost, B. Proc. SPIE 2011, 7929, 79290T.
(90) Stevens, D. Y.; Petri, C. R.; Osborn, J. L.; Spicar-Mihalic, P.;
McKenzie, K. G.; Yager, P. Lab Chip 2008, 8, 2038–2045.
(91) Lee, C. Y.; Harbers, G. M.; Grainger, D. W.; Gamble, L. J.;
Castner, D. G. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2007, 129, 9429–9438.
(92) Martinez-Duarte, R.; Gorkin, R. A., 3rd; Abi-Samra, K.; Madou,
M. J. Lab Chip 2010, 10, 1030–1043.
(93) Boone, T.; Fan, Z. H.; Hooper, H.; Ricco, A.; Tan, H. D.;
Williams, S. Anal. Chem. 2002, 74, 78A–86A.
(94) Tsao, C.-W.; DeVoe, D. L. Microﬂuid. Nanoﬂuid. 2008, 6, 1–16.
(95) Pan, T.; Wang, W. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 2011, 39, 600–620.
(96) Gorkin, R.; Park, J.; Siegrist, J.; Amasia, M.; Lee, B. S.; Park,
J.-M.; Kim, J.; Kim, H.; Madou, M.; Cho, Y.-K. Lab Chip 2010,
10, 1758–1773.
(97) Attia, U. M.; Alcock, J. R. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2010,
48, 973–991.
(98) Thomas, M. S.; Millare, B.; Clift, J. M.; Bao, D.; Hong, C.;
Vullev, V. I. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 2010, 38, 21–32.
(99) Focke, M.; Kosse, D.; Mueller, C.; Reinecke, H.; Zengerle, R.;
von Stetten, F. Lab Chip 2010, 10, 1365–1386.
(100) Liu, K.; Fan, Z. H. Analyst 2011, 136, 1288–1297.
(101) Tomazelli Coltro, W. K.; de Jesus, D. P.; Fracassi da Silva, J. A.;
do Lago, C. L.; Carrilho, E. Electrophoresis 2010, 31, 2487–2498.
(102) Lenshof, A.; Laurell, T. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2010, 39, 1203–1217.
(103) Mohammed, M. I.; Desmulliez, M. P. Lab Chip 2011, 11,
569–595.
(104) Lin, C.-C.; Tseng, C.-C.; Chuang, T.-K.; Lee, D.-S.; Lee, G.-B.
Analyst 2011, 136, 2669–2688.
(105) Miller, C. S.; Foley, J. D.; Bailey, A. L.; Campell, C. L.;
Humphries, R. L.; Christodoulides, N.; Floriano, P. N.; Simmons, G.;
Bhagwandin, B.; Jacobson, J. W.; Redding, S. W.; Ebersole, J. L.;
McDevitt, J. T. Biomarkers Med. 2010, 4, 171–189.
(106) Linder, V. Analyst 2007, 132, 1186.
(107) Sin, M. L.; Gao, J.; Liao, J. C.; Wong, P. K. J. Biol. Eng. 2011,
5, 6.

----- Page 26 (native) -----
(108) Jonsson, C.; Aronsson, M.; Rundstrom, G.; Pettersson, C.;
Mendel-Hartvig, I.; Bakker, J.; Martinsson, E.; Liedberg, B.; MacCraith,
B.; Ohman, O.; Melin, J. Lab Chip 2008, 8, 1191–1197.
(109) Cesaro-Tadic, S.; Dernick, G.; Juncker, D.; Buurman, G.;
Kropshofer, H.; Michel, B.; Fattinger, C.; Delamarche, E. Lab Chip 2004,
4, 563–569.
(110) Eijkel, J. C.; van den Berg, A. Lab Chip 2006, 6, 19–23.
(111) Gervais, L.; Delamarche, E. Lab Chip 2009, 9, 3330–3337.
(112) Weigl, B.; Domingo, G.; LaBarre, P.; Gerlach, J. Lab Chip
2008, 8, 1999–2014.
(113) Laser, D. J.; Santiago, J. G. J. Micromech. Microeng. 2004, 14,
R35–R64.
(114) Ricco, A. J.; Hines, J. W.; Piccini, M.; Parra, M.; Timucin, L.;
Barker, V.; Storment, C.; Friedericks, C.; Agasid, E.; Beasley, C.;
Giovangrandi, L.; Henschke, M.; Kitts, C.; Levine, L.; Luzzi, E.; Ly,
D.; Mas, I.; McIntyre, M.; Oswell, D.; Rasay, R.; Ricks, R.; Ronzano, K.;
Squires, D.; Swaiss, G.; Tucker, J.; Yost, B. The 14th International
Conference on Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems, Lyon,
France, 2007; pp 3337.
(115) Kokoris, M.; Nabavi, M.; Lancaster, C.; Clemmens, J.; Maloney,
P.; Capadanno, J.; Gerdes, J.; Battrell, C. F. Methods 2005, 37,
114–119.
(116) Melin, J.; Quake, S. R. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 2007,
36, 213–231.
(117) Haeberle, S.; Brenner, T.; Zengerle, R.; Ducree, J. Lab Chip
2006, 6, 776–781.
(118) Lin, C.-C.; Wang, J.-H.; Wu, H.-W.; Lee, G.-B. J. Assoc. Lab.
Autom. 2010, 15, 253–274.
(119) Lee, S. H.; Kim, S. W.; Kang, J. Y.; Ahn, C. H. Lab Chip 2008,
8, 2121–2127.
(120) Zhou, P.; Young, L.; Chen, Z. Biomed. Microdevices 2010, 12,
821–832.
(121) (a) Mark, D.; Metz, T.; Haeberle, S.; Lutz, S.; Ducree, J.;
Zengerle, R.; von Stetten, F. Lab Chip 2009, 9, 3599–3603. (b) Kim, J.;
Kido, H.; Rangel, R. H.; Madou, M. J. Sens. Actuators, B: Chem. 2008,
128, 613–621. (c) Steigert, J.; Grumann, M.; Brenner, T.; Riegger, L.;
Harter, J.; Zengerle, R.; Ducree, J. Lab Chip 2006, 6, 1040–1044.
(122) Burtis, C. A.; Anderson, N. G.; Mailen, J. C.; Scott, C. D.;
Tiﬀany, T. O.; Johnson, W. F. Clin. Chem. 1972, 18, 753.
(123) Steigert, J.; Grumann, M.; Brenner, T.; Mittenbuhler, K.;
Nann, T.; Ruhe, J.; Moser, I.; Haeberle, S.; Riegger, L.; Riegler, J.
J. Assoc. Lab. Autom. 2005, 10, 331–341.
(124) Martinez-Duarte, R.; Gorkin Iii, R. A.; Abi-Samra, K.; Madou,
M. J. Lab Chip 2010, 10, 1030–1043.
(125) Lee, B. S.; Lee, J.-N.; Park, J.-M.; Lee, J.-G.; Kim, S.; Cho,
Y.-K.; Ko, C. Lab Chip 2009, 9, 1548–1555.
(126) Teh, S. Y.; Lin, R.; Hung, L. H.; Lee, A. P. Lab Chip 2008,
8, 198–220.
(127) Malic, L.; Brassard, D.; Veres, T.; Tabrizian, M. Lab Chip
2010, 10, 418–431.
(128) (a) Bousse, L.; Cohen, C.; Nikiforov, T.; Chow, A.; Kopf-Sill,
A. R.; Dubrow, R.; Parce, J. W. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 2000,
29, 155–181. (b) Escarpa, A.; Gonzalez, M. C.; Lopez Gil, M. A.; Crevillen,
A. G.; Hervas, M.; Garcia, M. Electrophoresis 2008, 29, 4852–4861.
(129) Gao, Y.; Sherman, P. M.; Sun, Y.; Li, D. Anal. Chim. Acta 2008,
606, 98–107.
(130) Huang, S.-B.; Wu, M.-H.; Lee, G.-B. Sens. Actuators, B: Chem.
2009, 142, 389–399.
(131) Lee, C. Y.; Chang, C. L.; Wang, Y. N.; Fu, L. M. Int. J. Mol. Sci.
2011, 12, 3263–3287.
(132) Chang,C.-C.; Yang, R.-J.Microﬂuid.Nanoﬂuid. 2007,3, 501–525.
(133) Hong, C. C.; Choi, J. W.; Ahn, C. H. Lab Chip 2004, 4,
109–113.
(134) (a) Lim, C. Y.; Lam, Y. C.; Yang, C. Biomicroﬂuidics 2010, 4,
14101. (b) Lim, Y. C.; Kouzani, A. Z.; Duan, W. Microsyst. Technol. 2010,
16, 1995–2015.
(135) Lien, K.-Y.; Liu, C.-J.; Lin, Y.-C.; Kuo, P.-L.; Lee, G.-B.
Microﬂuid. Nanoﬂuid. 2008, 6, 539–555.
(136) Ahmed, D.; Mao, X.; Juluri, B. K.; Huang, T. J. Microﬂuid.
Nanoﬂuid. 2009, 7, 727–731.
(137) Nath, P.; Fung, D.; Kunde, Y. A.; Zeytun, A.; Branch, B.;
Goddard, G. Lab Chip 2010, 10, 2286–2291.
(138) Srinivasan, V.; Pamula, V. K.; Fair, R. B. Lab Chip 2004, 4,
310–315.
(139) Du, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Yim, C.; Lin, M.; Cao, X. Biomicroﬂuidics
2010, 4.
(140) Tofteberg, T.; Skolimowski, M.; Andreassen, E.; Geschke, O.
Microﬂuid. Nanoﬂuid. 2010, 8, 209–215.
(141) Tsai, R. T.; Wu, C. Y. Biomicroﬂuidics 2011, 5, 14103.
(142) Long, M.; Sprague, M. A.; Grimes, A. A.; Rich, B. D.; Khine, M.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 94, 133501.
(143) Swickrath, M. J.; Burns, S. D.; Wnek, G. E. Sens. Actuators, B:
Chem. 2009, 140, 656–662.
(144) Mair, D. A.; Schwei, T. R.; Dinio, T. S.; Svec, F.; Frechet, J. M.
Lab Chip 2009, 9, 877–883.
(145) Jung, J. H.; Kim, G. Y.; Seo, T. S. Lab Chip 2011, 11, 3465–3470.
(146) Choi, S. H.; Kim, D. S.; Kwon, T. H. Microsyst. Technol. 2008,
15, 309–316.
(147) Ko, Y.-J.; Maeng, J.-H.; Ahn, Y.; Hwang, S. Y. Sens. Actuators,
B: Chem. 2011, 157, 735–741.
(148) Osborn, J. L.; Lutz, B.; Fu, E.; Kauﬀman, P.; Stevens, D. Y.;
Yager, P. Lab Chip 2010, 10, 2659–2665.
(149) (a) Reches, M.; Mirica, K. A.; Dasgupta, R.; Dickey, M. D.;
Butte, M. J.; Whitesides, G. M. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2010,
2, 1722–1728. (b) Li, X.; Tian, J.; Shen, W. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
2010, 2, 1–6.
(150) West, J.; Becker, M.; Tombrink, S.; Manz, A. Anal. Chem.
2008, 80, 4403–4419.
(151) Kenyon, S. M.; Meighan, M. M.; Hayes, M. A. Electrophoresis
2011, 32, 482–493.
(152) Bhagat, A. A.; Bow, H.; Hou, H. W.; Tan, S. J.; Han, J.; Lim,
C. T. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 2010, 48, 999–1014.
(153) Posthuma-Trumpie, G. A.; Korf, J.; van Amerongen, A. Anal.
Bioanal. Chem. 2009, 393, 569–582.
(154) Nge, P. N.; Yang, W.; Pagaduan, J. V.; Woolley, A. T.
Electrophoresis 2011, 32, 1133–1140.
(155) Laurell, T.; Petersson, F.; Nilsson, A. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2007,
36, 492–506.
(156) Garcia, E.; Kirkham, J. R.; Hatch, A. V.; Hawkins, K. R.; Yager,
P. Lab Chip 2004, 4, 78–82.
(157) McKenzie, K. G.; Laﬂeur, L. K.; Lutz, B. R.; Yager, P. Lab Chip
2009, 9, 3543–3548.
(158) Dudek, M. M.; Lindahl, T. L.; Killard, A. J. Anal. Chem. 2010,
82, 2029–2035.
(159) Li, J. J.; Ouellette, A. L.; Giovangrandi, L.; Cooper, D. E.;
Ricco, A. J.; Kovacs, G. T. A. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2008,
55, 1560–1571.
(160) Jokerst, J. V.; Floriano, P. N.; Christodoulides, N.; Simmons,
G. W.; McDevitt, J. T. Lab Chip 2008, 8, 2079–2090.
(161) Garcia-Cordero, J. L.; Kurzbuch, D.; Benito-Lopez, F.; Diamond,
D.; Lee, L. P.; Ricco, A. J. Lab Chip 2010, 10, 2680–2687.
(162) Kim, J.; Johnson, M.; Hill, P.; Gale, B. K. Integr. Biol. 2009,
1, 574–586.
(163) (a) Pumera, M. Electrophoresis 2007, 28, 2113–2124. (b)
Freire, S. L. S.; Wheeler, A. R. Lab Chip 2006, 6, 1415–1423. (c) Song,
S.; Singh, A. K. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2006, 384, 41–43.
(164) Sikanen, T.; Pedersen-Bjergaard, S.; Jensen, H.; Kostiainen,
R.; Rasmussen, K. E.; Kotiaho, T. Anal. Chim. Acta 2010, 658, 133–140.
(165) Huh, Y. S.; Yang, K.; Hong, Y. K.; Jun, Y.-S.; Hong, W. H.;
Kim, D. H. Process Biochem. 2007, 42, 649–654.
(166) Vijayakumar, K.; Gulati, S.; deMello, A. J.; Edel, J. B. Chem. Sci.
2010, 1, 447–452.
(167) Bhattacharyya, A.; Klapperich, C. M. Sens. Actuators, B: Chem.
2008, 129, 693–698.
(168) Sheng, J.; Lei, J.; Ju, H.; Song, C.; Zhang, D. Anal. Chim. Acta
2010, 679, 1–6.

----- Page 27 (native) -----
(169) Levkin, P. A.; Eeltink, S.; Stratton, T. R.; Brennen, R.; Robotti,
K.; Yin, H.; Killeen, K.; Svec, F.; Frechet, J. M. J. J. Chromatogr. 2008,
1200, 55–61.
(170) (a) Schulte, T.; Bardell, R.; Weigl, B. H. J. Assoc. Lab. Autom.
2000, 5, 83–86. (b) Hatch, A.; Garcia, E.; Yager, P. Proc. IEEE 2004,
92, 126–139.
(171) Dimov, I. K.; Basabe-Desmonts, L.; Garcia-Cordero, J. L.;
Ross, B. M.; Ricco, A. J.; Lee, L. P. Lab Chip 2011, 11, 845–850.
(172) Fan, R.; Vermesh, O.; Srivastava, A.; Yen, B. K. H.; Qin, L. D.;
Ahmad, H.; Kwong, G. A.; Liu, C. C.; Gould, J.; Hood, L.; Heath, J. R.
Nat. Biotechnol. 2008, 26, 1373–1378.
(173) Pommer, M. S.; Zhang, Y.; Keerthi, N.; Chen, D.; Thomson,
J. A.; Meinhart, C. D.; Soh, H. T. Electrophoresis 2008, 29, 1213–1218.
(174) Shah, G. J.; Veale, J. L.; Korin, Y.; Reed, E. F.; Gritsch, H. A.;
Kim, C.-J. C. J. Biomicroﬂuidics 2010, 4, 044106–044106.
(175) Vandeventer, P. E.; Weigel, K. M.; Salazar, J.; Erwin, B.; Irvine,
B.; Doebler, R.; Nadim, A.; Cangelosi, G. A.; Niemz, A. J. Clin. Microbiol.
2011, 49, 2533–2539.
(176) Mahalanabis, M.; Al-Muayad, H.; Kulinski, M. D.; Altman, D.;
Klapperich, C. M. Lab Chip 2009, 9, 2811–2817.
(177) Stachowiak, J. C.; Shugard, E. E.; Mosier, B. P.; Renzi, R. F.;
Caton, P. F.; Ferko, S. M.; Van de Vreugde, J. L.; Yee, D. D.; Haroldsen,
B. L.; VanderNoot, V. A. Anal. Chem. 2007, 79, 5763–5770.
(178) Bao, N.; Wang, J.; Lu, C. Electrophoresis 2008, 29, 2939–2944.
(179) Lee, D. W.; Cho, Y.-H. Sens. Actuators, B: Chem. 2007, 124, 84–89.
(180) Lee, H. J.; Kim, J.-H.; Lim, H. K.; Cho, E. C.; Huh, N.; Ko, C.;
Park, J. C.; Choi, J.-W.; Lee, S. S. Lab Chip 2010, 10, 626–633.
(181) Cho, Y.-K.; Lee, J.-G.; Park, J.-M.; Lee, B.-S.; Lee, Y.; Ko, C.
Lab Chip 2007, 7, 565–573.
(182) Lin, Y.-H.; Lee, G.-B. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 94, 253–274.
(183) Chia, B. T.; Yang, X. Y.; Cheng, M. Y.; Yang, Y. J. MEMS 2010:
23rd IEEE international conference on micro electro mechanical systems,
2010; pp 967970.
(184) Manage, D. P.; Morrissey, Y. C.; Stickel, A. J.; Lauzon, J.;
Atrazhev, A.; Acker, J. P.; Pilarski, L. M. Microﬂuid. Nanoﬂuid. 2011,
10, 697–702.
(185) Martino, C.; Zagnoni, M.; Sandison, M. E.; Chanasakulniyom,
M.; Pitt, A. R.; Cooper, J. M. Anal. Chem. 2011, 83, 5361–5368.
(186) Egatz-Gomez, A.; Thormann, W. Electrophoresis 2011, 32,
1433–1437.
(187) Saaem, I.; Ma, K. S.; Marchi, A. N.; LaBean, T. H.; Tian, J. D.
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2010, 2, 491–497.
(188) (a) Arrigan, D. W. M.; Raj, J.; Herzog, G.; Manning, M.;
Volcke, C.; MacCraith, B. D.; Ballantyne, S.; Thompson, M. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 2009, 24, 2654–2658. (b) Le, N. C. H.; Gubala, V.;
Gandhiraman, R. P.; Daniels, S.; Williams, D. E. Langmuir 2011,
27, 9043–9051. (c) Gubala, V.; Le, N. C. H.; Gandhiraman, R. P.;
Coyle, C.; Daniels, S.; Williams, D. E. Colloids Surf., B: Biointerfaces 2010,
81, 544–548.
(189) Cantarero, L. A.; Butler, J. E.; Osborne, J. W. Anal. Biochem.
1980, 105, 375–382.
(190) (a) Le, N. C. H.; Gubala, V.; Gandhiraman, R. P.; Coyle, C.;
Daniels, S.; Williams, D. E. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2010, 398, 1927–1936.
(b) Moore, J. D.; Perez-Pardo, M. A.; Popplewell, J. F.; Spencer, S. J.;
Ray, S.; Swann, M. J.; Shard, A. G.; Jones, W.; Hills, A.; Bracewell, D. G.
Biosens. Bioelectron. 2011, 26, 2940–2947. (c) Feldoto, Z.; Lundin, M.;
Braesch-Andersen, S.; Blomberg, E. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2011,
354, 31–37.
(191) Lu, J. R.; Xu, H.; Williams, D. E. J. Phys. Chem. B 2006,
110, 1907–1914.
(192) Green, N. M. Methods Enzymol. 1990, 184, 51–67.
(193) Nguyen, G. H.; Milea, J. S.; Rai, A.; Smith, C. L. Biomol. Eng.
2005, 22, 147–150.
(194) (a) Smith, C. L.Milea, J. S.Nguyen, G. H. In Immobilisation of
DNA on Chips II; Wittmann, C., Ed.;Topics in Current Chemistry, Vol.
261; Springer-Verlag: Berlin, Germany, 2005; p 6390 (b) Hermanson,
G. T., Bioconjugate Techniques, 2nd ed.; Academic Press, Elsevier:
London, 2008; p 1202.
(195) (a) Rusmini, F.; Zhong, Z.; Feijen, J. Biomacromolecules 2007,
8, 1775–1789. (b) Jonkheijm, P.; Weinrich, D.; Schroder, H.; Niemeyer,
C. M.; Waldmann, H. Angew. Chem. 2008, 47, 9618–9647.
(196) (a) Kim, K.; Hwang, I.; Baek, K.; Jung, M.; Kim, Y.; Park,
K. M.; Lee, D. W.; Selvapalam, N. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2007, 129,
4170–4171. (b) Rekharsky, M. V.; Mori, T.; Yang, C.; Ko, Y. H.;
Selvapalam, N.; Kim, H.; Sobransingh, D.; Kaifer, A. E.; Liu, S.; Isaacs,
L.; Chen, W.; Moghaddam, S.; Gilson, M. K.; Kim, K.; Inoue, Y. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2007, 104, 20737–20742.
(197) Kweon, D.-H.; Kim, S.-G.; Han, N. S.; Lee, J. H.; Chung,
K. M.; Seo, J.-H. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 2005, 36, 571–578.
(198) Fragoso, A.; Caballero, J.; Almirall, E.; Villalonga, R.; Cao, R.
Langmuir 2002, 18, 5051–5054.
(199) Houk, K. N.; Leach, A. G.; Kim, S. P.; Zhang, X. Angew. Chem.
2003, 42, 4872–4897.
(200) (a) Li, C. M.; Liu, Y. S.; Hu, W. H.; Lu, Z. S. MedChemComm
2010, 1, 132–135. (b) Yamazaki, M. J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 2004, 213,
81–87. (c) Obuchi, K.; Komatsu, M.; Minami, K. In Optical Manu-
facturing and Testing VII; SPIE: Bellingham, WA, 2007; Vol. 6671,
U399U407, 560. (d) Niles, W. D.; Coassin, P. J. Assay Drug Dev.
Technol. 2008, 6, 577–590. (e) Yi, L.; Wang, X. D.; Fan, Y. J. Mater.
Process. Technol. 2008, 208, 63–69.
(201) Brown, L.; Koerner, T.; Horton, J. H.; Oleschuk, R. D. Lab
Chip 2006, 6, 66–73.
(202) Chen, Z. F.; Gao, Y. H.; Su, R. G.; Li, C. W.; Lin, J. M.
Electrophoresis 2003, 24, 3246–3252.
(203) (a) Galloway, M.; Stryjewski, W.; Henry, A.; Ford, S. M.;
Llopis, S.; McCarley, R. L.; Soper, S. A. Anal. Chem. 2002, 74, 2407–
2415. (b) Lee, G.-B.; Chen, S.-H.; Huang, G.-R.; Sung, W.-C.; Lin, Y.-H.
Sens. Actuators, B 2001, 75, 142–148.
(204) (a) Cheng, J.-Y.; Wei, C.-W.; Hsu, K.-H.; Young, T.-H. Sens.
Actuators, B 2004, 99, 186–196. (b) Klank, H.; Kutter, J. P.; Geschke, O.
Lab Chip 2002, 2, 242–246. (c) Yao, L.; Liu, B.; Chen, T.; Liu, S.; Zuo, T.
Biomed. Microdevices 2005, 7, 253–257.
(205) (a) Kim, Y. J.; Taniguchi, Y.; Murase, K.; Taguchi, Y.;
Sugimura, H. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2009, 255, 3648–3654. (b) Okuji, S.;
Sekiya, M.; Nakabayash, M.; Endo, H.; Sakud, N.; Nagai, K. Nucl.
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B 2006, 242, 353–356. (c) Stachowiak,
T. B.; Mair, D. A.; Holden, T. G.; Lee, L. J.; Svec, F.; Frechet, J. M. J.
J. Sep. Sci. 2007, 30, 1088–1093. (d) Li, Y. C.; Wang, Z.; Ou, L. M. L.; Yu,
H. Z. Anal. Chem. 2007, 79, 426–433. (e) Fixe, F.; Dufva, M.; Telleman,
P.; Christensen, C. B. V. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004, 32, e9.
(206) (a) Gandhiraman, R. P.; Gubala, V.; Le, C. H. N.; Volcke, C.;
Doyle, C.; James, B.; Daniels, S.; Williams, D. E. Colloids Surf. B:
Biointerfaces 2010, 79, 270–275. (b) Gandhiraman, R. P.; Volcke, C.;
Gubala, V.; Doyle, C.; Basabe-Desmonts, L.; Dotzler, C.; Toney, M. F.;
Iacono, M.; Nooney, R. I.; Daniels, S.; James, B.; Williams, D. E. J. Mater.
Chem. 2010, 20, 4116–4127. (c) Gubala, V.; Gandhiraman, R. P.;
Volcke, C.; Doyle, C.; Coyle, C.; James, B.; Daniels, S.; Williams,
D. E. Analyst 2010, 135, 1375–1381.
(207) Raj, J.; Herzog, G.; Manning, M.; Volcke, C.; MacCraith,
B. D.; Ballantyne, S.; Thompson, M.; Arrigan, D. W. M. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 2009, 24, 2654–2658.
(208) (a) Silberzan, P.; Leger, L.; Ausserre, D.; Benattar, J. J.
Langmuir 1991, 7, 1647–1651. (b) Kanan, S. A.; Tze, W. T. Y.; Tripp,
C. P. Langmuir 2002, 18, 6623–6627. (c) White, L. D.; Tripp, C. P.
J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2000, 232, 400–407.
(209) Gandhiraman, R. P.; Karkari, S. K.; Daniels, S.; MacCraith, B.
Surf. Coat. Technol. 2009, 203, 3521–3526.
(210) (a) Wang, Y.; Vaidya, B.; Farquar, H. D.; Stryjewski, W.; Hammer,
R. P.; McCarley, R. L.; Soper, S. A.; Cheng, Y. W.; Barany, F. Anal. Chem.
2003, 75, 1130–1140. (b) Situma, C.; Wang, Y.; Hupert, M.; Barany, F.;
McCarley, R. L.; Soper, S. A. Anal. Biochem. 2005, 340, 123–135. (c) Soper,
S. A.; Hashimoto, M.; Situma, C.; Murphy, M. C.; McCarley, R. L.; Cheng,
Y. W.; Barany, F.Methods 2005, 37, 103–113. (d) Nugen, S. R.; Asiello, P. J.;
Connelly, J. T.; Baeumner, A. J. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2009, 24, 2428–2433.
(211) Dixit, C. K.; Vashist, S. K.; MacCraith, B. D.; O’Kennedy, R.
Analyst 2011, 136, 1406–1411.

----- Page 28 (native) -----
(212) Muguruma, H. Plasma Processes Polym. 2010, 7, 151–162.
(213) Bouaidat, S.; Berendsen, C.; Thomsen, P.; Petersen, S. G.;
Wolﬀ, A.; Jonsmann, J. Lab Chip 2004, 4, 632–637.
(214) Eicher, D.; Merten, C. A. Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn. 2011,
11, 505–519.
(215) Arruda, D. L.; Wilson, W. C.; Nguyen, C.; Yao, Q. W.; Caiazzo,
R. J.; Talpasanu, I.; Dow, D. E.; Liu, B. C. Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn. 2009,
9, 749–755.
(216) Soper, S. A.; Brown, K.; Ellington, A.; Frazier, B.; Garcia-
Manero, G.; Gau, V.; Gutman, S. I.; Hayes, D. F.; Korte, B.; Landers,
J. L.; Larson, D.; Ligler, F.; Majumdar, A.; Mascini, M.; Nolte, D.;
Rosenzweig, Z.; Wang, J.; Wilson, D. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2006,
21, 1932–1942.
(217) Daniels, J. S.; Pourmand, N. Electroanalysis 2007, 19, 1239–
1257.
(218) (a) Dungchai, W.; Chailapakul, O.; Henry, C. S. Anal. Chem.
2009, 81, 5821–5826. (b) Li, C.; Shutter, L. A.; Wu, P. M.; Ahn, C. H.;
Narayan, R. K. Lab Chip 2010, 10, 1476–1479. (c) Pohlmann, C.; Wang,
Y.; Humenik, M.; Heidenreich, B.; Gareis, M.; Sprinzl, M. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 2009, 24, 2766–2771.
(219) Hoegger, D.; Morier, P.; Vollet, C.; Heini, D.; Reymond, F.;
Rossier, J. S. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2007, 387, 267–275.
(220) Cooper, J.; Yazvenko, N.; Peyvan, K.; Maurer, K.; Taitt, C. R.;
Lyon, W.; Danley, D. L. PLoS One 2010, 5.
(221) Kim, G.; Morgan, M.; Hahm, B. K.; Bhunia, A.; Mun, J. H.;
Om, A. S. J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 2008, 100, 052044.
(222) Tweedie, M.; Subramanian, R.; Lemoine, P. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc. 2006, 1, 4610–4614.
(223) Barton, A. C.; Davis, F.; Higson, S. P. J. Anal. Chem. 2008,
80, 9411–9416.
(224) Wang, W. U.; Chen, C.; Lin, K. H.; Fang, Y.; Lieber, C. M.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2005, 102, 3208–3212.
(225) Oh, B. K.; Nam, J. M.; Lee, S. W.; Mirkin, C. A. Small 2006,
2, 103–108.
(226) Zhang, X. R.; Su, H. R.; Bi, S.; Li, S. G.; Zhang, S. S. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 2009, 24, 2730–2734.
(227) Liu, G. D.; Lin, Y. Y.; Wang, J.; Wu, H.; Wai, C. M.; Lin, Y. H.
Anal. Chem. 2007, 79, 7644–7653.
(228) Kellner, C.; Botero, M. L.; Latta, D.; Drese, K.; Fragoso, A.;
O’Sullivan, C. K. Electrophoresis 2011, 32, 926–930.
(229) Thuerlemann, C.; Haeberli, A.; Alberio, L. Clin. Chem. 2009,
55, 505–512.
(230) Inoue, K.; Ferrante, P.; Hirano, Y.; Yasukawa, T.; Shiku, H.;
Matsue, T. Talanta 2007, 73, 886–892.
(231) (a) Zhang, C. Y.; Hu, J. Anal. Chem. 2010, 82, 1921–1927. (b)
Radwan, S. H.; Azzazy, H. M. E. Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn. 2009,
9, 511–524.
(232) (a) Chen, Z.; Mauk, M. G.; Wang, J.; Abrams, W. R.;
Corstjens, P. L. A. M.; Niedbala, R. S.; Malamud, D.; Bau, H. H. Ann.
N.Y. Acad. Sci. 2007, 1098, 429–436. (b) Ouellette, A. L.; Li, J. J.;
Cooper, D. E.; Ricco, A. J.; Kovacs, G. T. A. Anal. Chem. 2009,
81, 3216–3221.
(233) Yang, M. H.; Kostov, Y.; Bruck, H. A.; Rasooly, A. Anal. Chem.
2008, 80, 8532–8537.
(234) Jokerst, N. M.; Luan, L.; Palit, S.; Royal, M.; Dhar, S.; Brooke,
M. A.; Tyler, T. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 2009, 3, 202–211.
(235) Fournier-Bidoz, S.; Jennings, T. L.; Klostranec, J. M.; Fung,
W.; Rhee, A.; Li, D.; Chan, W. C. Angew. Chem. 2008, 47, 5577–5581.
(236) Stranik, O.; Nooney, R.; McDonagh, C.; MacCraith, B. D.
Plasmonics 2007, 2, 15–22.
(237) Myers, F. B.; Lee, L. P. Lab Chip 2008, 8, 2015–2031.
(238) Kurzbuch, D.; Bakker, J.; Melin, J.; J€onsson, C.; Ruckstuhl, T.;
MacCraith, B. D. Sens. Actuators, B: Chem. 2009, 137, 1–6.
(239) Sapsford, K. E.; Sun, S.; Francis, J.; Sharma, S.; Kostov, Y.;
Rasooly, A. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2008, 24, 618–625.
(240) Zhu, H.; Yaglidere, O.; Su, T. W.; Tseng, D.; Ozcan, A. Lab
Chip 2011, 11, 315–322.
(241) Tansil, N. C.; Gao, Z. Nano Today 2006, 1, 28–37.
(242) Xu, H.; Mao, X.; Zeng, Q. X.; Wang, S. F.; Kawde, A. N.; Liu,
G. D. Anal. Chem. 2009, 81, 669–675.
(243) Ohashi, T.; Mawatari, K.; Sato, K.; Tokeshi, M.; Kitamori, T.
Lab Chip 2009, 9, 991–995.
(244) Wang, S. X.; Li, G. IEEE Trans. Magn. 2008, 44, 1687–1702.
(245) Wang, S. X.; Taratorin, A. M. Magnetic Information Storage
Technology; Academic: New York, 1999.
(246) Tang, S. Q.; Moon, S. J.; Park, K. H.; Paek, S. H.; Chung,
K.-W.; Bae, S. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2011, 11, 82–89.
(247) Prins, M. W. J.; Megens, M. In Encyclopedia of Materials:
Science and Technology; Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2007; pp 16.
(248) Koets, M.; van der Wijk, T.; van Eemeren, J. T.; vanAmerongen,
A.; Prins, M. W. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2009, 24, 1893–1898.
(249) Wang, Y.; Dostalek, J.; Knoll, W. Anal. Chem. 2011, 83,
6202–6207.
(250) Nilsson, C. E.; Abbas, S.; Bennemo, M.; Larsson, A.; Hamalainen,
M. D.; Frostell-Karlsson, A. Vaccine 2010, 28, 759–766.
(251) Su, K. L.; Huang, H. H.; Chang, T. C.; Lin, H. P.; Lin, Y. C.;
Chen, W. T. Microﬂuid. Nanoﬂuid. 2009, 6, 93–98.
(252) Waggoner, P. S.; Craighead, H. G. Lab Chip 2007, 7, 1238–1255.
(253) Rocha-Gaso, M.-I.; March-Iborra, C.; Montoya-Baides, A.;
Arnau-Vives, A. Sensors 2009, 9, 5740–5769.
(254) Hirst, E. R.; Yuan, Y. J.; Xu, W. L.; Bronlund, J. E. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 2008, 23, 1759–1768.
(255) Yao, C.; Zhu, T.; Qi, Y.; Zhao, Y.; Xia, H.; Fu, W. Sensors 2010,
10, 5859–5871.
(256) Savran, C. A.; Knudsen, S. M.; Ellington, A. D.; Manalis, S. R.
Anal. Chem. 2004, 76, 3194–3198.
(257) Ricciardi, C.; Canavese, G.; Castagna, R.; Ferrante, I.; Ricci,
A.; Marasso, S. L.; Napione, L.; Bussolino, F. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2010,
26, 1565–1570.
(258) Floriano, P. N.; Christodoulides, N.; Miller, C. S.; Ebersole,
J. L.; Spertus, J.; Rose, B. G.; Kinane, D. F.; Novak, M. J.; Steinhubl, S.;
Acosta, S.; Mohanty, S.; Dharshan, P.; Yeh, C. K.; Redding, S.; Furmaga,
W.; McDevitt, J. T. Clin. Chem. 2009, 55, 1530–1538.
(259) Baader, J.; Klapproth, H.; Bednar, S.; Brandstetter, T.; Ruehe,
J.; Lehmann, M.; Freund, I. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2011, 26, 1839–1846.
(260) Cole, L. A. Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn. 2009, 9, 721–747.
(261) Assadollahi, S.; Reininger, C.; Palkovits, R.; Pointl, P.;
Schalkhammer, T. Sensors 2009, 9, 6084–6100.
(262) Dudek, M. M.; Kent, N. J.; Gu, P.; Fan, Z. H.; Killard, A. J.
Analyst 2011, 136, 1816–1825.
(263) Kalogianni, D. P.; Boutsika, L. M.; Kouremenou, P. G.;
Christopoulos, T. K.; Ioannou, P. C. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2011, 400,
1145–1152.
(264) Zou, Z.; Du, D.; Wang, J.; Smith, J. N.; Timchalk, C.; Li, Y.;
Lin, Y. Anal. Chem. 2010, 82, 5125–5133.
(265) Li, Z.; Wang, Y.; Wang, J.; Tang, Z.; Pounds, J. G.; Lin, Y. Anal.
Chem. 2010, 82, 7008–7014.
(266) Song, X.; Knotts, M. Anal. Chim. Acta 2008, 626, 186–192.
(267) Abrams, W. R.; Barber, C. A.; McCann, K.; Tong, G.; Chen,
Z.; Mauk, M. G.; Wang, J.; Volkov, A.; Bourdelle, P.; Corstjensd, P. L. A.
M.; Zuiderwijk, M.; Kardos, K.; Li, S.; Tanke, H. J.; Niedbala, R. S.;
Malamud, D.; Bau, H. In Oral-Based Diagnostics; Malamud, D. N.,
Niedbala, R. S., Eds.; Blackwell: Boston, MA, 2007; Vol. 1098,
pp 375388.
(268) Song, S.; Wang, L.; Li, J.; Zhao, J.; Fan, C. Trends Anal. Chem.
2008, 27, 108–117.
(269) Iliuk, A. B.; Hu, L.; Tao, W. A. Anal. Chem. 2011,
83, 4440–4452.
(270) Xu, Q.; Xu, H.; Gu, H.; Li, J.; Wang, Y.; Wei, M. Mater. Sci.
Eng.: C 2009, 29, 702–707.
(271) Cass, A. E. G.; Zhang, Y. Faraday Discuss. 2011, 149, 49–61.
(272) Raivio, T.; Korponay-Szabo, I.; Collin, P.; Laurila, K.; Huhtala,
H.; Kaartinen, T.; Partanen, J.; M€aki, M.; Kaukinen, K. Digestive Liver
Dis. 2007, 39, 1057–1063.
(273) Lee, S. R.; Yearwood, G. D.; Guillon, G. B.; Kurtz, L. A.; Fischl,
M.; Friel, T.; Berne, C. A.; Kardos, K. W. J. Clin. Virol. 2010, 48, 15–17.

----- Page 29 (native) -----
(274) Marusich, M. F.; Murray, J.; Xie, J.; Capaldi, R. A. Int.
J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 2009, 41, 2081–2088.
(275) Yoo, S. J.; Choi, Y. B.; Il Ju, J.; Tae, G.-S.; Kim, H. H.; Lee,
S.-H. Analyst 2009, 134, 2462–2467.
(276) Enomoto, K.; Uwabe, K.; Naito, S.; Onoda, J.; Yamauchi, A.;
Numata, Y.; Takemoto, H. Anal. Biochem. 2008, 380, 249–256.
(277) Daum, L. T.; Canas, L. C.; Arulanandam, B. P.; Niemeyer, D.;
Valdes,J.J.;Chambers,J.P.Inﬂuenza OtherRespir.Viruses 2007,1, 167–175.
(278) Litos, I. K.; Ioannou, P. C.; Christopoulos, T. K.; Tzetis, M.;
Kanavakis, E.; Traeger-Synodinos, J. Clin. Chim. Acta: Int. J. Clin. Chem.
2011, 412, 1968–1972.
(279) Tomita, N.; Mori, Y.; Kanda, H.; Notomi, T. Nat. Protoc. 2008,
3, 877–882.
(280) Stougaard, M.; Juul, S.; Andersen, F. F.; Knudsen, B. R. Integr.
Biol. 2011, 3, 982–992.
(281) Defever, T.; Druet, M.; Rochelet-Dequaire, M.; Joannes, M.;
Grossiord, C.; Limoges, B.; Marchal, D. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009,
131, 11433–11441.
(282) Levine, P. M.; Gong, P.; Levicky, R.; Shepard, K. L. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 2009, 24, 1995–2001.
(283) Sato, K.; Hosokawa, K.; Maeda, M. Anal. Sci. 2007, 23, 17–20.
(284) Lai, R. Y.; Plaxco, K. W.; Heeger, A. J. Anal. Chem. 2007,
79, 229–233.
(285) Radi, A. E.; Sanchez, J. L. A.; Baldrich, E.; O’Sullivan, C. K.
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2006, 128, 117–124.
(286) Zelada-Guillen, G. A.; Riu, J.; Duzgun, A.; Rius, F. X. Angew.
Chem. 2009, 48, 7334–7337.
(287) Cha, T.-G.; Baker, B. A.; Sauﬀer, M. D.; Salgado, J.; Jaroch, D.;
Rickus, J. L.; Porterﬁeld, D. M.; Choi, J. H. ACS Nano 2011, 5,
4236–4244.
(288) Morens, D. M.; Folkers, G. K.; Fauci, A. S. Nature 2004,
430, 242–249.
(289) Kim, J. S.; Jahng, M. S.; Lee, G. G.; Lee, K. J.; Chae, H. K.; Lee,
J. H.; Kim, M. H. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 2011, 52, 399–405.
(290) Kostic, T.; Stessl, B.; Wagner, M.; Sessitsch, A.; Bodrossy, L.
Microb. Biotechnol. 2010, 3, 444–454.
(291) (a) Omiccioli, E.; Amagliani, G.; Brandi, G.; Magnani, M. Food
Microbiol. 2009, 26, 615–622. (b) Elizaquível, P.; Gabaldon, J. A.; Aznar,
R. Food Control 2011, 22, 158–164.
(292) Peitz, I.; van Leeuwen, R. Lab Chip 2010, 10, 2944–2951.
(293) Davis, G.; Lauks, I. R.; Lin, C.; Miller, C. J. Apparatus and
methods for analyte measurement and immunoassay. U.S. Patent 7,419,821,
Sept. 2, 2008.
(294) Lowe, P.; Keatch, S. A.; Howell, S.; Marquordt, C.; Polwart,
R.; Thomson, A. K. Assay Device and Method, U.S. Patent Application
12/753,592, Jan. 13, 2011.
(295) St. John, A. In Point-of-Care Testing; Price, C. P., St. John, A.,
Hicks, J. M., Eds.; American Association for Clinical Chemistry Inc.:
Washington, DC, 2004; Vol. 2, pp 3145.
(296) (a) Perry, D. J.; Fitzmaurice, D. A.; Kitchen, S.; Mackie, I. J.;
Mallett, S. Br. J. Hamaetol. 2010, 150, 501–514. (b) Van Cott, E. M. Clin.
Lab.Med.2009, 29, 337–350. (c) Prisco, D.; Paniccia, R. Thromb. J. 2003,
6, 1–10. (d) Stief, T. W.; Fareed, J. Clin. Appl. Thromb. Hemostasis 2003,
9, 191–195.
(297) Dempﬂe, C.-E.; Schraml, M.; Besenthal, I.; Hansen, R.;
Gehrke, J.; Korte, W.; Risch, M.; Quehenberger, P.; Handler, S.; Minar,
E.; Schulz, I.; Zerback, R. Clin. Chim. Acta 2001, 307, 211–218.
(298) Sidelmann, J. J.; Gram, J.; Larsen, A.; Overgaard, K.; Jespersen,
J. Thromb. Res. 2010, 126, 524–530.
(299) (a) Sambu, N.; Curzen, N. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 2011,
72, 683–696. (b) Calatzis, A.; Leitner, M.; Panzer, S. Hamostaseologie
2009, 29, 279–284. (c) van Werkum, J. W.; Hackeng, C. M.; de Korte,
F. I.; Verheugt, F. W. A.; ten Berg, J. M. Netherlands Heart J. 2007,
15, 299–305. (d) Harrison, P. Blood Rev. 2005, 19, 111–123.
(300) Michelson, A. D.; Frelinger, A. L., III; Furman, M. I. Am.
J. Cardiol. 2006, 98, 4–10.
(301) Rhee, A. J.; Kahn, R. A. Current Opin. Anesthesiol. 2010,
23, 741–748.
(302) Aizawa, H.; Kurosawa, S.; Tozuka, M.; Park, J. W.; Kobayashi,
K.; Tanakac, H. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2003, 18, 765–771.
(303) Tennico, Y. H.; Hutanu, D.; Koesdjojo, M. T.; Bartel, C. M.;
Remcho, V. T. Anal. Chem. 2010, 82, 5591–5597.
(304) van Berkel, C.; Gwyer, J. D.; Deane, S.; Green, N.; Holloway,
J.; Hollis, V.; Morgan, H. Lab Chip 2011, 11, 1249–1255.
(305) Agrawal, N.; Toner, M.; Irimia, D. Lab Chip 2008, 8, 2054–2061.
(306) (a) Jakubowski, J. A.; Payne, C. D.; Li, Y. G.; Brandt, J. T.;
Small, D. S.; Farid, N. A.; Salazar, D. E.; Winters, K. J. Thromb.
Haemostasis 2008, 99, 409–415. (b) Price, M. J.; Endemann, S.;
Gollapudi, R. R.; Valencia, R.; Stinis, C. T.; Levisay, J. P.; Ernst, A.;
Sawhney, N. S.; Schatz, R. A.; Teirstein, P. S. Eur. Heart J. 2008,
29, 992–1000.
(307) (a) Kent, N. J.; O’Brien, S.; Basabe-Desmonts, L.; Meade,
G. R.; MacCraith, B. D.; Corcoran, B. G.; Kenny, D.; Ricco, A. J. IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2011, 58, 826–830. (b) Lincoln, B.; Ricco, A. J.;
Kent, N. J.; Basabe-Desmonts, L.; Lee, L. P.; MacCraith, B. D.; Kenny,
D.; Meade, G. Anal. Biochem. 2010, 405, 174–183.
(308) Carriere, D.; Vendrell, J. P.; Fontaine, C.; Jansen, A.; Reynes,
J.; Pages, I.; Holzmann, C.; Laprade, M.; Pau, B. Clin. Chem. 1999,
45, 92–97.
(309) Cheng, X. H.; Irimia, D.; Dixon, M.; Ziperstein, J. C.; Demirci,
U.; Zamir, L.; Tompkins, R. G.; Toner, M.; Rodriguez, W. R. JAIDS,
J. Acquired Immune Deﬁc. Syndr. 2007, 45, 257–261.
(310) (a) Medley, C. D.; Smith, J. E.; Tang, Z.; Wu, Y.; Bamrungsap,
S.; Tan, W. H. Anal. Chem. 2008, 80, 1067–1072. (b) Liu, G.; Mao, X.;
Phillips, J. A.; Xu, H.; Tan, W.; Zeng, L. Anal. Chem. 2009, 81, 10013–
10018.
(311) Tan, S. J.; Yobas, L.; Lee, G. Y.; Ong, C. N.; Lim, C. T. Biomed.
Microdevices 2009, 11, 883–892.
(312) Garcia-Cordero, J. L.; Barrett, L. M.; O’Kennedy, R.; Ricco,
A. J. Biomed. Microdevices 2010, 12, 1051–1059.
(313) (a) Barman, I.; Kong, C. R.; Dingari, N. C.; Dasari, R. R.; Feld,
M. S. Anal. Chem. 2010, 82, 9719–9726. (b) Barman, I.; Kong, C. R.;
Singh, G. P.; Dasari, R. R.; Feld, M. S. Anal. Chem. 2010, 82, 6104–6114.
(c) Dingari, N. C.; Barman, I.; Singh, G. P.; Kang, J. W.; Dasari, R. R.;
Feld, M. S. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2011, 400, 2871–2880. (d) Wan, B. Y.;
Small, G. W. Anal. Chim. Acta 2010, 681, 63–70.
(314) (a) Arnold, M. A.; Small, G. W. Anal. Chem. 2005,
77, 5429–5439. (b) Arnold, M. A.; Burmeister, J. J.; Small, G. W. Anal.
Chem. 1998, 70, 1773–1781.
(315) Caduﬀ, A.; Mueller, M.; Megej, A.; Dewarrat, F.; Suri, R. E.;
Klisic, J.; Donath, M.; Zakharov, P.; Schaub, D.; Stahel, W. A.; Talary,
M. S. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2011, 26, 3794–3800.
(316) Weinzimer, S. A.; Steil, G. M.; Swan, K. L.; Dziura, J.; Kurtz,
N.; Tamborlane, W. V. Diabetes Care 2008, 31, 934–939.
(317) (a) Martinez, A. W.; Phillips, S. T.; Carrilho, E.; Thomas,
S. W.; Sindi, H.; Whitesides, G. M. Anal. Chem. 2008, 80, 3699–3707.
(b) Yager, P.; Domingo, G. J.; Gerdes, J. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2008,
10, 107–144. (c) Lee, W. G.; Kim, Y.-G.; Chung, B. G.; Demirci, U.;
Khademhosseini, A. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 2010, 62, 449–457.
(318) (a) Desai, D.; Wu, G.; Zaman, M. H. Lab Chip 2011,
11, 194–211. (b) Wang, S.; Xu, F.; Demirci, U. Biotechnol. Adv. 2010,
28, 770–781.
(319) Schito, M. L.; D’Souza, M. P.; Owen, S. M.; Busch, M. P.
J. Infect. Dis. 2010, 201, S1–S6.
(320) (a) Hauck, T. S.; Giri, S.; Gao, Y.; Chan, W. C. W. Adv. Drug
Delivery Rev. 2010, 62, 438–448. (b) Rodrigues Ribeiro Teles, F. S.; Pires
de Tavora Tavira, L. A.; Pina da Fonseca, L. J. Crit. Rev. Clin. Lab. Sci.
2010, 47, 139–169.
(321) Flores, L. L.; Steingart, K. R.; Dendukuri, N.; Schiller, I.;
Minion, J.; Pai, M.; Ramsay, A.; Henry, M.; Laal, S. Clin. Vaccine
Immunol. 2011, 18, 1616–1627.
(322) Peeling, R. W.; Mabey, D. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 2010,
16, 1062–1069.
(323) Chin, C. D.; Laksanasopin, T.; Cheung, Y. K.; Steinmiller, D.;
Linder, V.; Parsa, H.; Wang, J.; Moore, H.; Rouse, R.; Umviligihozo, G.;
Karita, E.; Mwambarangwe, L.; Braunstein, S. L.; van de Wijgert, J.;

----- Page 30 (native) -----
Sahabo, R.; Justman, J. E.; El-Sadr, W.; Sia, S. K. Nat. Med. 2011,
17, 1015–1019.
(324) Breslauer, D. N.; Maamari, R. N.; Switz, N. A.; Lam, W. A.;
Fletcher, D. A. PLoS ONE 2009, 4, e6320.
(325) Siegel, A. C.; Phillips, S. T.; Dickey, M. D.; Lu, N.; Suo, Z.;
Whitesides, G. M. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2010, 20, 28–35.
(326) May, K.; Prior, M. E.; Richards, I. Test device for detecting
analytes in biological samples. U.S. Patent 5,656,503, August 12, 1997.
(327) (a) Martinez, A. W.; Phillips, S. T.; Butte, M. J.; Whitesides,
G. M. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2007, 46, 1318–1320. (b) Martinez, A. W.;
Phillips, S. T.; Whitesides, G. M. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2008,
105, 19606–19611. (c) Martinez, A. W.; Phillips, S. T.; Wiley, B. J.;
Gupta, M.; Whitesides, G. M. Lab Chip 2008, 8, 2146–2150. (d)
Martinez, A. W.; Phillips, S. T.; Nie, Z.; Cheng, C.-M.; Carrilho, E.;
Wiley, B. J.; Whitesides, G. M. Lab Chip 2010, 10, 2499–2504. (e)
Martinez, A. W.; Phillips, S. T.; Whitesides, G. M.; Carrilho, E. Anal.
Chem. 2010, 82, 3–10. (f) Lu, Y.; Shi, W.; Qin, J.; Lin, B. Anal. Chem.
2010, 82, 329–335. (g) Zhao, W.; van den Berg, A. Lab Chip 2008,
8, 1988–1991.
(328) (a) Noh, H.; Phillips, S. T. Anal. Chem. 2010, 82, 8071–8078.
(b) Noh, N.; Phillips, S. T. Anal. Chem. 2010, 82, 4181–4187. (c) Wang,
W.; Wu, W.-Y.; Zhu, J.-J. J. Chromatogr. 2010, 1217, 3896–3899. (d)
Kauﬀman, P.; Fu, E.; Lutz, B.; Yager, P. Lab Chip 2010, 10, 2614–2617.
(329) Di Risio, S.; Yan, N. J. Adhes. Sci. Technol. 2010, 24, 661–684.
(330) Dungchai, W.; Chailapakul, O.; Henry, C. S. Anal. Chim. Acta
2010, 674, 227–233.
(331) Fu, E.; Kauﬀman, P.; Lutz, B.; Yager, P. Sens. Actuators, B:
Chem. 2010, 149, 325–328.
(332) Carrilho, E.; Phillips, S. T.; Vella, S. J.; Martinez, A. W.;
Whitesides, G. M. Anal. Chem. 2009, 81, 5990–5998.
(333) (a) Carvalhal, R. F.; Kfouri, M. S.; de Oliveira Piazetta, M. H.;
Gobbi, A. L.; Kubota, L. T. Anal. Chem. 2010, 82, 1162–1165. (b) Nie,
Z.; Deiss, F.; Liu, X.; Akbulut, O.; Whitesides, G. M. Lab Chip 2010,
10, 3163–3169. (c) Nie, Z.; Nijhuis, C. A.; Gong, J.; Chen, X.;
Kumachev, A.; Martinez, A. W.; Narovlyansky, M.; Whitesides, G. M.
Lab Chip 2010, 10, 477–483.
(334) Wood, P.; Sinton, D. J. Micromech. Microeng. 2010, 20, 087001.
(335) (a) Lin, D. H.; Taylor, C. R.; Anderson, W. F.; Scherer,
A.; Kartalov, E. P. J. Chromatogr., B: Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci.
2010, 878, 258–263. (b) Ballerini, D. R.; Li, X.; Shen, W. Biomicroﬂuidics
2011, 5, 014105.
(336) Huckle, D. Expert Opin. Med. Diagn. 2010, 4, 189–200.
(337) Gurbel, P. A.; Becker, R. C.; Mann, K. G.; Steinhubl, S. R.;
Michelson, A. D. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2007, 50, 1822–1834.
(338) Dewsnap, C. H.; McOwan, A. Int. J. STD AIDS 2006,
17, 357–359.
(339) Jain, K. K. Clin. Chem. 2007, 53, 2002–2009.
(340) Klostranec, J. M.; Xiang, Q.; Farcas, G. A.; Lee, J. A.; Rhee, A.;
Laﬀerty, E. I.; Perrault, S. D.; Kain, K. C.; Chan, W. C. W. Nano Lett.
2007, 7, 2812–2818.
(341) Kartalov, E.; Zhong, J.; Scherer, A.; Quake, S.; Taylor, C.;
French Anderson, W. BioTechniques 2006, 40, 85–90.