

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Essential Bacillus subtilis genes
K. Kobayashia, S. D. Ehrlichb,c, A. Albertinid, G. Amatid, K. K. Andersene, M. Arnaudf, K. Asaig, S. Ashikagah, S. Aymerichi,
P. Bessieresj, F. Bolandk, S. C. Brignelll, S. Bronm, K. Bunain, J. Chapuisb, L. C. Christianseno, A. Danchinp,
M. De´barbouille´ f, E. Dervynb, E. Deuerlingq, K. Devinee, S. K. Devinee, O. Dreesenp, J. Erringtonr, S. Fillingeri,
S. J. Fosterk, Y. Fujitas, A. Galizzid, R. Gardanf, C. Eschevinsm, T. Fukushimat, K. Hagau, C. R. Harwoodl, M. Heckerv,
D. Hosoyaw, M. F. Hullop, H. Kakeshitan, D. Karamatax, Y. Kasaharaa, F. Kawamurah, K. Kogah, P. Koskiy, R. Kuwanaz,
D. Imamuraw, M. Ishimaruw, S. Ishikawat, I. Ishios, D. Le Coqi, A. Massonaa, C. Maue¨lx, R. Meimam, R. P. Melladobb,
A. Moirk, S. Moriyaa, E. Nagakawas, H. Nanamiyah, S. Nakaia, P. Nygaardo, M. Oguracc, T. Ohananq, M. O’Reillye,
M. O’Rourkek, Z. Pragail, H. M. Pooleyx, G. Rapoportf, J. P. Rawlinsr, L. A. Rivasbb, C. Rivoltax, A. Sadaieu, Y. Sadaieg,
M. Sarvasy, T. Satow, H. H. Saxildo, E. Scanlane, W. Schumannq, J. F. M. L. Seegersaa, J. Sekiguchit, A. Sekowskap,
S. J. Se´roraa, M. Simondd, P. Stragierdd, R. Studerx, H. Takamatsuz, T. Tanakacc, M. Takeuchiw, H. B. Thomaidesr,
V. Vagnerb, J. M. van Dijlm, K. Watabez, A. Wipatl, H. Yamamotot, M. Yamamotos, Y. Yamamotos, K. Yamanen, K. Yataee,
K. Yoshidas, H. Yoshikawau, U. Zuberv, and N. Ogasawaraa
aGraduate School of Information Science, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Nara 630-0101, Japan; bGe´ne´tique Microbienne, Institut National de la
Recherche Agronomique, 78530 Jouy en Josas, France; dGenetica e Microbiologia, Universita` di Pavia, 1 via Ferrata, 27100 Pavia, Italy; eGenetics, Smurﬁt
Institute, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland; fBiochimie Microbienne, Institut Pasteur, 25 Rue du Dr. Roux, 75015 Paris, France; gFaculty of Science, Saitama
University, Saitama 338-8570, Japan; hCollege of Science, Rikkyo (St. Paul’s) University, Tokyo 171-8501, Japan; iGe´ne´tique Mole´culaire et Cellulaire,
Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique–Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque–Institut National Agronomique Paris-Grignon, 78850
Thiverval-Grignon, France; jMathe´matiques Informatique Ge´nomes, Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, 78530 Jouy en Josas, France;
kMolecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld S10 2TN, United Kingdom; lCell and Molecular Bioscience, Newcastle University
Medical School, Framlington Place, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, United Kingdom; mGenetics, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology
Institute, 9750 AA, Haren, The Netherlands; nInstitute of Biological Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8572, Japan; oBiological Chemistry, Institute
of Molecular Biology, Solvgade 83, 1307 K, Copenhagen, Denmark; pGenetique des Genomes Bacteriens, Institut Pasteur, Unite´ de Recherche Associe´e,
Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque 2171, 75015 Paris, France; qInstitute of Genetics, Bayreuth University, D-95440 Bayreuth, Germany; rSir
William Dunn School of Pathology, Oxford University, Oxford OX1 3RE, United Kingdom; sFaculty of Life Science and Biotechnology, Fukuyama University,
Hiroshima 729-0292, Japan; tFaculty of Textile Science and Technology, Shinshu University, Nagano 386-8564, Japan; uDepartment of Bioscience, Tokyo
University of Agriculture, Tokyo 156-8502, Japan; vInstitute for Microbiology, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University, D-17487 Greifswald, Germany; wDepartment
of International Environmental and Agricultural Science, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, Tokyo 183-8509, Japan; xInstitut de Genetique
et de Biologie Microbiennes, CH-1005 Lausanne, Switzerland; yNational Public Health Institute, 00300, Helsinki, Finland; zFaculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Setsunan University, Osaka 573-0101, Japan; aaInstitut de Ge´ne´tique et Microbiologie, Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque Unite´ Mixte de
Recherche 8621, Universite´ Paris-Sud, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France; bbCentro Nacional de Biotecnologı´a, Campus de la Universidad Auto´ noma,
Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain; ccSchool of Marine Science and Technology, University of Tokai, Shizuoka 424-8610, Japan; ddInstitut de
Biologie Physico-Chimique, 75005 Paris, France; and eeRadioisotope Center, National Institute of Genetics, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan
Communicated by Richard M. Losick, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, January 27, 2003 (received for review November 10, 2002)
To estimate the minimal gene set required to sustain bacterial life
in nutritious conditions, we carried out a systematic inactivation of
Bacillus subtilis genes. Among 4,100 genes of the organism, only
192 were shown to be indispensable by this or previous work.
Another 79 genes were predicted to be essential. The vast majority
of essential genes were categorized in relatively few domains of
cell metabolism, with about half involved in information process-
ing, one-ﬁfth involved in the synthesis of cell envelope and the
determination of cell shape and division, and one-tenth related to
cell energetics. Only 4% of essential genes encode unknown
functions. Most essential genes are present throughout a wide
range of Bacteria, and almost 70% can also be found in Archaea
and Eucarya. However, essential genes related to cell envelope,
shape, division, and respiration tend to be lost from bacteria with
small genomes. Unexpectedly, most genes involved in the Emb-
den–Meyerhof–Parnas pathway are essential. Identiﬁcation of un-
known and unexpected essential genes opens research avenues to
better understanding of processes that sustain bacterial life.
T
he definition of the minimal gene set required to sustain a
living cell is of considerable interest. The functions specified
by such a set are likely to provide a view of a ‘‘minimal’’ bacterial
cell. Many functions should be essential in all cells and could be
considered as a foundation of life itself. The determination of the
range of essential functions in different cells should reveal
possible solutions for sustaining life. Computational and exper-
imental research has previously been carried out to define a
minimal protein-encoding gene set. An upper-limit estimate of
a minimal bacterial gene set was obtained from the sequence of
the entire Mycoplasma genitalium genome, which contains only
480 genes (1). A computational approach, based on the
assumption that essential genes are conserved in the genomes of
M. genitalium and Haemophilus influenzae, led to a description of
a smaller set of some 260 genes (2). More recently, an experi-
mental approach involving high-density transposon mutagenesis
of the H. influenzae genome led to a much higher estimate of
670 putative essential genes (3), whereas transposon mutagen-
esis of two mycoplasma species led to an estimate of 265–360
essential genes (4). Another experimental approach using anti-
sense RNA to inhibit gene expression led to the identification of
some 150 essential genes in Staphylococcus aureus (5). However,
these approaches have limitations. Computation is likely to
underestimate the minimal gene set because it takes into account
only those genes that have remained similar enough during the
course of evolution to be recognized as true orthologues.
Transposon mutagenesis might overestimate the set by misclas-
sification of nonessential genes that slow down the growth
without arresting it but can also miss essential genes that tolerate
transposon insertions (3, 6). Finally, the use of antisense RNA
is limited to the genes for which an adequate expression of the
inhibitory RNA can be obtained in the organism under study.
To obtain an independent and possibly more reliable estimate
of a minimal protein-encoding gene set for bacteria, we system-
atically inactivated Bacillus subtilis genes. B. subtilis was chosen
because it is one of the best studied bacteria (7) and is a model
for low-GC Gram-positive bacteria, which include both deadly
pathogens, such as Bacillus anthracis, and bacteria widely used in
food and industry, such as lactococci and bacilli. Because the
essentiality of a gene depends on the conditions under which the
organism is propagated, we used an environment likely to be
optimal for B. subtilis and thus carried out inactivation on a
cTo whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: ehrlich@jouy.inra.fr and
ehrlich@is.aist-nara.ac.jp.
4678–4683 
PNAS 
April 15, 2003 
vol. 100 
no. 8
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0730515100

----- Page 2 (native) -----
standard laboratory rich medium at 37°C. This choice also
allowed for a comparison of the results obtained in many
laboratories and many previous studies, nevertheless leaving
open the possibility that a different gene set is essential under
different growth conditions. Analysis of the mutants, in con-
junction with the literature data, leads us to conclude that there
are only 271 genes indispensable for growth in LB when inac-
tivated singly. These fall into a relatively few large domains of cell
physiology and are very broadly conserved in microorganisms.
Methods
The approach used for gene inactivation has been described (8).
Briefly, it involved insertion of a nonreplicating plasmid into the
target gene via a single crossover recombination. The expression
of the downstream genes from the same operon was controlled
by an isopropyl -D-thiogalactoside (IPTG)-regulated promoter
present on the inserted plasmid. A gene was deemed essential if
it could not be inactivated by insertion (i.e., no transformants
were obtained when competent recipient cells were mixed with
the insertional plasmid) and if the strain became IPTG depen-
dent when an intact copy of the gene was placed under control
of the regulated promoter (8). IPTG-dependent strains could
not be constructed for six essential genes, possibly because the
regulated promoter was either not strong enough or not suffi-
ciently tuned to provide appropriate gene expression levels. An
alternative strategy was followed for 160 genes shorter than
300 bp, where insertional inactivation was limited by the insuf-
ficient gene length. These genes were replaced by a chloram-
phenicol resistance marker, and if replacement failed they were
rendered IPTG-dependent. All mutations were made in the
standard laboratory strain 168. Inactivation was not attempted
for 656 genes studied previously in B. subtilis, and 185 genes
having a high degree of similarity with genes well characterized
in other bacteria or involved in well characterized processes, for
which we could predict essentiality with confidence (Table 3,
which is published as supporting information on the PNAS web
site, www.pnas.org). Complete microbial genomes included in
the Microbial Genome Database for Comparative Analysis
(http:mbgd.genome.ad.jp), comprising 54 bacteria, 16 ar-
chaea, and 2 yeasts, were analyzed for the presence of the B.
subtilis essential gene homologs by using the default parameters,
with 103 as a cut-off value.
Results
There are 4,100 annotated genes in the B. subtilis genome (9).
Some 303 are encoded on prophages that can be eliminated from
the genome and are not essential. Previous studies on 656 B.
subtilis genes identified 42 that are essential (Table 1). Through
predictions we propose that 79 other genes are essential, whereas
106 are not (Table 3). We inactivated all but 4 of the remaining
genes and found that 150 are essential. This analysis leads us to
conclude that there are 271 genes indispensable for growth when
inactivated singly (Table 1). For 96% of these, we propose
assignment to various domains of cell metabolism (Table 2; the
complete list of genes is given in Table 4, which is published as
supporting information on the PNAS web site).
Functional Assignment of Essential Genes. Information processing.
About half of the essential genes are involved in DNA and RNA
metabolism and protein synthesis. Sixteen genes encode the
basic DNA replication machinery. They comprise five genes
involved in the initiation of replication (dnaA, B, D, and I, and
priA), eight genes encoding components of the replisome (dnaC,
E, G, N, and X, holA and B, and polC), DNA ligase, and the Ssb
protein. One gene, pcrA, has no clearly identified role, but could
be involved in the progression of the replication fork (10).
Among genes involved in DNA packaging and segregation, five
encode topoisomerases (topA, gyrA and B, and parD and E), one
encodes the general DNA-binding protein Hbsu, and three
encode the proteins that act in the condensation of the nucleoid
(smc, and scpA and B; ref. 11). The remaining two genes encode
modification methylases, expected to be essential unless the
cognate nucleases are inactivated.
Among 14 essential genes involved in RNA metabolism, four
(rpoA, B, and C, and sigA) encode components of the basic
transcription machinery, whereas six are involved in RNA
modification. rnc and rnpA encode RNases, cspR and trmD and
Table 1. Essential and nonessential B. subtilis genes
Essential
Nonessential
Total
This study*
150
2,807
2,957
Previous studies†
42
614
656
Prediction‡
79
106
185
Phage genes
0
303
303
Total§
271 (6.6%)
3,830 (94.4%)
4,101
A list of the genes and their classiﬁcations can be accessed at http:
bacillus.genome.ad.jp.
*We included 18 essential genes here that were inactivated in the course of
this study and also studied previously.
†Carried out in B. subtilis.
‡Full list is presented as Table 3.
§Excluded are four genes that were not studied because of technical reasons
(too short for insertional inactivation and too inconveniently placed for
chloramphenicol replacement).
Table 2. B. subtilis essential genes
DNA metabolism
27
Basic replication machinery
16
Packaging and segregation
9
Methylation
2
RNA metabolism
14
Basic transcription machinery
4
RNA modiﬁcation
6
Regulation
4
Protein synthesis
95
Ribosomal proteins
52
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases
24
Translation factors
10
Protein folding and modiﬁcation
3
Protein translocation
6
Cell envelope
44
Membrane lipids
16
Cell wall
28
Cell shape and division
10
Glycolysis
8
Respiratory pathways
22
Isoprenoids
8
Menaquinone
8
Cytochrome biogenesis
3
Thioredoxin
3
Nucleotides
10
Cofactors
15
CoA
1
Folate
3
NAD
4
S-Adenosylmethionine
1
Iron–sulfur cluster
6
Other
15
Unknown
11
Total
271
A complete list of genes and the evidence used to ascertain their essential
nature are presented in Table 4.
Kobayashi et al.
PNAS 
April 15, 2003 
vol. 100 
no. 8 
4679
GENETICS

----- Page 3 (native) -----
U encode methylases, and cca encodes tRNA nucleotidyl trans-
ferase. Only four genes are involved in regulation of RNA
synthesis: a two-component system yycF and G (12), a gene
involved in the coupling between translation and termination of
RNA synthesis, nusA (13), and an anti-sigma factor, YhdL (14).
The largest category, comprising 95 essential genes, is that
involved in protein synthesis. Over half of the genes encode
ribosomal proteins. Although there is no experimental evidence
that they are essential in B. subtilis, we suggest that they belong
to the essential set, because the ribosome itself is essential. This
suggestion is supported by the observation that the inhibition of
synthesis of 21 different ribosomal proteins is lethal in S. aureus
(5). Among these are proteins such as L24, which was not
absolutely essential in E. coli, but cells that lacked it grew very
slowly and were thermosensitive (15). We suggest that there are
20 essential genes that encode aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases,
corresponding to 18 amino acids. All but two are present in
unique copies. We showed that one of the unique copy genes,
lysS, is essential and assumed that others are too, without seeking
further experimental evidence. There are two genes encoding
tRNA-Tyr and tRNA-Thr synthetases. Only tyrS was essential
when inactivated singly whereas either thrS or thrZ could assure
the viability. We grouped with the synthetases three genes that
are required for the conversion of the tRNA-Glu to tRNA-Gln
(gatC, B, and A) and one gene that is required for the formylation
of methionyl tRNA (fmt). Of the10 essential genes involved in
mRNA translation, 3 are required for initiation (infA, B, and C),
3 are required for elongation (tufA, tsf, and fusA), and 4 are
required for termination and ribosome recycling (prfA and B,
pth, and frr). There is one essential gene involved in posttrans-
lation modification, map, that encodes methionine aminopepti-
dase. Deformylation is also required, but can be carried out by
products of two genes, def and ykrB, neither of which is essential
when inactivated singly (16). Two essential genes, groEL and ES,
are involved in protein folding. Finally, there are six essential
genes that encode key components of the machinery for protein
insertion into the membrane and secretion. These include the
targeting factors Ffh and FtsY, the translocation motor SecA,
two components of the translocation channel, SecY and E, and
the folding catalyst PrsA. The essential DNA-binding protein
Hbsu is also a part of the signal recognition particle (17).
Cell envelope, shape, and division. About one-fifth of the essential
genes are required for these processes (Table 2). The synthesis
of the cell envelope involves 44 essential genes, all required for
membrane and cell wall formation. Membrane lipids, phospho-
lipids, and glycolipids are synthesized from fatty acids. Fatty acid
synthesis (Fig. 4, which is published as supporting information on
the PNAS web site) is initiated by products of four genes, accA,
B, C, and D, together with acpA and fabD gene products. acpS
is required for the conversion of AcpA from the apo to the holo
form, whereas birA is required for the addition of a biotinyl
group to carboxylase. The fatty acid chains are elongated by the
products of two essential genes, fabFG. The elongation cycle
involves two additional steps that are catalyzed by pairs of genes
with overlapping functions (ycsD and ywpB, and fabI and L),
none of which is essential when inactivated singly (18). Two of
the essential genes required for phospholipid synthesis (Fig. 5,
which is published as supporting information on the PNAS web
site), gpsA and yhdO, are involved in the conversion of dihy-
droxyacetone phosphate to phosphatidic acid, which is a pre-
cursor of complex lipids. Interestingly, yerQ, which encodes an
enzyme with a diacylglycerol kinase catalytic domain found in
eukaryotes and presumably catalyses synthesis of phosphatidic
acid from another precursor (diacylglycerol), is also essential,
whereas a homologue, dgkA, is not. Two essential genes, cdsA
and pgsA, are required for synthesis of phosphatidylglycerol
phosphate, which might be converted into phosphoglycerol by a
nonspecific phosphatase. The remaining essential gene, plsX,
appears to be required for both fatty acid and phospholipid
biosynthesis in a way that is not well understood (19).
Synthesis of peptidoglycan, the main component of the cell
wall, comprises two stages, the synthesis of the precursor mol-
ecules and the polymerization of peptidoglycan (20). All of the
essential genes are involved in the first stage, which encompasses
a variety of biosynthetic pathways: (i) Synthesis of aminosugars
(Fig. 6, which is published as supporting information on the
PNAS web site) by conversion of fructose-6-phosphate to UDP-
N-acetyl-glucosamine and UDP-N-acetyl-manosamine. The first
two steps, leading to glucosamine-1-phosphate, are catalyzed by
the products of glmS and ybbT genes. The last two steps are
carried out by the products of the gcaD and yvyH. More than one
gene product seems to be able to acetylate glucosamine-1-
phosphate, because there is no single essential gene for this step.
(ii) Diaminopimelate (Fig. 7, which is published as supporting
information on the PNAS web site) is synthesized from L-
aspartate by eight successive reactions, six of which are carried
out by products of essential genes asd, dapA, B, and F, and ykuQ
and R. The first and the fifth step can be catalyzed by products
of three (dapG, lysC, and yclM) and two genes (mtnV and ywfG),
respectively; thus, none of the five is essential if inactivated
singly. (iii) Two essential genes, racE and alr, encode racemases
that convert L-glutamate and L-alanine into the corresponding D
isomers. racE cannot be replaced by a homologue, yrpC. The
essential ddl gene is required for synthesis of the dipeptide
D-Ala-D-Ala. (iv) Eight essential genes, murAA, murB, C, D, E,
F, and G, and mraY, are required for synthesis of the lipid-linked
disaccharide-pentapeptide peptidoglycan precursor (Fig. 8,
which is published as supporting information on the PNAS web
site) from UDP-N-acetyl-glucosamine, phosphoenolpyruvate,
D-glutamine, diaminopimelate, D-ala dipeptide, and an isopre-
nylphosphate. Polymerization of peptidoglycan is carried out by
the products of functionally redundant genes in B. subtilis. The
cell wall of B. subtilis contains teichoic acid (21), and there are
seven essential genes involved in its synthesis. Four, tagA, B, D,
and O, are required for the synthesis of linkage units and three,
tagF, G, and H, are required for chain polymerization, translo-
cation, and linkage to peptidoglycan (Fig. 9, which is published
as supporting information on the PNAS web site).
Ten essential genes are involved in cell shape and division.
Septum formation requires seven (ftsA, L, W, and Z, divIB and
C, and pbpB; ref. 21), whereas cell shape requires three (rodA,
and mreB and C).
Embden–Meyerhof–Parnas (EMP) pathway and respiration. About 10%
of essential genes, which have in common the provision of energy
for the cell, are required for these processes. A majority of genes
composing the ubiquitous EMP pathway are essential (Fig. 10,
which is published as supporting information on the PNAS web
site). The process can be viewed as consisting of two parts: the
top, which converts hexose sugars to trioses, and the bottom,
which converts these compounds to pyruvate, funneled into
pyruvate dehydrogenase. The top part comprises four steps when
glucose is the carbon source, the last two of which are catalyzed
by products of essential genes pfkA and fbaA, whereas the bottom
part comprises six steps, four of which are encoded by essential
genes tpiA, pgk, pgm, and eno. The two remaining essential genes
related to glycolysis are tkt and prs. The first encodes a transke-
tolase, involved in the pentose pathway, whereas the second gene
codes for a pyrophosphokinase that converts ribose-5-phosphate
to 5-phospho-ribose-1-diphosphate, a common precursor of
nucleotides and cofactors, such as NAD, which likely accounts
for its essential role. Taken together, these results are rather
unexpected. First, our experiments were carried out on a rich
medium, which contains numerous compounds that could pro-
vide the energy and building blocks for cell life, the two known
functions of the EMP pathway. Addition of glucose to LB did not
restore growth of any of the nonviable EMP mutants. Second, in B.
4680 
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0730515100
Kobayashi et al.

----- Page 4 (native) -----
subtilis a part of the EMP pathway can be bypassed via the pentose
shunt, and it is surprising that both are simultaneously required for
viability. Possibly, the enzymes revealed as essential have novel and
unexpected functions in the cell. It should be noted that pgm and
eno mutants have been isolated previously and had very slow
growth (22), suggesting that the difference between lethal and
almost-lethal mutation can be due to subtle differences in the
experimental conditions and the strain background.
Respiration can provide energy for the cell, in the absence of
glycolysis. We identified 22 essential genes involved in this
process. Under the aerobic condition used in our experiments,
respiration involves the transfer of electrons by various dehy-
drogenases to menaquinone and then to cytochromes (23).
Menaquinone is synthesized from chorismate in seven steps, the
last six of which are catalyzed by products of essential genes,
menA, B, C, D, E, and H (Fig. 11, which is published as
supporting information on the PNAS web site). Two genes, menF
and dhbC, appear to be able to catalyze the first step, and neither
is essential if inactivated singly. The penultimate step involves
condensation of dihydroxynaphthoic acid with an isoprenoid
biphosphate. Isoprenoids (Fig. 12, which is published as sup-
porting information on the PNAS web site) are synthesized from
pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate by a nonmevalonate
pathway in B. subtilis. The first six steps, leading to isopentenyl
diphosphate, involve seven essential genes, dxs, dxr, ispE, yacM
and N, and yqfP and Y. Three other essential genes, hepS and T
and yqiD, are required for the synthesis of farnesyl diphosphate
and more complex compounds that are used for menaquinone
synthesis. Altogether, of 22 essential genes involved in respira-
tion, 16 are required for menaquinone synthesis. There are only
three essential genes involved in cytochrome biogenesis, resA, B,
and C. No cytochrome structural genes are essential, possibly
reflecting overlapping functions of their products (24). We have
included trxA and B, which encode thioredoxin and thioredoxin
reductase with the respiration genes, because of the role of TrxA
in electron transport, although this protein is involved in many
other oxido-reduction reactions. We also included here a puta-
tive thioredoxin reductase gene, yumC.
Nucleotides and cofactors. Metabolism of these compounds requires
10% of the essential genes (Table 2). The metabolism of
nucleotides is quite complex, comprising complementary de
novo synthesis and salvage pathways (25). Nevertheless, we
found 10 essential genes involved in this process. Among the four
that participate in purine metabolism (Fig. 13, which is published
as supporting information on the PNAS web site), two (adk and
gmk) specify kinases, which phosphorylate AMP or GMP to the
respective diphosphates. Absence of guanine from the medium
accounts for the essential nature of guaB. Surprisingly, hprT, a
gene from the purine salvage, is also essential, raising a possi-
bility that its product has a second, unsuspected role in the cell.
Two essential genes involved in pyrimidine metabolism (Fig. 14,
which is published as supporting information on the PNAS web
site), cmk and tmk, also encode kinases that phosphorylate CMP
and TMP to corresponding diphosphates. The remaining essen-
tial gene, pyrG, encodes cytidylate synthetase, which converts
UTP into CTP. This might reflect the paucity of cytidine in the
rich medium. Interestingly, two B. subtilis essential genes encode
enzymes present in the E. coli degradosome [yjbN (ppnK) and
eno, a member of the EMP pathway], which provides CDP for
DNA synthesis and further nucleotide metabolism, while con-
trolling mRNA turnover (26). Finally, there are three essential
genes involved simultaneously in purine and pyrimidine metab-
olism, nrdE and F and ymaA, that encode subunits of nucleoside-
diphosphate reductase, which converts the ribose into deoxyri-
bose derivatives.
Synthesis of only five cofactors, involving 16 genes, was
required under our experimental conditions. NAD synthesis can
take place de novo or by salvaging of precursors (Fig. 15, which
is published as supporting information on the PNAS web site),
and only the four genes involved in the salvage pathway (yueK,
yqeJ, nadE, and yjbN) were essential. We speculate that the
accumulation of nicotinate might repress de novo synthesis of
nicotine mononucleotide in the absence of yueK, rendering this
gene essential. There are three essential genes involved in folate
metabolism (Fig. 16, which is published as supporting information
on the PNAS web site). One, dfrA, codes for dihydrofolate reduc-
tase, which converts folate, presumably imported from the medium,
to tetrahydrofolate. Two other genes, glyA and folD, are required for
conversion of the latter compound to 10-formyl tetrahydrofolate, a
one-carbon donor molecule for a number of reactions. S-
adenosylmethionine (SAM) is another one-carbon donor, synthe-
sized from ATP and methionine by SAM synthetase, encoded by
the essential metK gene. There is only one essential gene involved
in the biosynthesis of CoA, ytaG, that is required for the last step
in the pathway (Fig. 17, which is published as supporting informa-
tion on the PNAS web site), suggesting that the precursor, dephos-
pho-CoA, is transported from the medium into the cell. The
remaining cofactor is an iron–sulfur cluster, which forms part of
proteins that participate in many aspects of the cell physiology,
including redox and nonredox catalysis, as well as sensing for
regulatory processes. There are five essential genes, yurU, V, W, X,
and Z, involved in the synthesis of this cluster. We included here
yrvO, a homologue of yurV.
Other processes. Only 15 essential genes that have a clear bio-
chemical function were not associated with any of the large
domains of cellular physiology discussed above. Among these are
six GTP-binding proteins of the EraObg family. Only one, obg,
has been studied previously in B. subtilis and been shown to
affect the stress response mediated by B. Five other genes,
mrpA, B, C, D and F, encode a sodium–hydrogen antiporter,
which is required to maintain pH homeostasis in the presence of
sodium chloride concentrations similar to those found in LB
(27). ppaC encodes the inorganic pyrophosphatase, which drives
the anabolic fluxes by pyrophosphate hydrolysis in various
biochemical reactions, whereas gcp encodes a sialopeptidase of
Fig. 1.
B. subtilis essential gene homologues are widely conserved. (Upper)
Genes are ordered by their relative abundance among 54 Bacteria (blue) and 18
Archaea and Eucarya (red). The position (rank) of a gene is shown on abscissa and
the fraction of organisms in which a gene is present is shown on the ordinate.
(Lower) Fraction of genes present in different kingdoms of life (a gene counted
as ‘‘all kingdoms’’ is present in at least one archaeon and one eukaryote, in
addition to bacteria, whereas a gene counted as ‘‘bacteria’’ is not present in any
archae or eukaryote). The list of genes and organisms is presented in Table 4.
Kobayashi et al.
PNAS 
April 15, 2003 
vol. 100 
no. 8 
4681
GENETICS

----- Page 5 (native) -----
unknown role. The last two genes, pdhA and odh, encode
subunits of pyruvate and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase, respec-
tively; growth of the mutants could be restored by addition to LB
of the metabolites (acetate and succinate, respectively) related
to the activity of the proteins they encode.
Unknown. The last category groups 11 essential genes for which we
were unable to suggest a role in cell physiology. Biochemical
functions, a protease and a hydrolase of the metallo--lactamase
superfamily, can be suggested for products of two gene, ydiC and
ykqC. One gene, yneS, encodes a putative membrane protein,
and another, ymdA, encodes a protein with an HD domain of
metal-dependent phosphohydrolases, whereas three, yloQ, yqjK,
and ywlC, encode proteins with recognizable signatures, an
ATPGTP-binding site, a metallo--lactamase motif, and a
putative RNA-binding motif, respectively. Four genes, yacA,
ydiB, ylaN, and yqeI, have no easily recognizable features.
Conservation of Essential Genes. The average level at which ho-
mologues of essential B. subtilis genes are present in bacteria is
rather high (approaching 80%), one-fourth being found in all
bacteria and three-fourths in at least 75% (Fig. 1 Upper). The
average is 36% in Eucarya and Archaea, but some 20% of the
genes are nevertheless present in all 18 organisms we analyzed
(Fig. 1 Upper). About one-third of the genes are found in all three
kingdoms of life, and a further one-third are shared between
Bacteria and either Archaea or Eucarya (Fig. 1 Lower).
The number of B. subtilis essential gene homologues present
in an organism depends on at least two parameters: phylogenetic
proximity to B. subtilis and genome size (Fig. 2 Top). The highest
number is found in bacilli and close relatives, having genomes of
3 Mb (highlighted in red). Other bacteria with genomes of a
similar size have, on average, slightly 80% of the B. subtilis
essential gene homologues. This proportion drops to 57% with
decreasing bacterial genome size, indicating progressive loss of
essential genes. Archaea and Eucarya maintain, on average, 36%
of the essential gene homologues, with the proportion varying
between 33% and 44% almost linearly with genome size. In
bacteria, gene loss occurs mainly in three categories (cell enve-
lope, shape and division, and respiratory pathways) and to a
lower extent in three other categories (cofactor synthesis, other
processes, and unknown functions). In contrast, information
processing, glycolysis, and nucleotide synthesis genes are largely
retained (Fig. 2 Middle and Bottom).
Phylogenetic profiling of essential B. subtilis genes is summarized
in Fig. 3. Organisms were grouped into four classes and ordered
within each class on the basis of the number of essential gene
homologues they share with B. subtilis, placing the organisms with
fewest conserved genes at the right of each class. Genes were
grouped in categories and ordered by abundance among all bac-
teria, which placed the less abundant genes at the bottom of each
category. A number of general features are easily discernible from
this analysis. (i) The five top categories are composed of genes
present in 80% of Bacteria and at least 40% of Eucarya and
Archaea, with the exception of RNA synthesis, which is less well
conserved in the last two kingdoms. (ii) The next two categories,
DNA metabolism and cell shape and division, contain genes
Fig. 2.
The number of B. subtilis essential gene homologues depends on
genomesize.(Top)Allgenes.BacilliandcloserelativesdenoteBacillusspeciesand
other low-GC Gram-positive bacteria, but not clostridia, mycoplasma, and
ureaplasma. (Middle and Bottom) Different bacterial gene categories. Empty red
circles in Bottom refer to Bacilli and close relatives, whereas ﬁlled red circles refer
tootherbacteria.Interpolatedlinesthroughouttheﬁgurecorrespondtothebest
ﬁtting polynomial of the second or the fourth order. The number of genes is:
information processing, 136; envelope, respiration, cell shape, and division, 76;
cofactors, other, and unknown, 41; and nucleotides and glycolysis, 18.
Fig. 3.
Phylogenetic proﬁling of essential genes. The 271 B. subtilis genes
were grouped in 266 clusters. Only one gene, yhdL, which encodes a possible
anti-sigma protein, had no orthologues in the database and is not presented
here. Each line and column corresponds to individual gene and organism,
respectively. Presence and absence of a gene is indicated by a black and white
square, respectively. The list of genes and organisms is given in Table 5, which
is published as supporting information on the PNAS web site and the ordering
is described in the text.
4682 
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0730515100
Kobayashi et al.

----- Page 6 (native) -----
present in most bacteria and genes specific for Gram-positive
organisms. This can most easily be seen from the appearance of the
relatively broad horizontal white bars at the bottom of the two
classes. (iii) The categories that contain genes missing from bacteria
with small genomes are easily identified by the presence of the
vertical white band at the right of the low-GC Gram-positive
bacteria class, corresponding to Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma urea-
lyticum. In addition, there is an enlargement of the white zone at the
right end of the ‘‘Other bacteria’’ class, noticeable for cell envelope,
respiration, and unknown functions. (iv) Genes in the last two
categories, unknown and other, although often found only in the
closest relatives of B. subtilis, are nevertheless present in over a half
of other bacteria.
Discussion
A Simple Bacterial Cell. Of some 4,100 genes of B. subtilis, only 271
are essential for growth under our experimental conditions when
inactivated singly. About 80% of the functions they encode fall
in a few large categories; namely, information processing, cell
envelope, shape, division, and energetics. These observations
lead to a view of a rather simple bacterial cell, consisting of a
compartment, formed by a membrane and a wall, enclosing the
elements necessary to synthesize proteins that carry out reac-
tions required for (i) the duplication and inheritance of the
genetic information; (ii) the division of the compartment; and
(iii) the provision of energy. These processes do not appear to be
coordinated by modulation of gene expression, because the expres-
sion regulators are by and large not essential. We suggest that the
coordination might be carried out, at least in part, by the essential
GTP-binding proteins, as appears to be the case in eukaryotes.
Broad Distribution of Essential Genes and Functions. Over 80% of
essential B. subtilis gene homologues are present in all bacteria
with genomes above 3 Mb, and 57% are found even in bacteria
with the smallest genomes (mycoplasma). Almost 70% of genes
are present in at least one kingdom other than Bacteria. Many
organisms thus appear to rely on a similar set of essential
functions, supporting the simple microbial cell view outlined
above. The similarity might be even higher, because some of the
genes might have diverged beyond recognition and some func-
tions can be encoded by unrelated genes (28). However, genes
involved in the synthesis of the cell envelope tend to be lost from
bacteria with smaller genomes. Concomitantly, genes involved in
the determination of cell shape, division, and respiration are also
lost. This suggests that it may be possible to build, maintain, and
reproduce the cell compartment in a simpler way than that used
by bacteria with larger genomes, and that glycolysis can be
sufficient to generate energy for the cell. A minimal essential
gene set could thus be significantly smaller than the one present
in bacteria with genomes larger than 3 Mb.
Unexpected Essential Genes. Notwithstanding the grouping of
most essential functions in a few large categories, our study has
revealed genes that were not expected to have an essential
function under the experimental conditions used, such as eight
EMP pathway genes and a gene involved in purine biosynthesis.
These observations suggest previously unsuspected links be-
tween different domains of cell physiology.
Redundant Genes for Essential Functions. Our analysis does not
detect essential functions encoded by redundant genes, because
only a single gene was inactivated in each mutant strain. The list
of the essential genes given here is thus likely to be underesti-
mated, because synthetic lethal mutants are well known. A
rigorous detection of the missing functions would require the
systematic combination of all of the mutations in a single strain,
which is beyond the present genetic technology. However, it is
remarkable that single gene inactivation did reveal large cate-
gories of essential functions, suggesting that most of the vital cell
processes are encoded by nonredundant genes. The presence of
paralogues for 50% of B. subtilis genes (9) might thus allow the
cell to respond to changing environmental conditions rather than
provide back-up for vital processes.
Isogenic Mutant Collection. Finally, it should be noted that the
isogenic set of 3,000 mutants that we have generated can be
used to identify genes, and thus functions, that are essential
under conditions different from those used here. Furthermore,
the mutant set is a unique bacterial resource for studying various
phenotypes and may thus lead to deeper insight into the me-
tabolism of the bacterial cell.
This work was supported, in part, by European Union Grant BIO4-
CT95-0278 and a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Priority Areas
(C) ‘‘Genome Biology’’ from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology of Japan.
1. Fraser, C. M., Gocayne, J. D., White, O., Adams, M. D., Clayton, R. A.,
Fleischmann, R. D., Bult, C. J., Kerlavage, A. R., Sutton, G., Kelley, J. M., et
al. (1995) Science 270, 397–403.
2. Mushegian, A. R. & Koonin, E. V. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93,
10268–10273.
3. Akerley, B. J., Rubin, E. J., Novick, V. L., Amaya, K., Judson, N. & Mekalanos,
J. J. (2002) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 966–971.
4. Hutchison, C. A., Peterson, S. N., Gill, S. R., Cline, R. T., White, O., Fraser,
C. M., Smith, H. O. & Venter, J. C. (1999) Science 286, 2165–2169.
5. Ji, Y., Zhang, B., Van Horn, S. F., Warren, P., Woodnutt, G., Burnham, M. K.
& Rosenberg, M. (2001) Science 293, 2266–2269.
6. Gerdes, S. Y., Scholle, M. D., D’Souza, M., Bernal, A., Baev, M. V., Farrell,
M., Kurnasov, O. V., Daugherty, M. D., Mseeh, F., Polanuyer, B. M., et al.
(2002) J. Bacteriol. 184, 4555–4572.
7. Sonenshein, A. L., Hoch, J. A. & Losick, R., eds. (2002) Bacillus subtilis
and Its Closest Relatives: From Genes to Cells (Am. Soc. Microbiol., Wash-
ington, DC).
8. Vagner, V., Dervyn, E. & Ehrlich, S. D. (1998) Microbiology 144, 3097–3104.
9. Kunst,F.,Ogasawara,N.,Moszer,I.,Albertini,A.M.,Alloni,G.,Azevedo,V.,Bertero,
M. G., Bessieres, P., Bolotin, A., Borchert, S., et al. (1997) Nature 390, 249–256.
10. Petit, M. A. & Ehrlich, S. D. (2002) EMBO J. 21, 3137–3147.
11. Soppa, J., Kobayashi, K., Noirot-Gros, M. F., Oesterhelt, D., Ehrlich, S. D.,
Dervyn, E., Ogasawara, N. & Moriya, S. (2002) Mol. Microbiol. 45, 59–71.
12. Fabret, C. & Hoch, J. A. (1998) J. Bacteriol. 180, 6375–6383.
13. Ingham, C. J., Dennis, J. & Furneaux, P. A. (1999) Mol. Microbiol. 31, 651–663.
14. Horsburgh, M. J. & Moir, A. (1999) Mol. Microbiol. 32, 41–50.
15. Nishi, K., Dabbs, E. R. & Schnier, J. (1985) J. Bacteriol. 163, 890–894.
16. Haas, M., Beyer, D., Gahlmann, R. & Freiberg, C. (2001) Microbiology 147,
1783–1791.
17. Nakamura, K., Yahagi, S., Yamazaki, T. & Yamane, K. (1999) J. Biol. Chem.
274, 13569–13576.
18. Heath, R. J., Su, N., Murphy, C. K. & Rock, C. O. (2000) J. Biol. Chem. 275,
40128–40133.
19. Morbidoni, H. R., de Mendoza, D. & Cronan, J. E., Jr. (1996) J. Bacteriol. 178,
4794–4800.
20. Foster, S. J. & Popham, D. L. (2002) in Bacillus subtilis and Its Closest Relatives:
From Genes to Cells, eds. Sonenshein, A. L., Hoch, J. A. & Losick, R. (Am. Soc.
Microbiol, Washington DC), pp. 21–41.
21. Errington, J. & Daniel, R. A. (2002) in Bacillus subtilis and Its Closest Relatives:
From Genes to Cells, eds. Sonenshein, A. L., Hoch, J. A. & Losick, R. (Am. Soc.
Microbiol, Washington, DC), pp. 97–109.
22. Leyva-Vazquez, M. A. & Setlow, P. (1994) J. Bacteriol. 176, 2788–2795.
23. von Wachenfeldt, C. & Hederstadt, L. (2002) in Bacillus subtilis and Its Closest
Relatives: From Genes to Cells, eds. Sonenshein, A. L., Hoch, J. A. & Losick,
R. (Am. Soc. Microbiol, Washington, DC), pp. 163–179.
24. Winstedt, L. & von Wachenfeldt, C. (2000) J. Bacteriol. 182, 6557–6564.
25. Switzer, R. L. (2002) in Bacillus subtilis and Its Closest Relatives: From Genes
to Cells, eds. Sonenshein, A. L., Hoch, J. A. & Losick, R. (Am. Soc. Microbiol,
Washington, DC), pp. 255–269.
26. Nitschke´, P., Guerdoux-Jamet, P., Chiapello, H., Faroux, G., Henaut, C.,
Henaut, A. & Danchin, A. (1998) FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 22, 207–227.
27. Ito, M., Guffanti, A. A., Oudega, B. & Krulwich, T. A. (1999) J. Bacteriol. 181,
2394–2402.
28. Koonin, E. V. (2000) Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet. 1, 99–116.
Kobayashi et al.
PNAS 
April 15, 2003 
vol. 100 
no. 8 
4683
GENETICS