

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Education and debate
Why the impact factor of journals should not be used for
evaluating research
Per O Seglen
Evaluating scientific quality is a notoriously difficult
problem which has no standard solution. Ideally, pub-
lished scientific results should be scrutinised by true
experts in the field and given scores for quality and
quantity according to established rules. In practice,
however,
what
is
called
peer
review
is
usually
performed by committees with general competence
rather than with the specialist’s insight that is needed to
assess primary research data. Committees tend, there-
fore,
to
resort
to
secondary
criteria
like
crude
publication counts, journal prestige, the reputation of
authors and institutions, and estimated importance
and relevance of the research field,
1 making peer
review as much of a lottery as of a rational process.
2 3
On this background, it is hardly surprising that
alternative methods for evaluating research are being
sought, such as citation rates and journal impact
factors, which seem to be quantitative and objective
indicators directly related to published science. The
citation data are obtained from a database produced by
the
Institute
for
Scientific
Information
(ISI)
in
Philadelphia, which continuously records scientific
citations as represented by the reference lists of articles
from a large number of the world’s scientific journals.
The references are rearranged in the database to show
how many times each publication has been cited within
a certain period, and by whom, and the results are
published as the Science Citation Index (SCI). On the
basis
of
the
Science
Citation
Index
and
authors’
publication lists, the annual citation rate of papers by a
scientific author or research group can thus be
calculated. Similarly, the citation rate of a scientific
journal—known as the journal impact factor—can be
calculated as the mean citation rate of all the articles
contained in the journal.
4 Journal impact factors, which
are published annually in SCI Journal Citation Reports,
are widely regarded as a quality ranking for journals
and used extensively by leading journals in their adver-
tising.
Since
journal
impact
factors
are
so
readily
available, it has been tempting to use them for evaluat-
ing individual scientists or research groups. On the
assumption that the journal is representative of its arti-
cles, the journal impact factors of an author’s articles
can simply be added up to obtain an apparently objec-
tive and quantitative measure of the author’s scientific
achievement. In Italy, the use of journal impact factors
was recently advocated to remedy the purported
subjectivity
and
bias
in
appointments
to
higher
academic positions.
5 In the Nordic countries, journal
impact factors have, on occasion, been used in the
evaluation of individuals as well as of institutions and
have been proposed, or actually used, as one of the
premises for allocation of university resources and
positions.
1 6 7 Resource allocation based on impact fac-
tors has also been reported from Canada
8 and
Hungary
9 and, colloquially, from several other coun-
tries. The increasing awareness of journal impact
factors, and the possibility of their use in evaluation, is
already changing scientists’ publication behaviour
towards
publishing
in
journals
with
maximum
impact,
9 10 often at the expense of specialist journals
that might actually be more appropriate vehicles for
the research in question.
Given
the
increasing
use
of
journal
impact
factors—as well as the (less explicit) use of journal
prestige—in research evaluation, a critical examination
of this indicator seems necessary (see box).
Is the journal impact factor really
representative of the individual journal
articles?
Relation of journal impact factor and citation rate
of article
For the journal’s impact factor to be reasonably
representative of its articles, the citation rate of
individual articles in the journal should show a narrow
distribution, preferably a Gaussian distribution, around
Summary points
• Use of journal impact factors conceals the
difference in article citation rates (articles in the
most cited half of articles in a journal are cited
10 times as often as the least cited half)
• Journals’ impact factors are determined by
technicalities unrelated to the scientific quality
of their articles
• Journal
impact
factors
depend
on
the
research field: high impact factors are likely in
journals covering large areas of basic research
with
a
rapidly
expanding
but
short
lived
literature that use many references per article
• Article citation rates determine the journal
impact factor, not vice versa
Institute for Studies
in Research and
Higher Education
(NIFU),
Hegdehaugsveien
31, N-0352 Oslo,
Norway
Per O Seglen,
professor
BMJ 1997;314:498–502
498
BMJ VOLUME 314
15 FEBRUARY 1997

----- Page 2 (native) -----
the mean value (the journal’s impact factor). Figure 1
shows that this is far from being the case: three differ-
ent biochemical journals all showed skewed distribu-
tions of articles’ citation rates, with only a few articles
anywhere near the population mean.
11
The uneven contribution of the various articles to
the journal impact is further illustrated in figure 2: the
cumulative curve shows that the most cited 15% of the
articles account for 50% of the citations, and the most
cited 50% of the articles account for 90% of the
citations. In other words, the most cited half of the arti-
cles are cited, on average, 10 times as often as the least
cited half. Assigning the same score (the journal
impact factor) to all articles masks this tremendous
difference—which is the exact opposite of what an
evaluation is meant to achieve. Even the uncited
articles are then given full credit for the impact of the
few highly cited articles that predominantly determine
the value of the journal impact factor.
Since any large, random sample of journal articles
will correlate well with the corresponding average of
journal impact factors,
12 the impact factors may seem
reasonably representative after all. However, the corre-
lation between journal impact and actual citation rate
of articles from individual scientists or research groups
is often poor
9 12 (fig 3). Clearly, scientific authors do not
necessarily publish their most citable work in journals
of the highest impact, nor do their articles necessarily
match the impact of the journals they appear in.
Although some authors may take journals’ impact fac-
tors into consideration when submitting an article,
other factors are (or at least were) equally or more
important, such as the journal’s subject area and its rel-
evance to the author’s specialty, the fairness and rapid-
ity
of
the
editorial
process,
the
probability
of
acceptance, publication lag, and publication cost (page
charges).
13
Journal impact factors are representative only
when the evaluated research is absolutely average
(relative to the journals used), a premise which really
makes any evaluation superfluous. In actual practice,
however, even samples as large as a nation’s scientific
output are far from being random and representative
of the journals they have been published in: for exam-
ple, during the period 1989-93, articles on general
medicine in Turkey would have had an expected
citation rate of 1.3 (relative to the world average) on the
Problems associated with the use of
journal impact factors
• Journal
impact
factors
are
not
statistically
representative of individual journal articles
• Journal impact factors correlate poorly with actual
citations of individual articles
• Authors use many criteria other than impact when
submitting to journals
• Citations to “non-citable” items are erroneously
included in the database
• Self citations are not corrected for
•
Review articles are heavily cited and inflate the
impact factor of journals
• Long articles collect many citations and give high
journal impact factors
• Short publication lag allows many short term journal
self citations and gives a high journal impact factor
• Citations in the national language of the journal are
preferred by the journal’s authors
• Selective
journal
self
citation:
articles
tend
to
preferentially cite other articles in the same journal
• Coverage of the database is not complete
• Books are not included in the database as a source for
citations
• Database has an English language bias
• Database is dominated by American publications
• Journal set in database may vary from year to year
• Impact factor is a function of the number of
references per article in the research field
• Research fields with literature that rapidly becomes
obsolete are favoured
• Impact factor depends on dynamics (expansion or
contraction) of the research field
• Small research fields tend to lack journals with high
impact
• Relations between fields (clinical v basic research, for
example) strongly determine the journal impact factor
• Citation rate of article determines journal impact, but
not vice versa
600
500
Biochimica Biophysica Acta
Biochemical Journal
Journal of Biological Chemistry
400
300
200
100
0
No of articles cited
≤1
2-3
4-5
6-7
8-9
10-11
12-13
14-15
16-17
18-19
20-21
22-23
24-25
26-27
28-29
≥30
No of citations per article per year
Fig 1 Citation rates in 1986 or 1987 of articles published in three
biochemical journals in 1983 or 1984, respectively11
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
% Of journal's citation rate
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
% Of journal articles (in 5% categories by annual citation rate)
Fig 2 Cumulative contribution of articles with different citation
rates (beginning with most cited 5%) to total journal impact.
Values are mean (SE) of journals in fig 1; dotted lines indicate
contributions of 15% and 50% most cited articles11
Education and debate
499
BMJ VOLUME 314
15 FEBRUARY 1997

----- Page 3 (native) -----
basis of journal impact, but the actual citation was only
0.3.
14 The use of journal impact factors can therefore
be as misleading for countries as for individuals.
Journal impact factors are calculated in a way that
causes bias
Apart from being non-representative, the journal
impact factor is encumbered with several shortcom-
ings of a technical and more fundamental nature. The
factor is generally defined as the recorded number of
citations within a certain year (for example, 1996) to
the items published in the journal during the two pre-
ceding years (1995 and 1994), divided by the number
of such items (this would be the equivalent of the aver-
age citation rate of an item during the first and second
calendar year after the year of publication). However,
the Science Citation Index database includes only nor-
mal articles, notes, and reviews in the denominator as
citable items, but records citations to all types of docu-
ments (editorials, letters, meeting abstracts, etc) in the
numerator; citations to translated journal versions are
even listed twice.
15-17 Because of this flawed computa-
tion,
a
journal
that
includes
meeting
reports,
interesting editorials, and a lively correspondence sec-
tion can have its impact factor greatly inflated relative
to journals that lack such items. Editors who want to
raise the impact of their journals should make frequent
reference
to
their
previous
editorials,
since
the
database makes no correction for self citations. The
inclusion of review articles, which generally receive
many more citations than ordinary articles,
17 18 is also
recommended. Furthermore, because citation rate is
roughly proportional to the length of the article,
19
journals might wish to publish long, rather than short,
articles. If correction were made for article length,
“communications” journals like Biochemical and Bio-
physical Research Communications and FEBS Letters
would get impact factors as high as, or higher than, the
high impact journals within the field, like Journal of
Biological Chemistry.
20 21
The use of an extremely short term index (citations
to articles published only in the past two years) in cal-
culating
the
impact
factor
introduces
a
strong
temporal bias, with several consequences. For example,
articles in journals with short publication lags will con-
tain relatively many up to date citations and thus con-
tribute heavily to the impact factors of all cited
journals. Since articles in a given journal tend to cite
articles from the same journal,
22 rapid publication is
self serving with respect to journal impact, and signifi-
cantly correlated with it.
23 Dynamic research fields with
high activity and short publication lags, such as
biochemistry and molecular biology, have a corre-
spondingly high proportion of citations to recent
publications—and hence higher journal impact factors
—than, for example, ecology and mathematics.
23 24
Russian journals, which are cited mainly by other
Russian journals,
25 are reported to have particularly
long publication lags, resulting in generally low impact
factors.
26 Pure technicalities can therefore account for
several-fold differences in journal impact.
Limitations of the database
The Science Citation Index database covers about
3200 journals
8; the estimated world total is about
126 000.
27 The coverage varies considerably between
research fields: in one university, 90% of the chemistry
faculty’s publications, but only 30% of the biology fac-
ulty’s publications, were in the database.
28 Since the
impact factor of any journal will be proportional to the
database coverage of its research field, such discrepan-
cies mean that journals from an underrepresented
field that are included will receive low impact factors.
Furthermore, the journal set in the database is not
constant but may vary in composition from year to
year.
24 29 In many research fields a substantial fraction
of scientific output is published in the form of books,
which are not included as source items in the database;
they therefore have no impact factor.
30 In mathematics,
leading publications that were not included in the Sci-
ence
Citation
Index
database
were
cited
more
frequently than the leading publications that were
included.
31 Clearly, such systematic omissions from the
database can cause serious bias in evaluations based on
impact factor.
The preference of the Science Citation Index data-
base for English language journals
28 will contribute to a
low impact factor for the few non-English journals that
are included,
32 since most citations to papers in
languages other than English are given by other
papers in the same language.
25 27 33 The Institute for
Scientific Information’s database for the social sciences
contained only two German social science journals,
whereas a German database contained 542.
34 Specifi-
cally, American scientists, who seem particularly prone
to citing each other,
33 35 dominate these databases to
such an extent (over half of the citations) as to raise
both the citation rate and the mean journal impact of
American science 30% above the world average,
14 the
rest of the world then falling below average. This bias is
10
10
5
2
1
0.5
0.2
0
10
5
2
1
0.5
0.2
0
10
5
2
1
0.5
0.2
0
50
20
10
5
2
0.5
1
0.2
0
No of citations per article per year
No of citations per article per year
0.5
1
2
5
Impact factor of journal
Impact factor of journal
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
r=0.44
r=0.63
r=0.05
r=0.27
Fig 3 Correlation between article citation rate and journal impact for four authors12
Education and debate
500
BMJ VOLUME 314
15 FEBRUARY 1997

----- Page 4 (native) -----
aggravated by the use of a short term index: for exam-
ple, in American publications within clinical medicine,
83% of references in the same year were to other
papers by American scientists (many of them undoubt-
edly self citations), a value 25% higher than the stable
level reached after three years (which would, inciden-
tally, also be biased by self citations and citations of
other American work).
33 Thus, both the apparent qual-
ity lead of American science and the values of the vari-
ous journal impact factors are, to an important extent,
determined by the large volume, the self citations, and
the national citation bias of American science,
27 in
combination with the short term index used by the
Science Citation Index for calculating journal impact
factors.
Journal impact factors depend on the research field
Citation habits and citation dynamics can be so differ-
ent in different research fields as to make evaluative
comparisons on the basis of citation rate or journal
impact difficult or impossible. For example, biochemis-
try and molecular biology articles were cited about five
times as often as pharmacy articles.
33 Several factors
have been found to contribute to such differences
among fields of research.
The citation impact of a research field is directly
proportional to the mean number of references per
article, which varies considerably from field to field (it is
twice as high in biochemistry as in mathematics, for
example).
24 Within the arts and humanities, references
to articles are hardly used at all, leaving these research
fields (and others) virtually uncited,
36 a matter of
considerable consternation among science administra-
tors unfamiliar with citation kinetics.
37
In highly dynamic research fields, such as biochem-
istry and molecular biology, where published reports
rapidly
become
obsolete,
a
large
proportion
of
citations are captured by the short term index used to
calculate
journal
impact
factors,
as
previously
discussed
38 —but fields with a more durable literature,
such as mathematics, have a smaller fraction of short
term citations and hence lower journal impact factors.
This field property combines with the low number of
references per article to give mathematics a recorded
citation
impact
that
is
only
a
quarter
that
of
biochemistry.
24
In young and rapidly expanding research fields, the
number of publications making citations is large
relative to the amount of citable material, leading to
high citation rates for articles and high journal impact
factors for the field.
39 40
In a largely self contained research field, the mean
article (or journal) citation rate is independent of the
size of the field,
41 but the absolute range will be wider in
a large field, meaning higher impact factors for the top
journals.
42 Such differences become obvious when
comparing review journals, which tend to top their
field (table 1). Leading scientists in a small field may
thus
be
at
a
disadvantage
compared
with
their
colleagues in larger fields, since they lack access to
journals of equally high citation impact.
43
Most research fields are, however, not completely
self contained, the most important field factor probably
being the ability of a research field to be cited by adja-
cent fields. The relation between basic and clinical
medicine is a case in point: clinical medicine draws
heavily on basic science, but not vice versa. The result is
that basic medicine is cited three to five times more
than clinical medicine, and this is reflected in journal
impact factors.
42 44 45 The outcome of an evaluation
based on impact factors in medicine will therefore
depend
on
the
position
of
research
groups
or
institutions along the basic-clinical axis.
33
In measures of citation rates of articles, attempts to
take research field into account often consist of
expressing citation rate relative to some citation impact
specific to the field.
46 Such field corrections range from
simply dividing the article’s citation rate by the impact
factor of its journal
28 (which punishes publication in
high impact journals) to the use of complex, author
specific, field indicators based on reference lists
47 48
(which punishes citations to high impact journals).
However, field corrections cannot readily be applied to
journal impact factors, since many research fields are
dominated by one or a few journals, in which case cor-
rections might merely generate relative impact factors
of unit value. Even within large fields, the tendency of
journals to subspecialise with certain subjects is likely
to generate significant differences in journal impact: in
a single biochemical journal there was a 10-fold differ-
ence in citation rates in subfields.
19
Is the impact of an article increased by
publication in a high impact journal?
It is widely assumed that publication in a high impact
journal will enhance the impact of an article (the “free
ride” hypothesis). In a comparison of two groups of
scientific authors with similar journal preference who
differed twofold in mean citation rate for articles, how-
ever, the relative difference was the same (twofold)
throughout a range of journals with impact factors of
0.5 to 8.0.
12 If the high impact journals had contributed
“free” citations, independently of the article contents,
the relative difference would have been expected to
diminish as a function of increasing journal impact.
49
These data suggest that the journals do not offer any
free ride. The citation rates of the articles determine
the journal impact factor (a truism illustrated by the
good correlation between aggregate citation rates of
article and aggregate journal impact found in these
data), but not vice versa.
If scientific authors are not detectably rewarded
with a higher impact by publishing in high impact
journals, why are we so adamant on doing it? The
answer, of course, is that as long as there are people out
there who judge our science by its wrapping rather
than by its contents, we cannot afford to take any
chances. Although journal impact factors are rarely
Table 1 Journal impact factors and research field
Journal
1986
1987
Annual Review of Biochemistry
31.6
35.1
Annual Review of Immunology
26.5
25.2
Annual Review of Cell Biology
14.1
22.8
Annual Review of Genetics
14.0
14.3
Annual Review of Neuroscience
15.4
13.7
Annual Review of Pharmacology
10.1
9.9
Annual Review of Physiology
7.8
9.1
Annual Review of Biophysics
7.2
7.7
Annual Review of Microbiology
4.9
6.4
Education and debate
501
BMJ VOLUME 314
15 FEBRUARY 1997

----- Page 5 (native) -----
used explicitly, their implicit counterpart, journal pres-
tige, is widely held to be a valid evaluation criterion
50
and is probably the most used indicator besides a
straightforward count of publications. As we have seen,
however, the journal cannot in any way be taken as
representative of the article. Even if it could, the journal
impact factor would still be far from being a quality
indicator: citation impact is primarily a measure of sci-
entific utility rather than of scientific quality, and
authors’ selection of references is subject to strong
biases
unrelated
to
quality.
51 52
For
evaluation
of
scientific quality, there seems to be no alternative to
qualified experts reading the publications. Much can
be done, however, to improve and standardise the
principles, procedures, and criteria used in evaluation,
and the scientific community would be well served if
efforts could be concentrated on this rather than on
developing
ever
more
sophisticated
versions
of
basically useless indicators. In the words of Sidney
Brenner, “What matters absolutely is the scientific con-
tent of a paper, and nothing will substitute for either
knowing or reading it.”
53
Funding: None.
Conflict of interest: None.
1
Hansen HF, Jørgensen BH. Styring af forskning: kan forskningsindikatorer
anvendes? Frederiksberg, Denmark: Samfundslitteratur, 1995.
2
Cole S, Cole JR, Simon GA. Chance and consensus in peer review. Science
1981;214:881-6.
3
Ernst E, Saradeth T, Resch KL. Drawbacks of peer review. Nature
1993;363:296.
4
Garfield E. Citation analysis as a tool in journal evaluation. Science
1972;178:471-9.
5
Calza L, Garbisa S. Italian professorships. Nature 1995:374:492.
6
Drettner B, Seglen PO, Sivertsen G. Inverkanstal som fördelningsinstru-
ment: ej accepterat av tidskrifter i Norden. Läkartidningen 1994;91:744-5.
7
Gøtzsche PC, Krog JW, Moustgaard R. Bibliometrisk analyse af
dansk
sundhedsvidenskabelig
forskning
1988-1992.
Ugeskr
Læger
1995;157:5075-81.
8
Taubes G. Measure for measure in science. Science 1993;260:884-6.
9
Vinkler P. Evaluation of some methods for the relative assessment of
scientific publications. Scientometrics 1986;10:157-77.
10 Maffulli N. More on citation analysis. Nature 1995;378:760.
11 Seglen
PO. The
skewness
of
science.
J
Am
Soc
Information
Sci
1992;43:628-38.
12 Seglen PO. Causal relationship between article citedness and journal
impact. J Am Soc Information Sci 1994;45:1-11.
13 Gordon MD. How authors select journals: a test of the reward maximiza-
tion model of submission behaviour. Social Studies of Science 1984;14:27-
43.
14 Braun T, Glänzel W, Grupp H. The scientometric weight of 50 nations in
27
science
areas, 1989-1993. Part
II. Life
sciences. Scientometrics
1996;34:207-37.
15 Magri M-H, Solari A. The SCI Journal Citation Reports: a potential tool
for studying journals? I. Description of the JCR journal population based
on the number of citations received, number of source items, impact fac-
tor, immediacy index and cited half-life. Scientometrics 1996;35:93-117.
16 Moed HF, Van Leeuwen TN. Impact factors can mislead. Nature
1996;381:186.
17 Moed HF, Van Leeuwen TN, Reedijk J. A critical analysis of the journal
impact factors of Angewandte Chemie and the Journal of the American
Chemical Society. Inaccuracies in published impact factors based on
overall citations only. Scientometrics 1996;37:105-16.
18 Bourke P, Butler L. Standard issues in a national bibliometric database:
the Australian case. Scientometrics 1996;35:199-207.
19 Seglen PO. Evaluation of scientists by journal impact. In: Weingart P,
Sehringer R, Winterhager M, eds. Representations of science and technology.
Leiden: DSWO Press, 1992;240-52.
20 Sengupta IN. Three new parameters in bibliometric research and their
application
to
rerank
periodicals
in
the
field
of
biochemistry.
Scientometrics 1986;10:235-42.
21 Semenza G. Editorial. FEBS Lett 1996;389:1-2.
22 Seglen PO. Kan siteringsanalyse og andre bibliometriske metoder brukes
til evaluering av forskningskvalitet? NOP-Nytt (Helsingfors) 1989;15:2-20.
23 Metcalfe NB. Journal impact factors. Nature 1995;77:260-1.
24 Moed HF, Burger WJM, Frankfort JG, Van Raan AFJ. The application of
bibliometric indicators: important field-and time-dependent factors to be
considered. Scientometrics 1985;8:177-203.
25 Lange L. Effects of disciplines and countries on citation habits. An analy-
sis of empirical papers in behavioural sciences. Scientometrics 1985;8:205-
15.
26 Sorokin NI. Impact factors of Russian journals. Nature 1996;380:578.
27 Andersen H. ACTA Sociologica på den internationale arena-hvad kan
SSCI fortælle? Dansk Sociologi 1996;2:72-8.
28 Moed HF, Burger WJM, Frankfort JG, Van Raan AFJ. On the measurement
of research performance: the use of bibliometric indicators. Leiden: Science
Studies Unit, LISBON-Institute, University of Leiden, 1987.
29 Sivertsen G. Norsk forskning på den internasjonale arena. En sammenlikning
av 18 OECD-lands artikler og siteringer i Science Citation Index 1973-86.
Oslo: Institute for Studies in Resesearch and Higher Education, 1991.
30 Andersen H. Tidsskriftpublicering og forskningsevaluering. Biblioteksar-
bejde 1996;17:19-26.
31 Korevaar JC, Moed HF. Validation of bibliometric indicators in the field of
mathematics. Scientometrics 1996;37:117-30.
32 Bauin S, Rothman H. “Impact” of journals as proxies for citation counts.
In: Weingart P, Sehringer R, Winterhager M, eds. Representations of science
and technology. Leiden: DSWO Press, 1992;225-39.
33 Narin F, Hamilton KS. Bibliometric performance measures. Scientometrics
1996;6:293-310.
34 Artus HM. Science indicators derived from databases. Scientometrics
1996;37:297-311.
35 Møller AP. National citations. Nature 1990;348:480.
36 Hamilton DP. Research papers: who’s uncited now. Science 1991;251:25.
37 Hamilton DP. Publishing by—and for?—the numbers. Science 1990;
250:1331-2.
38 Marton J. Obsolescence or immediacy? Evidence supporting Price’s
hypothesis. Scientometrics 1985;7:145-153.
39 Hargens LL, Felmlee DH. Structural determinants of stratification in sci-
ence. Am Sociol Rev 1984;49:685-97.
40 Vinkler P. Relationships between the rate of scientific development and
citations. The chance for a citedness model. Scientometrics 1996;35:375-
86.
41 Gomperts MC. The law of constant citation for scientific literature. J
Documentation 1968;24:113-7.
42 Seglen PO. Bruk av siteringsanalyse og andre bibliometriske metoder i
evaluering av forskningsaktivitet. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen 1989;31:3229-34.
43 Seglen PO. Evaluering av forskningskvalitet ved hjelp av siteringsanalyse
og andre bibliometriske metoder. Nordisk Medicin 1989;104:331-5.
44 Narin F, Pinski G, Gee HH. Structure of the biomedical literature. J Am Soc
Inform Sci 1976;27:25-45.
45 Folly G, Hajtman B, Nagy JI, Ruff I. Some methodological problems in
ranking scientists by citation analysis. Scientometrics 1981;3:135-47.
46 Schubert
A, Braun
T. Cross-field
normalization
of
scientometric
indicators. Scientometrics 1996;36:311-24.
47 Lewison
G, Anderson
J, Jack
J. Assessing
track
records. Nature
1995;377:671.
48 Vinkler P. Model for quantitative selection of relative scientometric
impact indicators. Scientometrics 1996;36:223-36.
49 Seglen PO. How representative is the journal impact factor? Research
Evaluation 1992;2:143-9.
50 Martin BR. The use of multiple indicators in the assessment of basic
research. Scientometrics 1996;36:343-62.
51 MacRoberts MH, MacRoberts BR. Problems of citation analysis: a critical
review. J Am Soc Information Sci 1989;40:342-9.
52 Seglen PO. Siteringer og tidsskrift-impakt som kvalitetsmål for forskning.
Klinisk Kemi i Norden 1995;7:59-63.
53 Brenner S. Cited [incorrectly] in: Strata P. Citation analysis. Nature
1995;375:624.
(Accepted 9 January 1997)
ONE HUNDRED YEARS AGO
Samson’s riddle
Within the last few days two great sums of money have been given for
the advancement of science. Dr Alfred Nobel, the inventor of
dynamite, has left nearly £2,000,000 as a prize fund for the most
important discoveries in physics, chemistry, physiology, and medicine;
and the Baroness Hirsch has promised £80,000 to the Pasteur
Institute. We who have just received Dr Mond’s splendid gift of the
Davy-Faraday Laboratory need not envy the good fortune of other
nations, nor does help given to Science benefit one country, but all.
The work of the Pasteur Institute goes forth over the whole world; as
Dr Roux says of it, “We are perpetually carrying on a struggle against
death, and we can only express our deep gratitude to all benefactors
who help us to lighten the load of suffering humanity.” The prizes
given by Dr Nobel are open to all the nations; and he has added yet
another prize for him who has done most to promote the cause of
peace. Truly, as in Samson’s riddle, out of the eater has come forth
meat, out of the strong has come forth sweetness. (BMJ 1897;i:161.)
Education and debate
502
BMJ VOLUME 314
15 FEBRUARY 1997

----- Page 6 (native) -----
The rationing debate
Defining a package of healthcare services the NHS is
responsible for
The case for
Bill New
As part of its mission to raise the level of debate about rationing of healthcare resources, the Rationing Agenda
Group commissioned six pairs of articles debating specific propositions to do with rationing. The BMJ plans to
publish these at roughly fortnightly intervals over the next few weeks. The first appears below.
The use of tattoo removal as an example of NHS
rationing is now so common that it is in danger of trivi-
alising an important debate. Behind such questions as
“Should the NHS be devoting resources to tattoo
removal?” lies a more fundamental issue: what kinds of
benefit should the NHS provide?
Most readers will assume that defining a healthcare
“package” is a means of rationing healthcare resources.
In other words, faced with the task of managing the
limited NHS budget one option is to exclude some
services altogether. But my case rests on a different
interpretation of a package and involves asking a
preliminary question. Before deciding how to ration,
we need to know what to ration: What is the range of
services relevant to the role of the NHS? What
“business” is the NHS in? Is it the NHS’s job to provide
fertility treatment, physiotherapy for sports injuries,
long term nursing care, gender reassignment, adult
dentistry, and cosmetic surgery? Or should these
services be provided by local authorities, voluntary
agencies, or the private sector? The question does not
rely on clinical judgment. It is about the boundary of a
public institution’s responsibilities. And it is a question
which has been muddled up with issues of rationing
proper.
Defining the boundaries
The need to address this question derives from a grow-
ing sense of confusion and uncertainty about what it is
reasonable to expect from the NHS. For example,
where one lives can have a decisive effect on whether
or not NHS treatment is available. The 1991 NHS
reforms were an important catalyst in this process:
purchasing authorities now concentrate on commis-
sioning health care for their resident populations,
rather than on management issues. Wishing to be seen
to be making the best use of financial allocations, some
took the view that certain services were not a priority
and therefore not worth purchasing. For example, the
availability of fertility treatment depends on the whim
of purchasing health authorities—and increasingly
general practice fundholders. In addition to this uncer-
tainty over regional variations is the apparent removal
of some primary care services from NHS provision
altogether. Adult dentistry is subsidised by central
government, but only for a fraction of its cost. In some
areas it is hard to find dentists who offer even this
minimal NHS cover. There has been no explicit
national debate about why dentistry is apparently not
an NHS responsibility.
It is inequitable that one’s place of residence should
determine access to care. Levels of service provision
will inevitably vary from one part of the country to
another, in response to varying need or because some
providers are more efficient than others. But this is dif-
ferent from removing availability altogether: infertility
is not at zero levels in those areas where in vitro fertili-
sation treatment it is not available. Ad hoc develop-
ments such as these can serve only to promote
uncertainty and a sense of unfairness quite out of
proportion to the quantity of resources at stake.
Furthermore, the vigilance of the news media has had
a significant impact on the public’s perception of
health delivery. Activity, and inactivity, in the NHS is
now scrutinised and reported daily. This is welcome,
but awkward: old issues, once hidden, must now be
tackled if the NHS is not to fall into disrepute.
Nothing to do with saving money
To be clear about what devising a healthcare package
would seek to achieve, we must be clear about what it is
not trying to do. Firstly, it is not (necessarily) about sav-
ing money. The case for a centrally defined package
has been associated with easing the pressure on
resources. However, this is not the purpose of the pro-
posals outlined here—the desire is to promote equity,
collective understanding, and reassurance. The pack-
age considered relevant to NHS business is just as
likely to be more extensive than that available now. The
point is that it should not vary from one area to
another and that it should be derived as the result of an
explicit, democratic process.
Secondly, drawing up such a package is not an
attempt to avoid additional rationing. In the well
known Oregon initiative in the USA, all those services
which might possibly be provided collectively are
ranked and the line drawn where resources allow.
Above the line everyone has access; below no one does
(unless privately financed). The line moves up and
down depending on the availability of resources.
Rationing
health
care
is
therefore
a
centrally
“Before deciding how to ration, we need
to know what to ration”
Education and debate
There is a need
for a clearly
defined package
of healthcare
services which
is relevant to,
and the
responsibility
of, the NHS
King’s Fund Policy
Institute, London
W1M 0AN
Bill New,
senior research officer,
BMJ 1997;314:503–5
The BMJ, BMA,
King’s Fund,
College of Health,
and RAG
(Rationing Agenda
Group) will be
holding a
conference entitled
“Rationing in the
NHS: Time to get
real” on 10 and 11
July at Kensington
Town Hall. For
further information
ring Jane Lewis
0171 383 6605
(Email: 106005.
2356@compuserve.
com).
503
BMJ VOLUME 314
15 FEBRUARY 1997

----- Page 7 (native) -----
undertaken activity, specifying a package to which
everyone has access.
But the approach presented here is a preliminary
to rationing. It is about deciding what should appear
on Oregon’s list in total, not about where the line
should be drawn. Of course, there will be resource
implications from this decision. For example, if long
term nursing care was considered an NHS responsibil-
ity then resources might need to be reallocated from
private households to the NHS through taxation. But
specifying a package to promote reassurance and geo-
graphical fairness does not involve deciding how NHS
resources should be distributed between individuals
who make a claim on them. Defining a package does
not imply a right to treatment.
Cost effectiveness not relevant to
establishing “the package”
However, if the need, in principle, for a package is
accepted then there must be a coherent and practical
means of establishing it. For this to be successful the
focus must shift from criteria which guide rationing
decisions to criteria which help establish the range of
relevant services which are to be rationed. Trying to do
both at once results in doing very little at all, as
international experience testifies.
New Zealand and Holland have both tried to estab-
lish packages of healthcare services, and both have had
little success. In New Zealand, “core” services were
intended both to clarify what the population could
expect and limit the financial burden on the state. Ulti-
mately, though, the planners were forced to concede
that everything that was currently provided would
form the core—hardly the result they were looking for.
In
Holland,
four
criteria—necessity,
effectiveness,
efficiency, and individual responsibility—were used to
define a package. The Dutch also found it difficult to
specify precisely which services ought to be excluded.
Why so little success?
These strategies were trying to do too much at
once. Issues of equity, reassurance, and clarity about the
responsibility of the state were mixed up with a desire
to contain costs and ration more systematically. The
root of the difficulties lies in the inclusion of effective-
ness and cost effectiveness as criteria for establishing a
package.
Whether a service is relevant to a healthcare system
has nothing to do with effectiveness. For example, cos-
metic surgery for enhancement where there is no
severe psychological distress is rarely supported for
collective healthcare provision. But no one suggests
that the plastic surgeons who work miracles on Holly-
wood
stars
are
not
effective.
So
questions
of
effectiveness and cost effectiveness should be left aside
at this stage of the debate.
Their importance comes when deciding how to
allocate resources between all the services that are rel-
evant and between the people who can benefit from
them. The result of such deliberations may also lead to
a package, but it will be of an entirely different kind. In
Oregon, cost effectiveness was the basic principle at
work (although with many refinements and alongside
other criteria). But the resulting package did not
address whether fertility treatment, residential care,
dentistry, and so on were relevant to Oregon’s public
healthcare provision.
Reliance on measures of cost and effectiveness has
meant that most commentators believe strategies for
defining a package are doomed to failure, or at least
likely to disappoint those who promote them.
1 The
reasons given are now reasonably well accepted: health
interventions are extremely variable in their effects on
individuals. Just about every treatment therefore does
some good for someone, even if it is “ineffective” in
general. Making blanket exclusions on this basis will
inevitably be a blunt instrument and will antagonise
doctors, who feel their clinical freedom is curtailed. As
a consequence, the Oregon experiment has proved to
be extremely controversial and has generally not been
considered relevant to the NHS.
A qualitative approach
But the following approach for establishing relevance
to the NHS does not rely on effectiveness. Instead it
proposes a qualitative approach which avoids the
difficulties of variable individual response to treat-
ment. The approach has been described in more
detail elsewhere,
2 but the central proposition is this:
those characteristics which define healthcare’s spe-
cial nature, and which in general terms make it unsuit-
able
for
economic
exchange,
should
determine
whether or not individual services are relevant to the
NHS.
Taken together, three characteristics set health care
apart: fundamental importance, information imbal-
ance, and uncertainty. Health is clearly of fundamental
importance; there is little certainty about how our
health will develop in the future; and typically we know
“There has been no explicit national
debate about why dentistry is apparently
not an NHS responsibility”
SIMON STERN/THE INKSHED
Education and debate
504
BMJ VOLUME 314
15 FEBRUARY 1997

----- Page 8 (native) -----
little about the nature of our needs for health care or of
the likely effects of the treatments available to us. In
short, we are not good consumers. We must trust doc-
tors who, under free market conditions with insurance
markets, have an incentive to provide as much care as
possible.
It is the combination of characteristics which makes
health care special. Fundamental importance is not
sufficient on its own—food, after all, is important but no
one suggests that we should have a National Food
Service because people are perfectly able to choose
what and how much food they need. Neither are infor-
mation imbalance and uncertainty sufficient on their
own. Car repair services display these characteristics,
but no one is suggesting a National Car Repair
Service—because
cars
are
not
of
fundamental
importance.
However, not all services which are related to
health care display these characteristics in combina-
tion. Residential care for the elderly is fundamentally
important
but
does
not
suffer
from
significant
information
imbalances;
cosmetic
surgery
for
enhancement is not generally considered to be of fun-
damental importance. Services of this kind should not
be an NHS responsibility. On the other hand, curative
dentistry, fertility treatment, and intensive nursing care
do seem to satisfy the criteria; consequently, they
should form part of the NHS’s range of available serv-
ices. All health authorities and GP fundholders should
be required to provide some level of these services.
Note that defining this package does not imply any
judgment about effectiveness or whether any indi-
vidual service represents good value for money. It
simply clarifies what the NHS should be in the business
of doing.
Meeting the objections
There are a several practical objections to such a
proposal. The first argues that such an approach
necessitates drawing up a long list of individual services
which would need to be continually updated. Every
existing and new treatment for cancer, for example,
would need specification. In fact, such an enterprise
would be unnecessary. Specification is required only at
a general level: treatment for cancer, AIDS, infertility,
or whatever, not individual drugs or surgical interven-
tions. Indeed, it may be sufficient simply to concentrate
on exclusions rather than long lists of inclusions.
Furthermore, whether or not a particular treatment is
effective is irrelevant—the NHS may decide not to pur-
chase a drug to treat AIDS until it proves its
effectiveness, but it would be clear that drugs of this
kind are relevant to NHS business.
The second objection argues that any attempt to
centralise decision making will fail to accommodate
individual
cases
and
exceptional
circumstances.
Clearly,
defining
the
range
of
relevant
services
will restrict clinicians’ ability to use their skills to
certain ends. But this will not be as inflexible as critics
suggest.
A typical example cites an individual with extreme
psychological distress caused by a tattoo mistakenly
purchased
when
young.
In
circumstances
where
cosmetic surgery for enhancement is outside NHS
responsibilities, surely such central codification would
deny legitimate treatment? Not if treatment is correctly
focused on the nature of the condition. In the case of
psychological distress the correct course of action is
referral to a psychiatrist (psychiatry, let us assume, is
within NHS responsibilities). The specialist might well
provide appropriate treatment herself or may recom-
mend removal of the tattoo as the preferred means of
treating the distress. In this way tattoo removal could
still be undertaken quite legitimately on the NHS. But
at the same time some restriction has been placed on
clinical freedom: cosmetic procedures for conditions
that do not involve psychological distress are outside
the scope of the NHS—no exceptions. If a real
improvement in the clarity of the NHS’s role and
equity in the availability of its services is to be achieved
then such restrictions are inevitable.
The final objection asserts that introducing legal
specifications of what the NHS should provide will
simply allow the nominal provision of services. So, for
example, if infertility were to be included it would
probably be sufficient for a health authority to provide
one round of treatment per year to satisfy its legal
obligations. Thus health authorities could pay lip serv-
ice to the policy but continue to decide the range of
responsibilities for themselves. This may indeed turn
out to be how purchasers act. But it is equally reason-
able to suppose that health authorities simply want
clear guidance on the range of their responsibilities
and have no wish to indulge in gamesmanship with
policy directives. In any event, individual purchasers
would be clear about their role—they would still decide
on the extent of provision depending on local circum-
stances, but would now provide services secure in the
knowledge that they were in step with all other
purchasers in the NHS.
One final point. Criteria such as those suggested
here for guiding the specification of a healthcare
package are just that: guidance. They cannot replace
debate and political compromise. So it is not possible
simply to read off a list of relevant healthcare
services—people will inevitably disagree over the
degree to which fertility treatment, for example, satis-
fies
information
imbalance
and
fundamental
importance. But once a decision has been made,
openly and with reference to coherent criteria, what
we stand to gain from clarity and equity will surely
outweigh
the
awkward
processes
involved.
The
alternative—allowing the NHS increasingly to ignore
the principles on which it was founded—risks losing
mass popular respect for a successful and valued
public institution.
1
Klein R. Can we restrict the health care menu? Health Policy 1994;27:103-
12.
2
New B, Le Grand J. Rationing in the NHS: principles and pragmatism.
London: King’s Fund, 1996.
“Whether a service is relevant to a
healthcare system has nothing to do
with effectiveness”
“It is the combination of characteristics
which makes health care special”
Education and debate
505
BMJ VOLUME 314
15 FEBRUARY 1997

----- Page 9 (native) -----
The case against
Rudolf Klein
Traditionally the National Health Service has relied on
implicit
rationing
by
clinicians
within
budgetary
constraints set by central government. Neither the
founding fathers, nor any of their successors, defined
the scope and limits of the NHS’s responsibilities. The
statutory responsibility of ministers of health is to pro-
vide an “adequate” service. But the frontiers of
adequacy have never been defined, and the courts have
resolutely refused to rule on what should be provided
to whom. The package of health care offered has thus
varied, in terms of its composition and its generosity,
both over time and geographically. It is for individual
health authorities to decide what package of healthcare
services to provide for their populations and for
individual clinicians to decide between the competing
claims on the resources available to them.
1
Unsatisfactory state of affairs
In many ways this is an unsatisfactory state of affairs
and not surprisingly has increasingly come under chal-
lenge. There are two main grounds for criticism. Firstly,
the present situation allows ministers to duck responsi-
bility for the consequences of their decisions when set-
ting the NHS’s budget. If “adequacy” remains an elastic
and fuzzy notion, there is no way of establishing
whether the budget is sufficient to meet the NHS’s
commitments. Without any definition of what those
commitments are in the first place, the debate about
whether or not the NHS is “underfunded” becomes a
meaningless dialogue of the deaf and accountability is
fudged. Secondly, the lack of any defined package
means that in practice there can be no equity, if by
equity is meant that everyone should have the same
opportunity of treatment for any given degree of need
for a particular healthcare intervention. A considerable
degree of arbitrariness remains in the chances of
getting treated in the NHS: even if equity were
achieved in terms of ensuring that all health authorities
have the same command over resources, relative to the
needs of their populations, there would still be no
assurance that they would necessarily buy the same set
of services.
Developments since the introduction of the 1991
NHS reforms have reinforced these general considera-
tions. The medical profession has become increasingly
restive about having to carry the ultimate responsibility
for rationing. If resources are short, many doctors now
argue,
ministers
should
accept
the
burden
of
determining what can or cannot be provided. Further,
the purchaser-provider split has given visibility to deci-
sions by health authorities about what care to buy—or
not to buy—for their populations. The visibility may be
less than complete, but enough has been revealed to
cause disquiet about the differences of policy that have
emerged. For example, it would seem absurd that the
chances of getting in vitro fertilisation treatment
should depend on where people live, yet health
authorities differ sharply on whether or not to buy this
treatment.
2
The case for defining the package of healthcare
services to be delivered by the NHS is therefore strong.
I will argue, however, that the case against moving in
this direction is even stronger—for four main reasons.
Firstly, no consensus exists about the principles or cri-
teria that should be used in designing such a package.
Secondly, any decisions to restrict the NHS menu are
difficult to implement, given patient heterogeneity.
Thirdly, by concentrating on rationing by denial we risk
ignoring other (probably more important) dimensions
of rationing. Fourthly, defining an NHS package would
probably
not
achieve
the
declared
objectives
of
promoting equity and accountability, and the all out
pursuit of these objectives would in any case lead to a
damaging degree of centralised rigidity.
A perplexity of criteria
The case for defining the NHS menu assumes the fea-
sibility of developing criteria acceptable to both public
and professionals for determining what should be
included and excluded. And indeed many such criteria
are on offer. The growing international interest in lim-
iting the open ended financial commitments of health-
care systems has, in turn, produced a series of attempts
to develop principles for defining the limits of national
packages. The result of all this activity is, however,
discouraging. A cacophony of criteria is on offer,
embodying competing (and sometimes conflicting)
views about how to define the limits of public responsi-
bility for health care. And when seemingly unconten-
tious criteria are proposed, it turns out that their
acceptability
depends
crucially
on
their
level
of
abstraction: acceptable as general propositions, they
become contentious when applied to particular cases.
SIMON STERN/THE INKSHED
Education and debate
There is a need
for a clearly
defined package
of healthcare
services which
is relevant to,
and the
responsibility
of, the NHS
King’s Fund Policy
Institute, London
W1M 0AN
Rudolf Klein,
professorial fellow
BMJ 1997;314:506–9
506
BMJ VOLUME 314
15 FEBRUARY 1997

----- Page 10 (native) -----
International experience
The problem of conflicting criteria is well illustrated by
the international experience.
1 Oregon’s much cited
exercise in defining a package of care for those not
covered by medical insurance was originally based on
ranking different conditions-treatments according to
their cost-benefit ratio. It thus embodied the econo-
mist’s notion that any package of care should be
designed to maximise the community’s return on any
resources invested in health care. In the outcome this
was effectively abandoned, partly because adequate
data
were
lacking,
partly
because
the
exercise
produced some counterintuitive results—for example,
appendectomy ranked lower than tooth capping. The
final rankings that appeared, after repeated massaging,
seem to reflect judgments about “reasonableness”
taken in the light of community values. In other words,
the attempt to apply clear cut, transparent criteria was
abandoned.
The Dunning committee, which sought to develop
criteria for defining a package of health care for the
Netherlands, proposed four criteria for including any
intervention or services: necessity, effectiveness, effi-
ciency, and whether it is a matter of individual, rather
than community, responsibility. Necessary services
were those which “guarantee normal functions as a
member of the community or simply protect existence
as a member.” It thus recognised both economic
considerations and the “rule of rescue”—that condi-
tions that threaten survival or the capacity to function
must be included in any package. So, for example, in
vitro fertilisation failed to pass the necessity test:
“Undesired childlessness in the Netherlands poses no
danger to the community, and it cannot be said that
childlessness interferes with normal function in our
society.”
In
contrast,
a
Swedish
commission
rejected
outright the efficiency principle—that is, the economis-
tic approach to defining a basic package. Instead, it
endorsed the rule of rescue by giving priority to the
treatment of life threatening conditions. It also invoked
social solidarity—the principle that the commitments of
a healthcare system should be shaped by a sense of
collective
responsibility
for
the
wellbeing
of
its
members, especially the most vulnerable, such as the
chronically and terminally ill. And the New Zealand
committee on core services declined the task of defin-
ing the contents or limits of a healthcare package.
Defining characteristics of health care
The list of possible criteria could be extended further.
Consider, for example, a recent, highly ingenious
attempt to cut through the confusion by deriving the
principles for defining the basic package from the
arguments used to justify public intervention in the
provision of health care in the first place. Public provi-
sion or financing is justified, New and Le Grand argue,
3
by three defining characteristics of health care that dis-
tinguish it from other goods: the unpredictability of
need, information asymmetry between patients and
providers, and its fundamental importance to people’s
ability to achieve their life goals. Unpredictability and
asymmetry, as the authors recognise, also characterise
many
other
transactions.
So
we
are
left
with
“fundamental importance”—health care as the key to
functioning in society—as the key criterion.
This, of course, is unexceptionable: who could disa-
gree? Indeed this criterion is first cousin to the
Dunning committee’s criterion of “necessity.” But how
are
we
to
define
fundamental
importance?
The
Dunning committee excluded in vitro fertilisation;
New and Le Grand consider the inability to have a
child to be of fundamental importance. The criterion
thus turns out to be vacuous to the extent that it
provides no guidance on how conflicting interpreta-
tions
can
be
resolved. This
leads
to
a
general
conclusion: principles that incorporate a semiauto-
matic formula for implementing them (like maxi-
mising health benefits) tend to be highly contentious,
while uncontentious principles owe their acceptability
to the fact that there is ambiguity about their
implementation.
On one point only there appears to be widespread
agreement. This is that “ineffective” health care should
be excluded from any healthcare package or menu.
Again who could disagree? This turns out to be a
rather blunt criterion. Most interventions are effective
for
someone, just
as
most
services
may
be
of
fundamental
importance
to
someone.
Inevitably
attempts at defining a package of health care stub their
toes against the rock of patient heterogeneity: a point
explored further in the next section.
Problems of practice
Given that it is so difficult to devise coherent criteria or
principles, it is not surprising that most attempts to
define the healthcare menu have been tentative and
somewhat incoherent. The issue has, in effect, been
approached backwards: by listing exclusions rather
than by defining what is to be included. Oregon
remains unique in explicitly setting out what will be
provided, as well as what will be excluded—not surpris-
ingly perhaps since the whole venture started as an
exercise in extending coverage for the uninsured. Oth-
erwise, however, the problem has been defined, in
practice, as an exercise in limiting what is to be
available. About a quarter of the 100 health authorities
in England explicitly set out, in their purchasing plans
for 1996-7, procedures which will not be included in
their contracts.
4
The lists of exclusions are dominated by various
forms of cosmetic surgery. These range from tattoo
removal to buttock lift, from breast augmentation to
procedures for pinning back ears. The reversal of steri-
lisation and of vasectomy also feature frequently. Also
included is in vitro fertilisation. Interestingly, the roll
call
of
exclusions
is
not
some
peculiar
English
eccentricity. Very similar lists have been produced in
Ontario and in Spain when attempts have been made
to define entitlements to healthcare.
“Attempts at defining a package of
health care stub their toes against the
rock of patient heterogeneity”
“Rationing...is about the exercise of
judgment, not the drawing up of lists”
Education and debate
507
BMJ VOLUME 314
15 FEBRUARY 1997

----- Page 11 (native) -----
Nibbling at the edges
The above catalogue of exclusions is not complete.
Health authorities have also begun to exclude some
procedures, such as dilatation and curettage for women
under 40, where the evidence suggests that they are not
clinically effective. But, overall, the exclusions affect only
the small change of NHS activity. The implicit criterion
appears to be that it is no part of the NHS’s
responsibilities to deal with conditions that are self
inflicted or that can be seen as not being “medical”—that
is, as not impairing the ability to function. In effect, it is
not the NHS’s job to help people to look good.
As a criterion for defining the healthcare menu,
this does not take one very far. But the experience of
applying even this principle helps to explain why
attempts to restrict the menu have been limited to nib-
bling at the edges—and why, indeed, the whole
enterprise is flawed in conception. The pattern is clear.
No sooner does a health authority announce that it is
proposing not to buy a particular procedure than there
is an outcry. In part, this is the reflex reaction of a
medical profession which claims that only its members
are qualified to pronounce on what patients need. But,
more importantly, it reflects the fact of patient hetero-
geneity. For some patients, if only a very few, even a
buttock lift may be crucial for their ability to function
socially. Blanket exclusions ignore the fact of patient
heterogeneity.
Health
authorities
have
therefore
tended to retreat from such blanket exclusions to a
more flexible position: such procedures are normally
not bought unless a clinical need can be demonstrated.
If it is difficult to sustain a policy of blanket
exclusions even in the case of marginal procedures it is
not surprising that there has been little or no attempt
to extend it to services which make larger demands on
the NHS budget and which are more central to
people’s conception of health care. Much the same
conclusion follows if we look at the list of medicines
which general practitioners are not permitted to
prescribe:
these
range
from
various
cold
relief
remedies to toothpaste.
3 Again, the exclusions are con-
spicuous for their marginality. Any attempt to go
further in this direction is therefore likely to mean that
there would have to be a disproportionate investment
of energy—in terms of persuading professional and
public opinion—with a trivial yield in terms of the
effects on the NHS’s budgetary commitments. And it
might well divert attention from the real challenge of
managing scarcity in the NHS: which is not whether to
provide specific services but how much to provide and
how to decide who should be treated and how.
The dimensions of rationing
Explicit rationing through the exclusion of specific pro-
cedures or services from the healthcare menu has the
great appeal of giving visibility to collective decisions
about how the resources devoted to the NHS should be
used. But, as argued above, in practice the inevitable
price of visibility is triviality. Moreover, any such strategy
fails to address the various dimensions of rationing. If
rationing is defined as giving patients less demonstrably
effective health care than might be desirable in the
absence of resource constraints (and from which they
would benefit), then it is a pervasive characteristic of the
NHS and of other healthcare systems. There is
rationing by dilution: offering less intensive care or
spending less time with a patient than might be ideal.
There is rationing by termination: discharging patients
from hospital earlier than desirable. There is rationing
by delay: waiting lists are the obvious example.
The following two quotations illustrate the point.
The first is from an American commentator on the
Oregon experiment
5:
It takes no great talent to realise that appendectomy is worth
funding, at least for a clear cut diagnosis of appendicitis. The real
issue is not whether to perform the appendectomy; it is whether
to fund countless marginal interventions that are potentially
part of the procedure—marginal blood tests and repeat tests;
precautionary preventive antibiotic therapy before surgery; the
number of nurses in the operating room; and the backup
support on call or in the hospital. Even more decisions about
marginal elements will arise during the recovery phase; exactly
how many days of hospital stay are permitted, how often the
physician should make rounds, how many follow up tests there
should be, and so on. Many of these are predicted to offer more
benefits than harm, but with margins so small that one could
argue that resources should be used elsewhere.
The second comes from the Swedish commission
on priorities
1:
If resources are limited then in certain circumstances it may be
reasonable to opt for the second best treatment. In hip surgery, for
example, a steel prosthesis is less expensive than a titanium one
but less durable. It must be considered acceptable for a physician,
as is often the case, to choose a steel prosthesis for a patient aged
over 80 while giving a titanium one to a patient who is 70 years
old and might perhaps need renewed surgery after a few years. In
dealing with pronounced coronary strictures involving a risk of
stroke, one can choose between surgery and medication. Surgery
is a good deal more expensive, involves a short term risk but is in
the long term a more effective method of averting stroke. If
resources are limited, it may be justifiable to refrain from expand-
ing surgical activities and to stick to medication—which is simple,
inexpensive but less effective—instead.
Countless day to day decisions
This, then, is the reality of rationing: countless, day to
day decisions by clinicians and others taken in the light
of the resources available and the particular circum-
stances of the patient concerned. Rationing, in effect, is
a continuous attempt to reconcile competing claims on
SIMON STERN/THE INKSHED
Education and debate
508
BMJ VOLUME 314
15 FEBRUARY 1997

----- Page 12 (native) -----
limited resources, a balancing act between optimising
and satisfying treatment. It is about the exercise of
judgment, not about the drawing up of lists of what
should or should not included in the NHS’s menu.
Nor is the phenomenon of rationing limited to the
acute sector of care. At present there is much debate
about the extent to which the NHS should provide long
term care and how the demarcation line between social
and medical care should be defined. One central fact
tends to be overlooked: the NHS has always rationed—to
the point of scandal—the care provided in the long term
sector. An analysis of the reports of the Health Advisory
Service on NHS provision for the elderly mentally ill
showed that, of the hospitals inspected, 77% had poor
sanitary conditions, 66% dilapidated buildings, and 60%
overcrowded wards.
6 This is rationing of a very different
kind from that discussed previously: the poor quality
care flows directly from decisions about the allocation of
resources to different parts of the NHS and does not
involve clinical decisions. But it is rationing. Dilution
could hardly go further.
There are many problems about the kind of implicit
rationing that characterises the NHS. It may involve the
use of arbitrary and unacceptable criteria, such as the
age of the patient. It may mean that the allocation of
resources
reflects
as
much
the
idiosyncrasies
of
individual clinicians as the characteristics of patients.
Clinician heterogeneity is as much of a problem as
patient heterogeneity. From this, of course, flows the
equity case for defining the care that the NHS should
provide. However, it is far from self evident that defining
such a package or menu would resolve the equity issue.
Designing a straitjacket
A strict construction of the equity principle would
require not only that all health authorities should pro-
vide the same range of services but that individual
patients should have the same opportunity of getting
treatment for any given need. In other words, the argu-
ment would move from specifying the range of services
to be provided to specifying also the quantity of
services to be provided. And indeed there have been
some moves in this direction. In the 1980s the Depart-
ment of Health started to set health authorities targets
for carrying out certain procedures such as coronary
artery
bypass
grafts
and
hip
replacements.
For
example, the 1990 target was a rate of 300 coronary
artery bypass grafts and 1950 hip replacements per
million population.
7 Implicit in this strategy was the
objective that health authorities should, in effect,
deliver a particular quantity of specified packages of
health care to their populations. This strategy appears
to have been largely abandoned as the department’s
focus has switched to outcomes, but it shows that, in
principle at least, it would be possible to define both
the menu and the number of meals to be served.
Indeed the equity case for designing a basic
package of care would seem to require taking this fur-
ther step. For without it “inconsistency and arbitrari-
ness in the rationing of health care,” as New and Le
Grand put it, would surely persist. In vitro fertilisation
provides an illustration. Many health authorities have
decided against excluding this from their provision but
have, instead, adopted a strategy of limiting the
number of procedures to be made available. They
therefore ration by the selection of patients, with differ-
ent health authorities using different criteria (the age
of the prospective mother, the stability of the partner-
ship, etc) for selecting candidates. The service actually
provided could therefore be extremely sparse and
largely symbolic in many areas. And while in vitro ferti-
lisation may be a special case, differences in the way in
which health authorities interpret their responsibilities
are in no way exceptional. Throughout the whole
range of NHS provision variation in the level of
services provided is the norm.
Pursuing the logic
However, advocates of specifying the range of service
to be provided by the NHS tend to flinch from the logic
of their own arguments. Thus New and Le Grand (to
quote, again, the most sophisticated exponents of this
approach) conclude that while every health authority
would have to provide at least some level of service for
the specified range “the actual level of provision, highly
contingent on local circumstances, would be left to
local discretion.” So “inconsistency and arbitrariness”
come in by the back door of local discretion.
There is, of course, a case for local discretion. The
scope for substitution in health care is great: a deficit in
one kind of service may be compensated for by
provision elsewhere. Health care is in a continuous
process of technological and organisational evolution
and to specify particular levels of service would put the
NHS in a straitjacket, inhibiting adaptation and innova-
tion. The concept of “need” is, itself, highly elusive, and
flexibility in its interpretation is essential. However much
we may chafe at the way in which local discretion is often
exercised, it still seems preferable to imposing a national
template on the design and delivery of health care.
But if this line of argument is accepted, there is lit-
tle left of the case for devising an NHS menu. If its pro-
ponents refuse to accept the full logic of their own
case—if they rightly recoil from the notion of imposing
a national template on the NHS—there would seem lit-
tle point in travelling half way down the road with
them. Rather than worrying about drawing up an NHS
menu, we should concentrate on what is going on in
the kitchen: we should accept the inevitability and
indeed desirability of leaving rationing decisions to cli-
nicians and concentrate on ways of making the profes-
sion collectively more accountable for the way in which
they carry out this onerous task.
1
Klein R, Day P, Redmayne S. Managing scarcity: priority setting and ration-
ing in the NHS. Buckingham: Open University Press, 1996.
2
Redmayne S, Klein R. Rationing in practice: the case of in vitro fertilisa-
tion. BMJ 1993;306:1521-4.
3
New B, Le Grand J. Rationing in the NHS: principles and pragmatism.
London: King’s Fund, 1996.
4
Redmayne S. Small steps, big goals: purchasing policies in the NHS. Birming-
ham: NAHAT, 1996.
5
Veatch RM. The Oregon experiment: needless and real worries. In:
Strosberg MA, Wiener JM, Baker R, Fein IA, eds. Rationing America’ s
medical care: The Oregon plan and beyond. Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution, 1992.
6
Day P, Klein R, Tipping G. Inspecting for quality: services for the elderly. Bath:
Centre for the Study of Social Policy, 1988.
7
Department of Health and Office of Population Censuses and Surveys.
Departmental Report. London: HMSO, 1992 (Cm 1913).
“Rather than worrying about drawing
up an NHS menu, we should
concentrate on what is going on in the
kitchen”
Education and debate
509
BMJ VOLUME 314
15 FEBRUARY 1997

----- Page 13 (native) -----
Primary care: opportunities and threats
Deregulating primary care
Angela Coulter, Nicholas Mays
The 1996 primary care white paper, Choice and
Opportunity, offers scope for a wide range of new
organisations to enter the market for NHS primary
care. If the new law is implemented it will sweep away
many of the existing legislative, budgetary, and
procedural barriers to innovation, initially through a
range of pilot schemes. Full implementation could
end general practitioners’ monopoly of general
medical services and permit experimental alternatives
to the single national contract for general
practitioners. Such pilots have the potential for
creating better primary care, especially in inner cities,
through new employment options, such as salaried
posts. There are, however, considerable risks. For
example, the legislation will allow piloting of new
forms of vertically integrated provider organisations,
thereby eroding the purchaser-provider separation
established by the NHS changes of 1991. The
proposals in the white paper also require local health
authorities to develop primary care and regulate the
pilot schemes at a time when they have lost many
staff. To ensure equity of innovation pilots must
emerge where primary care most needs improving
and pilots must be evaluated thoroughly before they
are applied widely.
Big bang or damp squib?
The launch of the primary care white paper, Choice and
Opportunity,
1 last October was accompanied by a rash
of newspaper headlines heralding a revolution in
primary care provision. Reports said that pharmacy
chains
such
as
Boots
and
UniChem,
American
managed care organisations, and even the supermar-
ket chains Tesco, Asda, and Safeway were considering
offering
primary
care
services.
2-5
Since
October,
concern has been growing about the consequences of
the imminent break up of the general practitioners’
professional monopoly and about the risks of allowing
hospitals or commercial organisations to provide
primary care.
6-8 Despite this, ministers have attempted
to downplay the headlines and have concentrated on
the
likelihood
of
developments
among
existing
primary care providers in the NHS.
If the primary care bill (foreshadowed by Choice and
Opportunity) receives parliamentary approval it will
sweep away many of the existing legislative, budgetary,
and procedural barriers to innovation. It will pave the
way for experimenting with a variety of new organisa-
tional forms for the delivery of primary care, including
general medical, dental, and community pharmaceuti-
cal services. For the first time, health authorities will be
able to try suspending the national contract for general
practitioners
and
directly
commissioning
general
medical and other primary care services in ways that
respond to local needs (box 1).
The government emphasises that some things will
not change. The NHS will remain free at the point of
use and will still be funded out of taxation. The right to
enrol with an NHS family doctor will continue (see box
2). Opinions differ on whether this enabling legislation
will change the pattern of service provision radically.
Some
commentators
say
that
it
could
lead
to
something like the “big bang” deregulation of 1986
which dramatically transformed financial institutions
in the City of London.
9 Others predict only minimal
change because there will be no compulsion and little
incentive for primary care professionals to join or form
new types of organisation.
7 Stephen Dorrell, the secre-
tary of state for health, hopes that around 7% of prac-
tices in the United Kingdom will be piloting new forms
of organisation from April 1998.
10 This prediction,
based on the experience of general practitioner
fundholding, could be blown off course by an early
general election. The Labour party, however, is not
opposing the majority of the proposals, although it is
unhappy about allowing commercial organisations to
run primary care services.
11
There are signs that a number of groups are keen
to seize the opportunity to innovate. Some experi-
ments are already up and running. In this sense the
white paper is simply the recognition of established
trends towards organisational and budgetary mergers.
For
example, the
Lyme
Community
Care
Unit,
founded in April 1992, is a limited company set up and
run by general practitioners in Lyme Regis, Dorset.
The unit employs a wide range of community staff,
including nurses, midwives, therapists, counsellors, care
managers, social workers, and general practitioners,
who provide integrated health and social care services,
run a hospital at home scheme, and purchase second-
ary care.
12 The Andover Health Consortium links six
fundholding practices and a community trust to
provide and purchase health services for a population
of around 100 000.
13 14 In Newcastle, a primary care
trust already employs salaried general practitioners.
15
Other plans mooted before the white paper include
plans by some community health trusts to employ
ADRIAN TAYLOR/THE INKSHED
Education and debate
This is the
second of a
series of six
articles
discussing the
imminent
reforms in
primary care
King’s Fund,
London W1M 0AN
Angela Coulter,
director, King’s Fund
Development Centre
Nicholas Mays,
director of health
services research,
King’s Fund Policy
Institute
Correspondence to:
Dr Coulter.
BMJ 1997;314:510–3
510
BMJ VOLUME 314
15 FEBRUARY 1997

----- Page 14 (native) -----
salaried general practitioners in inner city areas where
recruitment has been difficult
16; the purchase of a com-
munity hospital by a group of practices in south
London
17; joint ownership of practice premises by a
cooperative of general practitioners, nurses, dentists
and pharmacists
18; management of an out of hours
cooperative in Dorset by the local ambulance trust
19;
establishment of an American-style health mainte-
nance organisation by a group of fundholders in
Leicestershire
20; and the proposed establishment by
Premier Health Care NHS Trust of a subsidiary agency
to
supply
salaried
general
practitioners,
practice
nurses, district nurses, and health visitors to practices
all over Britain.
21
Need for change
In their foreword to the white paper, the secretaries of
state said that they wanted local people to develop
services which will fit local needs and circumstances
more closely: “We have no template in mind.”
1 What
they did have in mind was the need to deal with
primary care’s problems identified during the Depart-
ment of Health’s “listening exercise” (box 3).
22 This
investigation emphasised that primary health care
should be continuous, comprehensive, and properly
coordinated to meet patients’ needs; should be the
gatekeeper to secondary care; and should respond to
the health needs of communities as well as individuals.
The catalogue of criticisms in box 3 does not present a
balanced picture of the current state of primary care
which, in many ways, is the great success story of the
NHS. The criticism will be important, however, for
those planning pilot projects, and it will remind them
of the reasons why experimentation was considered
necessary.
Risks of change
The risks involved in replacing small scale partnerships
in general practice with larger, more bureaucratic
organisations are immense, although many practices
have now grown so large that informal teamworking is
difficult.
Community
nurses
will
probably
resist
increased medical domination and direct employment
by
general
practitioners, preferring
to
work
for
community trusts. Professional rivalries could intensify
when the divisions inherent in the current system
become more permeable—for example, if new primary
care organisations encourage internal competition
between doctors and nurses to undertake overlapping
roles.
It is not clear whether any of the new services
would be funded to augment existing services rather
than replace them. For example, would patients be able
to remain registered with their conventional general
practitioner and also use the convenience of the NHS
general practitioner or nurse service at the supermar-
ket? If so, could the NHS afford the costs and ensure
continuity and coordination of care? Administrative
costs in primary care will probably increase, particu-
larly if a range of for-profit providers enters the market.
Profit-making managed care organisations in the
United States are now reporting management and
marketing costs in excess of 20% of turnover.
23
On the other hand, change may bring considerable
benefits. For example, wider choice in financing
general practice might enable health authorities in
inner cities to improve the availability and quality of
services in places that have not benefited from earlier
initiatives such as fundholding.
Monitoring and regulation
The white paper’s rhetoric calls for diversity and local
flexibility,
stating
that
new
arrangements
should
emerge from the field.
1 In comparison with the
disastrous imposition of the revised contract for
general practitioners in 1990, the new consultative
approach seems more likely to gain acceptance among
health professionals. The changes must be tightly
regulated, not least to safeguard the values espoused in
the other recent primary care white paper
24—quality,
fairness, accessibility, responsiveness, and efficiency—
which imply the development of national standards in
primary care.
Potential conflicts of interest could arise from
group practices owning or controlling the community
hospitals or specialist facilities to which they refer.
Pharmaceutical companies offering disease manage-
Box 1—New arrangements for
organising delivery of primary care
which could be piloted
• Whole practice contracts for primary care. Through
these contracts a health authority could negotiate
locally with individual general or dental practices for
them to provide a specified range of general medical
services and selected specialist services. Practices might
employ community nurses, therapists, and hospital spe-
cialists on a sessional basis
• Joint working by general practices and community
trusts (on contract to local health authorities) to provide
a full range of primary care services, possibly including
community hospital or hospital at home schemes.
Community trusts and general practices might merge
to form single, jointly managed organisations
• Community trusts contracted by health authorities to
provide all primary care services. Trusts might employ
salaried general practitioners or dentists, or subcontract
to selected general practices
• Acute trusts contracted by health authorities to
provide primary and secondary services—either the full
range or specified services such as mental health
• Private or voluntary sector organisations contracted
with the health authority to provide primary care serv-
ices. These might include major retailers, drug compa-
nies, insurance companies, provident societies such as
BUPA, or national charities
• Private or voluntary sector subcontractors providing
disease management services to other primary or
secondary care providers—for example, for asthma care
• Multiprofessional, not for profit, primary care organi-
sations bidding for contracts to provide primary care.
These might be set up and managed by health
professionals, such as nurses or therapists, or general
managers, within or outside the NHS
• Consortiums of general practices already in total
purchasing pilot projects or locality commissioning
groups which could take on more fully integrated
budgets for providing or purchasing the complete
range of primary and secondary care services. Such
budgets could cover general medical services and
hospital and community health services budgets, and
include resources for fundholding
Education and debate
511
BMJ VOLUME 314
15 FEBRUARY 1997

----- Page 15 (native) -----
ment services are unlikely to promote or use the prod-
ucts of rival firms. In addition, the new forms of
vertically
integrated
organisation
(providing
both
primary and secondary care) may, in the longer term,
inhibit attempts to test out new and different sources
and forms of provision. Acute trusts running primary
care facilities could use their controlling interests to
generate demand for their specialist services and may
be tempted to squeeze resources out of primary care
when the going gets tough in hospitals. It is hard to see
how the claimed advantages of the purchaser-provider
split can be maintained when the two functions are
vested in the same primary care organisation. The gov-
ernment has refused to allow health authorities to
employ general practitioners directly, presumably to
safeguard purchaser-provider separation, but has not
applied the same logic elsewhere.
Finally, what will happen to patient choice if
merged organisations control all primary and commu-
nity facilities in an area? For example, the Wakefield
total purchasing pilot now covers the entire district;
and proposals are currently being mooted, if the NHS
(Primary Care) Bill becomes law, for the establishment
of very large franchises of primary and secondary care
organisations that would use private capital investment
and control services throughout an entire urban area.
It looks as if much of the burden of accrediting,
monitoring, and regulating the new arrangements will
fall on local health authorities. They may not be able to
do this adequately, especially if a large number of pilots
are
allowed
to
proceed.
Health
authorities
are
currently preoccupied with the annual contracting
round and the pressure to reduce waiting times for
hospital services. Most of the top jobs in the new
merged and slimmed down authorities went to people
with experience of secondary rather than primary care.
Even those people who liaise with general practitioner
fundholders or locality commissioning groups have
been concerned mainly with developing the purchas-
ing role of primary care rather than its providing role.
Evaluation
The government has provided no details on how the
secretary of state will approve proposed pilot schemes,
or on how the pilot projects will be evaluated and by
whom. It will be important to guard against inequity of
innovation, with new initiatives happening only in bet-
ter off areas where primary care is stronger (a feature
of the early days of general practitioner fundholding).
One guiding principle could be that the pilots should
assist in levelling up the quality of primary care in dis-
advantaged areas. Pilots should be selected to allow the
maximum opportunity to learn about the costs, risks,
and
benefits
of
alternative
arrangements.
When
general practitioner fundholding was launched the
government did nothing to encourage independent
evaluation of its effects. As a result, many of the
published studies were descriptive accounts of the
process of becoming a fundholder which failed to ask
searching questions about the value of the scheme or
about the risks as well as the benefits.
25 With the exten-
sion of fundholding to total purchasing pilots, the gov-
ernment made a commitment to evaluation.
26 This was
not sufficient, however to curb the rapid expansion of
the
number
of
pilot
sites, which
threatened
to
overwhelm scientific inquiry.
27
Evaluation should assess the extent to which speci-
fied objectives have been achieved. Some type of quasi-
experimental design with reference populations will be
needed
to
assess
the
impact
of
the
change
or
innovation, and explicit comparisons should be made
between different ways of achieving the same ends. At
the same time, the overall effects of deregulating and
diversifying primary care should be monitored nation-
ally. Recent years have seen major upheavals in the
organisation of the NHS; isolating the effects of specific
innovations is especially difficult in such turbulent
times. Innovators and evaluators will have to agree cri-
teria against which success or failure will be judged.
They will also have to agree on a timescale for evalua-
tion. Too short a timescale will run the risk of missing
the true effects, too long will increase the likelihood
that the innovation will diffuse before the results are
available.
Box 2—Key principles to guide
future legislation on primary care
provision in the NHS
1
• Participation in pilots will be voluntary and existing
contractual arrangements will continue if practitioners
wish
• Patients will still have the right to register with a gen-
eral practitioner of their choice to ensure continuity of
care and personal service
• New arrangements for providing primary care will be
piloted and evaluated before being implemented more
widely
• The new arrangements will combine local flexibility
with national safeguards for patients and practitioners
• Pilots will not be imposed from the centre but will
emerge from experience in the field
• Public accountability for the use of funds and
provision of services should be transparent and clearly
maintained
• Reverting to previous arrangements for provision of
primary care will be possible if pilots fail
Box 3—Common problems in NHS
primary care identified through the
“listening exercise”
22
• Variations in quality of care
• Failures of coordination between different agencies
and professional groups
• Weak teamworking
• Lack of responsiveness of services to local needs
• Gaps in the provision of information for patients
• Barriers to developing the roles of nurses and other
non-medical primary care professionals
• Inequitable distribution of primary care resources
• Poor quality premises and infrastructure in some
areas, particularly inner cities
• Low morale and recruitment difficulties, particularly
in inner cities
• Inflexibility in service provision due to rigid national
practitioner contracts
• Limited opportunities for research and career devel-
opment
• Lack of incentives to shift resources and services out
of hospitals
Education and debate
512
BMJ VOLUME 314
15 FEBRUARY 1997

----- Page 16 (native) -----
Conclusion
Supporting improvements in the new primary care
agencies will require a “hands on” developmental
approach, very different in nature from the arm’s
length approach encouraged by negotiating annually
with secondary care providers. This will be especially
necessary in inner cities, where the pressures of dealing
with multiple health and social problems leave primary
care professionals little time for dreaming up creative
new approaches to organising their tasks. The latest
white papers should serve to refocus attention on
improving primary care services—not before time—but
the success of the strategy will depend heavily on
strong, imaginative, and responsive leadership by local
health authorities, and this will be costly.
We thank Lucy Johnson, research librarian at the King’s
Fund, for providing summaries of reactions to Choice and
Opportunity from the professional press and David Wilkin, Alan
Maynard, and Jennifer Dixon for helpful comments on the draft
paper.
1
Secretaries of State for Health, Scotland, and Wales. Choice and
opportunity. Primary care: the future. London: Stationery Office 1996. (Cm
3390.)
2
Elliot A, Winchester K. How private companies reacted. Pulse 1996 Octo-
ber 26:7.
3
Hollinger P, Timmins N. UniChem in plan to run doctor services for
NHS. Financial Times 1996 December 9:1.
4
Stirling A. Private firms scent GP bonanza. Pulse 1996 December 14:1.
5
Gould M. Why let reality spoil the cottage hospital dream? Pulse 1996
October 26:8.
6
Gosden T, Maynard A. He who pays the piper. Health Service Journal 1996
October 31:18.
7
Elliot A, Winchester K. Fundholding could be undermined. Pulse 1996
October 26:7.
8
Linden M, Mardell L. Opportunity or new danger? Pulse 1996 October
26:15.
9
Gould M. £100m big bang. Pulse 1996 October 26:1.
10 Elliot A. Dorrell lights the GP fuse. Pulse 1996 November 9:1.
11 Allan G, Webster V. Primary care: white paper and parliamentary debate.
Healthcare Parliamentary Monitor 1996 November 4.
12 Robinson B. Primary managed care: the Lyme alternative. In: Meads G,
ed. Future options for general practice. Oxford: Radcliffe Medical Press,
1996:201-10.
13 Edmonds R, Sloane R. The primary care agency. In Meads G, ed. Future
options for general practice. Oxford: Radcliffe Medical Press, 1996:109-21.
14 Butler P. Trust and GPs may merge to form unique care agency. Health
Service Journal 1996 October 17:5.
15 Crail M. Pilot light. Health Service Journal 1996 October 24:10-1.
16 Trusts to pilot salaried contracts [editorial]. Pulse 1996 November 2:6.
17 GPs want to buy cottage hospital [editorial]. Pulse 1996 November 9:2.
18 O’Dowd A. Nurses could be set to join GPs’ co-op. Pulse 1996 November
9:15.
19 Ambulance trust to manage GP co-op [editorial]. Pulse 1996 November
9:15.
20 Elliot A. GPs are set to pilot US-style managed care deals. Pulse 1996
November 30:20.
21 Salaried GPs to be supplied by trust? [editorial]. Pulse 1996 November
9:4.
22 NHS Executive. Primary care: the future. Leeds: NHSE, 1996.
23 Reinhardt UE. Comment on the Jackson Hole initiative for a twenty-first
century American health care system. Health Econ 1993;2:7-14.
24 Secretaries of State for Health, Scotland, and Wales. Primary care: deliver-
ing the future. London: Stationery Office, 1996. (Cm 3512.)
25 Coulter A. Evaluating general practice fundholding in the UK. Eur J Pub-
lic Health 1995;5:233-9.
26 Department of Health. Developing NHS purchasing and GP fundholding.
Leeds: NHSE, 1994. (EL(94)79.)
27 Mays N, Goodwin N, Bevan G, Wyke S, on behalf of the Total Purchasing
National Evaluation Team. Total purchasing: a profile of national pilot
projects. London: King’s Fund Publishing, 1996.
28 Salmon JW. The corporatization of medicine: introduction. Int J Health
Services 1987;17:1-6.
Pushing teeth
Fifty years ago when I was a medical student, I had a card
with a long list of procedures to perform under
supervision and get signed up by clinical tutors: reducing
and plastering a Colles’ fracture, performing a lumbar
puncture, passing a catheter, and so on. At the end of the
list was “extract two teeth.” Why two? I never discovered
the answer. But, like some of my classmates, I extracted a
great many more. The dentist who supervised us had a
sensationally beautiful assistant, and we went back again
and again to gaze at her longingly and attempt to invite
her to our parties (to no avail; she disdained medical
students suffering from arrested adolescence). But thanks
to her, I soon excelled at extracting teeth. The dentist knew
well why I was there, and ensured that my time was not
entirely wasted.
The secret of dental extractions is not to pull the
tooth, but to push it out: push the wedge shaped points of
the dental forceps well down alongside the roots of the
tooth so the wedge loosens the roots; extraction then is
usually easy.
This skill came in handy a few years later. I was
hitching a ride across the world as ship’s doctor on a Blue
Star freighter. Shortly after we had rounded the Cape of
Good Hope en route from London to Adelaide, the chief
engineer, a curmudgeonly tyrant, bit savagely into a bread
roll and broke the cusp off a bicuspid. He was in agony. I
had to deal expeditiously and well with this acute dental
emergency, or my life in this small, closed, and highly
critical community would not have been worth living. The
surgery on the ship was well equipped; I could have done
a craniotomy or a destructive operation on a fetus. And of
course there was a full set of dental forceps.
I premedicated the chief with a tumbler of brandy. The
hard part was injecting local anaesthetic; even
semistupefied, the chief did not like this part at all. The
heavy seas of the Roaring Forties were no help, nor was
my choice of a dental chair without adequate support for
his head and neck.
The rest was easy. I carefully positioned the dental
forcep blades beside the broken tooth, and pushed down
as hard as I possibly could. The tooth popped up and out
like a pea out of a pod. It was so simple I felt like clearing
the rest of that side of his mouth while it was numb, but
self restraint prevailed. For the rest of the voyage perhaps
it was as well that my reputation for competence was not
tested further. I have never again been called on to extract
teeth. Pity, really. I think that I could have become a master
of the art, thanks to those hours of unfulfilled dreams and
useful experience in the dental clinic behind our teaching
hospital.
John Last is emeritus professor of epidemiology at the University
of Ottawa
We welcome filler articles of up to 600 words on topics
such as A memorable patient, A paper that changed my practice,
My most unfortunate mistake,or any other piece conveying
instruction, pathos, or humour. If possible the article
should be supplied on a disk.
Education and debate
513
BMJ VOLUME 314
15 FEBRUARY 1997