

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Consensus statement on concussion in sport:
the 4th International Conference on Concussion
in Sport held in Zurich, November 2012
Paul McCrory,1 Willem H Meeuwisse,2,3 Mark Aubry,4,5,6 Bob Cantu,7,8
Jiří Dvořák,9,10,11 Ruben J Echemendia,12,13 Lars Engebretsen,14,15,16
Karen Johnston,17,18 Jeffrey S Kutcher,19 Martin Raftery,20 Allen Sills,21
Brian W Benson,22,23,24 Gavin A Davis,25 Richard G Ellenbogen,26,27
Kevin Guskiewicz,28 Stanley A Herring,29,30 Grant L Iverson,31 Barry D Jordan,32,33,34
James Kissick,6,35,36,37 Michael McCrea,38 Andrew S McIntosh,39,40,41
David Maddocks,42 Michael Makdissi,43,44 Laura Purcell,45,46 Margot Putukian,47,48
Kathryn Schneider,49 Charles H Tator,50,51,52,53 Michael Turner54
▸Additional material is
published online only. To view
these ﬁles please visit the
journal online (http://dx.doi.
org/10.1136/bjsports-2013-
092313).
For numbered afﬁliations see
end of article.
Correspondence to:
Dr Paul McCrory, The Florey
Institute of Neuroscience and
Mental Health, Heidelberg,
VIC 3084, Australia;
paulmccr@bigpond.net.au
Received 8 February 2013
Accepted 8 February 2013
To cite: McCrory P,
Meeuwisse WH, Aubry M,
et al. Br J Sports Med
2013;47:250–258.
PREAMBLE
This paper is a revision and update of the recommen-
dations developed following the 1st (Vienna 2001),
2nd
(Prague
2004)
and
3rd
(Zurich
2008)
International Consensus Conferences on Concussion
in Sport and is based on the deliberations at the 4th
International Conference on Concussion in Sport
held in Zurich, November 2012.1–3
The new 2012 Zurich Consensus statement is
designed to build on the principles outlined in the
previous documents and to develop further concep-
tual understanding of this problem using a formal
consensus-based approach. A detailed description
of the consensus process is outlined at the end of
this document under the Background section. This
document is developed primarily for use by physi-
cians and healthcare professionals who are involved
in the care of injured athletes, whether at the recre-
ational, elite or professional level.
While agreement exists pertaining to principal
messages
conveyed
within
this
document,
the
authors acknowledge that the science of concussion
is evolving, and therefore management and return
to play (RTP) decisions remain in the realm of
clinical
judgement
on
an
individualised
basis.
Readers are encouraged to copy and distribute freely
the Zurich Consensus document, the Concussion
Recognition Tool (CRT), the Sports Concussion
Assessment Tool V.3 (SCAT3) and/or the Child
SCAT3 card and none are subject to any restrictions,
provided they are not altered in any way or con-
verted to a digital format. The authors request that
the document and/or the accompanying tools be dis-
tributed in their full and complete format.
This consensus paper is broken into a number of
sections
1. A summary of concussion and its management,
with updates from the previous meetings;
2. Background information about the consensus
meeting process;
3. A summary of the speciﬁc consensus ques-
tions discussed at this meeting;
4. The Consensus paper should be read in conjunc-
tion with the SCAT3 assessment tool, the Child
SCAT3 and the CRT (designed for lay use).
SECTION 1: SPORT CONCUSSION AND
ITS MANAGEMENT
The Zurich 2012 document examines the sport
concussion and management issues raised in the
previous Vienna 2001, Prague 2004 and Zurich
2008 documents and applies the consensus ques-
tions from section 3 to these areas.1–3
Deﬁnition of concussion
A panel discussion regarding the deﬁnition of con-
cussion and its separation from mild traumatic
brain injury (mTBI) was held. There was acknowl-
edgement by the Concussion in Sport Group
(CISG) that although the terms mTBI and concus-
sion are often used interchangeably in the sporting
context and particularly in the US literature, others
use the term to refer to different injury constructs.
Concussion is the historical term representing low-
velocity injuries that cause brain ‘shaking’ resulting
in clinical symptoms and that are not necessarily
related to a pathological injury. Concussion is a
subset of TBI and will be the term used in this
document. It was also noted that the term commo-
tio cerebri is often used in European and other
countries. Minor revisions were made to the deﬁn-
ition of concussion, which is deﬁned as follows:
Concussion is a brain injury and is deﬁned as a
complex pathophysiological process affecting the
brain, induced by biomechanical forces. Several
common features that incorporate clinical, patho-
logic and biomechanical injury constructs that may
be utilised in deﬁning the nature of a concussive
head injury include:
1. Concussion may be caused either by a direct
blow to the head, face, neck or elsewhere on
the body with an ‘‘impulsive’ force transmit-
ted to the head.
2. Concussion typically results in the rapid onset
of short-lived impairment of neurological func-
tion that resolves spontaneously. However, in
some cases, symptoms and signs may evolve
over a number of minutes to hours.
3. Concussion may result in neuropathological
changes, but the acute clinical symptoms
Editor’s choice
Scan to access more
free content
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:250–258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313
1 of 12
Consensus statement
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
11 March 2013. 
10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 2 (native) -----
largely reﬂect a functional disturbance rather than a struc-
tural injury and, as such, no abnormality is seen on stand-
ard structural neuroimaging studies.
4. Concussion results in a graded set of clinical symptoms
that may or may not involve loss of consciousness.
Resolution of the clinical and cognitive symptoms typic-
ally follows a sequential course. However, it is important
to note that in some cases symptoms may be prolonged.
Recovery of concussion
The majority (80–90%) of concussions resolve in a short (7–
10 day) period, although the recovery time frame may be longer
in children and adolescents.2
Symptoms and signs of acute concussion
The diagnosis of acute concussion usually involves the assess-
ment of a range of domains including clinical symptoms, phys-
ical signs, cognitive impairment, neurobehavioural features and
sleep disturbance. Furthermore, a detailed concussion history is
an important part of the evaluation both in the injured athlete
and when conducting a preparticipation examination. The
detailed clinical assessment of concussion is outlined in the
SCAT3 and Child SCAT3 forms, which are given in the appen-
dix to this document.
The suspected diagnosis of concussion can include one or
more of the following clinical domains:
1. Symptoms—somatic (eg, headache), cognitive (eg, feeling
like in a fog) and/or emotional symptoms (eg, lability);
2. Physical signs (eg, loss of consciousness (LOC), amnesia);
3. Behavioural changes (eg, irritability);
4. Cognitive impairment (eg, slowed reaction times);
5. Sleep disturbance (eg, insomnia).
If any one or more of these components are present, a con-
cussion should be suspected and the appropriate management
strategy instituted.
On-ﬁeld or sideline evaluation of acute concussion
When a player shows ANY features of a concussion:
A. The player should be evaluated by a physician or other
licensed healthcare provider onsite using standard emer-
gency management principles and particular attention
should be given to excluding a cervical spine injury.
B. The appropriate disposition of the player must be deter-
mined by the treating healthcare provider in a timely
manner. If no healthcare provider is available, the player
should be safely removed from practice or play and
urgent referral to a physician arranged.
C. Once the ﬁrst aid issues are addressed, an assessment of
the concussive injury should be made using the SCAT3 or
other sideline assessment tools.
D. The player should not be left alone following the injury
and serial monitoring for deterioration is essential over
the initial few hours following injury.
E. A player with diagnosed concussion should not be
allowed to RTP on the day of injury.
Sufﬁcient time for assessment and adequate facilities should
be provided for the appropriate medical assessment both on and
off the ﬁeld for all injured athletes. In some sports, this may
require rule change to allow an appropriate off-ﬁeld medical
assessment to occur without affecting the ﬂow of the game or
unduly penalising the injured player’s team. The ﬁnal determin-
ation regarding concussion diagnosis and/or ﬁtness to play is a
medical decision based on clinical judgement.
Sideline evaluation of cognitive function is an essential com-
ponent in the assessment of this injury. Brief neuropsychological
test batteries that assess attention and memory function have
been shown to be practical and effective. Such tests include the
SCAT3, which incorporates the Maddocks’ questions4 5 and the
Standardized Assessment of Concussion (SAC).6–8 It is worth
noting that standard orientation questions (eg, time, place and
person) have been shown to be unreliable in the sporting situ-
ation when compared with memory assessment.5 9 It is recog-
nised, however, that abbreviated testing paradigms are designed
for rapid concussion screening on the sidelines and are not
meant to replace comprehensive neuropsychological testing
which should ideally be performed by trained neuropsycholo-
gists who are sensitive to subtle deﬁcits that may exist beyond
the acute episode; nor should they be used as a stand-alone tool
for the ongoing management of sports concussions.
It should also be recognised that the appearance of symptoms
or cognitive deﬁcit might be delayed several hours following a
concussive episode and that concussion should be seen as an
evolving injury in the acute stage.
Evaluation in the emergency room or ofﬁce by medical
personnel
An athlete with concussion may be evaluated in the emergency
room or doctor’s ofﬁce as a point of ﬁrst contact following
injury or may have been referred from another care provider. In
addition to the points outlined above, the key features of this
examination should encompass:
A. A medical assessment including a comprehensive history
and detailed neurological examination including a thor-
ough assessment of mental status, cognitive functioning,
gait and balance.
B. A determination of the clinical status of the patient,
including whether there has been improvement or deteri-
oration since the time of injury. This may involve seeking
additional information from parents, coaches, teammates
and eyewitnesses to the injury.
C. A determination of the need for emergent neuroimaging
in order to exclude a more severe brain injury involving a
structural abnormality.
In large part, these points above are included in the SCAT3
assessment.
Concussion investigations
A range of additional investigations may be utilised to assist in the
diagnosis and/or exclusion of injury. Conventional structural neu-
roimaging is typically normal in concussive injury. Given that
caveat, the following suggestions are made: Brain CT (or where
available an MR brain scan) contributes little to concussion evalu-
ation but should be employed whenever suspicion of an intracereb-
ral or structural lesion (eg, skull fracture) exists. Examples of such
situations may include prolonged disturbance of the conscious
state, focal neurological deﬁcit or worsening symptoms.
Other imaging modalities such as fMRI demonstrate activa-
tion patterns that correlate with symptom severity and recovery
in concussion.10–14 Although not part of routine assessment at
the present time, they nevertheless provide additional insight to
pathophysiological mechanisms. Alternative imaging technolo-
gies
(eg,
positron
emission
tomography,
diffusion
tensor
imaging, magnetic resonance spectroscopy, functional connectiv-
ity), while demonstrating some compelling ﬁndings, are still at
early stages of development and cannot be recommended other
than in a research setting.
2 of 12
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:250–258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313
Consensus statement
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
11 March 2013. 
10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Published studies, using both sophisticated force plate tech-
nology, as well as those using less sophisticated clinical balance
tests (eg, Balance Error Scoring System (BESS)), have identiﬁed
acute postural stability deﬁcits lasting approximately 72 h fol-
lowing sports-related concussion. It appears that postural stabil-
ity testing provides a useful tool for objectively assessing the
motor domain of neurological functioning, and should be
considered as a reliable and valid addition to the assessment of
athletes suffering from concussion, particularly where the symp-
toms or signs indicate a balance component.15–21
The signiﬁcance of Apolipoprotein (Apo) E4, ApoE promoter
gene, Tau polymerase and other genetic markers in the manage-
ment of sports concussion risk or injury outcome is unclear at
this time.22 23 Evidence from human and animal studies in more
severe traumatic brain injury demonstrates induction of a variety
of genetic and cytokine factors such as: insulin-like growth
factor 1 (IGF-1), IGF binding protein 2, Fibroblast growth
factor, Cu-Zn superoxide dismutase, superoxide dismutase 1
(SOD-1), nerve growth factor, glial ﬁbrillar acidic protein
(GFAP) and S-100. How such factors are affected in sporting
concussion is not known at this stage.24–31 In addition, bio-
chemical serum and cerebral spinal ﬂuid biomarkers of brain
injury (including S-100, neuron-speciﬁc enolase (NSE), myelin
basic protein (MBP), GFAP, tau, etc) have been proposed as a
means by which cellular damage may be detected if present.32–38
There is currently insufﬁcient evidence, however, to justify the
routine use of these biomarkers clinically.
Different
electrophysiological
recording
techniques
(eg,
evoked response potential (ERP), cortical magnetic stimulation
and electroencephalography) have demonstrated reproducible
abnormalities in the postconcussive state; however, not all
studies reliably differentiated concussed athletes from con-
trols.39–45 The clinical signiﬁcance of these changes remains to
be established.
Neuropsychological assessment
The application of neuropsychological (NP) testing in concus-
sion has been shown to be of clinical value and contributes sig-
niﬁcant information in concussion evaluation.46–51 Although
cognitive recovery largely overlaps with the time course of
symptom recovery in most cases, it has been demonstrated that
cognitive recovery may occasionally precede or more commonly
follow clinical symptom resolution, suggesting that the assess-
ment of cognitive function should be an important component
in the overall assessment of concussion and, in particular, any
RTP protocol.52 53 It must be emphasised, however, that NP
assessment should not be the sole basis of management deci-
sions. Rather, it should be seen as an aid to the clinical decision-
making process in conjunction with a range of assessments of
different clinical domains and investigational results.
It is recommended that all athletes should have a clinical
neurological assessment (including assessment of their cognitive
function) as part of their overall management. This will nor-
mally be performed by the treating physician often in conjunc-
tion with computerised neuropsychological screening tools.
Formal NP testing is not required for all athletes; however,
when this is considered necessary, it should ideally be performed
by a trained neuropsychologist. Although neuropsychologists are
in the best position to interpret NP tests by virtue of their back-
ground and training, the ultimate RTP decision should remain a
medical one in which a multidisciplinary approach, when pos-
sible, has been taken. In the absence of NP and other (eg,
formal balance assessment) testing, a more conservative RTP
approach may be appropriate.
NP testing may be used to assist RTP decisions and is typically
performed when an athlete is clinically asymptomatic; however,
NP assessment may add important information in the early
stages following injury.54 55 There may be particular situations
where testing is performed early to assist in determining aspects
of management, for example, return to school in a paediatric
athlete. This will normally be best determined in consultation
with a trained neuropsychologist.56 57
Baseline NP testing was considered by the panel and was not
felt to be required as a mandatory aspect of every assessment;
however, it may be helpful to add useful information to the
overall interpretation of these tests. It also provides an add-
itional educative opportunity for the physician to discuss the sig-
niﬁcance of this injury with the athlete. At present, there is
insufﬁcient evidence to recommend the widespread routine use
of baseline neuropsychological testing.
Concussion management
The cornerstone of concussion management is physical and
cognitive rest until the acute symptoms resolve and then a
graded programme of exertion prior to medical clearance and
RTP. The current published evidence evaluating the effect of
rest following a sports-related concussion is sparse. An initial
period of rest in the acute symptomatic period following injury
(24–48 h) may be of beneﬁt. Further research to evaluate the
long-term outcome of rest, and the optimal amount and type
of rest, is needed. In the absence of evidence-based recommen-
dations, a sensible approach involves the gradual return to
school and social activities (prior to contact sports) in a
manner that does not result in a signiﬁcant exacerbation of
symptoms.
Low-level exercise for those who are slow to recover may be
of beneﬁt, although the optimal timing following injury for ini-
tiation of this treatment is currently unknown.
As described above, the majority of injuries will recover spon-
taneously over several days. In these situations, it is expected
that an athlete will proceed progressively through a stepwise
RTP strategy.58
Graduated RTP protocol
RTP protocol following a concussion follows a stepwise process
as outlined in table 1.
With this stepwise progression, the athlete should continue to
proceed to the next level if asymptomatic at the current level.
Generally, each step should take 24 h so that an athlete would
take approximately 1 week to proceed through the full rehabili-
tation protocol once they are asymptomatic at rest and with pro-
vocative exercise. If any postconcussion symptoms occur while
in the stepwise programme, then the patient should drop back
to the previous asymptomatic level and try to progress again
after a further 24 h period of rest has passed.
Same day RTP
It was unanimously agreed that no RTP on the day of concussive
injury should occur. There are data demonstrating that at the
collegiate and high school levels, athletes allowed to RTP on the
same day may demonstrate NP deﬁcits postinjury that may not
be evident on the sidelines and are more likely to have delayed
onset of symptoms.59–65
‘Difﬁcult’ or persistently symptomatic concussion patient
Persistent
symptoms
(>10 days)
are
generally
reported
in
10–15% of concussions. In general, symptoms are not speciﬁc
to concussion and it is important to consider other pathologies.
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:250–258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313
3 of 12
Consensus statement
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
11 March 2013. 
10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 4 (native) -----
Cases of concussion in sport where clinical recovery falls
outside the expected window (ie, 10 days) should be managed
in a multidisciplinary manner by healthcare providers with
experience in sports-related concussion.
Psychological management and mental health issues
Psychological approaches may have potential application in this
injury,
particularly
with
the
modiﬁers
listed
below.66
67
Physicians are also encouraged to evaluate the concussed athlete
for affective symptoms such as depression and anxiety as these
symptoms are common in all forms of traumatic brain injury.58
Role of pharmacological therapy
Pharmacological therapy in sports concussion may be applied
in two distinct situations. The ﬁrst of these situations is the man-
agement of speciﬁc and/or prolonged symptoms (eg, sleep dis-
turbance, anxiety, etc). The second situation is where drug
therapy is used to modify the underlying pathophysiology of the
condition with the aim of shortening the duration of the con-
cussion symptoms.68 In broad terms, this approach to manage-
ment should be only considered by clinicians experienced in
concussion management.
An important consideration in RTP is that concussed athletes
should not only be symptom-free, but also they should not be
taking any pharmacological agents/medications that may mask
or modify the symptoms of concussion. Where antidepressant
therapy may be commenced during the management of a con-
cussion, the decision to RTP while still on such medication must
be considered carefully by the treating clinician.
Role of preparticipation concussion evaluation
Recognising the importance of a concussion history, and appre-
ciating the fact that many athletes will not recognise all the con-
cussions they
may have
suffered in
the
past,
a
detailed
concussion history is of value.69–72 Such a history may pre-
identify athletes who ﬁt into a high-risk category and provides
an opportunity for the healthcare provider to educate the
athlete in regard to the signiﬁcance of concussive injury. A struc-
tured concussion history should include speciﬁc questions as to
previous symptoms of a concussion and length of recovery; not
just the perceived number of past concussions. It is also worth
noting that dependence on the recall of concussive injuries by
teammates or coaches has been demonstrated to be unreliable.69
The clinical history should also include information about all
previous head, face or cervical spine injuries as these may also
have clinical relevance. It is worth emphasising that in the
setting of maxillofacial and cervical spine injuries, coexistent
concussive injuries may be missed unless speciﬁcally assessed.
Questions
pertaining
to
disproportionate
impact
versus
symptom severity matching may alert the clinician to a progres-
sively increasing vulnerability to injury. As part of the clinical
history, it is advised that details regarding protective equipment
employed at the time of injury be sought, both for recent and
remote injuries.
There is an additional and often unrecognised beneﬁt of the pre-
participation physical examination insofar as the evaluation allows
for an educative opportunity with the player concerned as well as
consideration of modiﬁcation of playing behaviour if required.
Modifying factors in concussion management
A range of ‘modifying’ factors may inﬂuence the investigation
and management of concussion and, in some cases, may predict
the potential for prolonged or persistent symptoms. However,
in some cases, the evidence for their efﬁcacy is limited. These
modiﬁers would be important to consider in a detailed concus-
sion history and are outlined in table 2.
Female gender
The role of female gender as a possible modiﬁer in the manage-
ment of concussion was discussed at length by the panel. There
was
no unanimous
agreement
that
the current published
research evidence is conclusive enough for this to be included as
a modifying factor, although it was accepted that gender may be
a risk factor for injury and/or inﬂuence injury severity.73–75
Signiﬁcance of LOC
In the overall management of moderate-to-severe traumatic
brain injury, duration of LOC is an acknowledged predictor of
Table 2
Concussion modifiers
Factors
Modifier
Symptoms
Number
Duration (>10 days)
Severity
Signs
Prolonged loss of consciousness (LOC) (>1 min),
Amnesia
Sequelae
Concussive convulsions
Temporal
Frequency—repeated concussions over time
Timing—injuries close together in time
‘Recency’—recent concussion or traumatic brain
injury (TBI)
Threshold
Repeated concussions occurring with progressively
less impact force or slower recovery after each
successive concussion
Age
Child and adolescent (<18 years old)
Comorbidities and
premorbidities
Migraine, depression or other mental health
disorders, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD), learning disabilities (LD), sleep disorders
Medication
Psychoactive drugs, anticoagulants
Behaviour
Dangerous style of play
Sport
High-risk activity, contact and collision sport, high
sporting level
Table 1
Graduated return to play protocol
Rehabilitation
stage
Functional exercise at each
stage of rehabilitation
Objective of each
stage
1. No activity
Symptom limited physical and
cognitive rest
Recovery
2. Light aerobic
exercise
Walking, swimming or
stationary cycling keeping
intensity <70% maximum
permitted heart rate
No resistance training
Increase HR
3. Sport-specific
exercise
Skating drills in ice hockey,
running drills in soccer. No
head impact activities
Add movement
4. Non-contact
training drills
Progression to more complex
training drills, eg, passing drills
in football and ice hockey
May start progressive
resistance training
Exercise, coordination
and cognitive load
5. Full-contact
practice
Following medical clearance
participate in normal training
activities
Restore confidence and
assess functional skills
by coaching staff
6. Return to play
Normal game play
4 of 12
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:250–258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313
Consensus statement
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
11 March 2013. 
10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 5 (native) -----
outcome.76 Although published ﬁndings in concussion describe
LOC associated with speciﬁc, early cognitive deﬁcits, it has not
been noted as a measure of injury severity.77 78 Consensus dis-
cussion determined that prolonged (>1 min duration) LOC
would be considered as a factor that may modify management.
Signiﬁcance of amnesia and other symptoms
There is renewed interest in the role of post-traumatic amnesia
and its role as a surrogate measure of injury severity.64 79 80
Published
evidence
suggests
that
the
nature,
burden
and
duration of the clinical postconcussive symptoms may be more
important
than
the
presence
or
duration
of
amnesia
alone.77 81 82 Further, it must be noted that retrograde amnesia
varies with the time of measurement postinjury and hence is
poorly reﬂective of injury severity.83 84
Motor and convulsive phenomena
A variety of immediate motor phenomena (eg, tonic posturing)
or
convulsive
movements
may
accompany
a
concussion.
Although dramatic, these clinical features are generally benign
and require no speciﬁc management beyond the standard treat-
ment of the underlying concussive injury.85 86
Depression
Mental health issues (such as depression) have been reported as
a consequence of all levels of traumatic brain injury including
sports-related concussion. Neuroimaging studies using fMRI
suggest that a depressed mood following concussion may reﬂect
an underlying pathophysiological abnormality consistent with a
limbic-frontal model of depression.34
87–97 Although such
mental health issues may be multifactorial in nature, it is recom-
mended that the treating physician consider these issues in the
management of concussed patients.
SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Child and adolescent athlete
The evaluation and management recommendations contained
herein can be applied to children and adolescents down to the
age of 13 years. Below that age, children report concussion
symptoms
different
from
adults
and
would
require
age-appropriate symptom checklists as a component of assess-
ment. An additional consideration in assessing the child or ado-
lescent athlete with a concussion is that the clinical evaluation
by the healthcare professional may need to include both patient
and parent input, and possibly teacher and school input when
appropriate.98–104 A child SCAT3 has been developed to assess
concussion (see appendix) for individuals aged 5–12 years.
The decision to use NP testing is broadly the same as the adult
assessment paradigm, although there are some differences. The
timing of testing may differ in order to assist planning in school
and home management. If cognitive testing is performed, then it
must be developmentally sensitive until late teen years due to the
ongoing cognitive maturation that occurs during this period,
which in turn limits the utility of comparison to either the
person’s own baseline performance or to population norms.20 In
this age group, it is more important to consider the use of trained
paediatric neuropsychologists to interpret assessment data, par-
ticularly in children with learning disorders and/or ADHD who
may need more sophisticated assessment strategies.56 57 98
It was agreed by the panel that no return to sport or activity
should occur before the child/adolescent athlete has managed to
return to school successfully. In addition, the concept of ‘cogni-
tive rest’ was highlighted with special reference to a child’s need
to limit exertion with activities of daily living that may exacerbate
symptoms. School attendance and activities may also need to be
modiﬁed to avoid provocation of symptoms. Children should not
be returned to sport until clinically completely symptom-free,
which may require a longer time frame than for adults.
Because of the different physiological response and longer
recovery after concussion and speciﬁc risks (eg, diffuse cerebral
swelling) related to head impact during childhood and adoles-
cence, a more conservative RTP approach is recommended. It is
appropriate to extend the amount of time of asymptomatic rest
and/or the length of the graded exertion in children and adoles-
cents. It is not appropriate for a child or adolescent athlete with
concussion to RTP on the same day as the injury, regardless of
the level of athletic performance. Concussion modiﬁers apply
even more to this population than adults and may mandate
more cautious RTP advice.
Elite versus non-elite athletes
All athletes, regardless of the level of participation, should be
managed using the same treatment and RTP paradigm. The
available resources and expertise in concussion evaluation are of
more importance in determining management than a separation
between elite and non-elite athlete management. Although
formal NP testing may be beyond the resources of many sports
or individuals, it is recommended that, in all organised high-risk
sports, consideration be given to having this cognitive evalu-
ation, regardless of the age or level of performance.
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy
Clinicians need to be mindful of the potential for long-term
problems in the management of all athletes. However, it was
agreed that chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) represents
a distinct tauopathy with an unknown incidence in athletic
populations. It was further agreed that a cause and effect rela-
tionship has not as yet been demonstrated between CTE and
concussions or exposure to contact sports.105–114 At present, the
interpretation of causation in the modern CTE case studies
should proceed cautiously. It was also recognised that it is
important to address the fears of parents/athletes from media
pressure related to the possibility of CTE.
INJURY PREVENTION
Protective equipment—mouthguards and helmets
There is no good clinical evidence that currently available pro-
tective equipment will prevent concussion, although mouth-
guards have a deﬁnite role in preventing dental and orofacial
injury. Biomechanical studies have shown a reduction in impact
forces to the brain with the use of head gear and helmets, but
these ﬁndings have not been translated to show a reduction in
concussion incidence. For skiing and snowboarding, there are a
number of studies to suggest that helmets provide protection
against head and facial injury and hence should be recom-
mended for participants in alpine sports.115–118 In speciﬁc
sports such as cycling, motor and equestrian sports, protective
helmets may prevent other forms of head injury (eg, skull frac-
ture) that are related to falling on hard surfaces and may be an
important injury prevention issue for those sports.118–130
Rule change
Consideration of rule changes to reduce the head injury inci-
dence or severity may be appropriate where a clear-cut mechan-
ism is implicated in a particular sport. An example of this is in
football (soccer) where research studies demonstrated that upper
limb to head contact in heading contests accounted for approxi-
mately 50% of concussions.131 As noted earlier, rule changes
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:250–258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313
5 of 12
Consensus statement
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
11 March 2013. 
10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 6 (native) -----
may also be needed in some sports to allow an effective off-ﬁeld
medical assessment to occur without compromising the athlete’s
welfare, affecting the ﬂow of the game or unduly penalising the
player’s team. It is important to note that rule enforcement may
be a critical aspect of modifying injury risk in these settings, and
referees play an important role in this regard.
Risk compensation
An important consideration in the use of protective equipment
is the concept of risk compensation.132 This is where the use of
protective equipment results in behavioural change such as the
adoption of more dangerous playing techniques, which can
result in a paradoxical increase in injury rates. The degree to
which this phenomenon occurs is discussed in more detail in
the review published in this supplement of the journal. This
may be a matter of particular concern in child and adolescent
athletes where the head injury rates are often higher than in
adult athletes.133–135
Aggression versus violence in sport
The competitive/aggressive nature of sport that makes it fun to
play and watch should not be discouraged. However, sporting
organisations should be encouraged to address violence that
may increase concussion risk.136
137 Fair play and respect
should be supported as key elements of sport.
Knowledge transfer
As the ability to treat or reduce the effects of concussive injury
after the event is minimal, education of athletes, colleagues and
the general public is a mainstay of progress in this ﬁeld.
Athletes, referees, administrators, parents, coaches and health-
care providers must be educated regarding the detection of con-
cussion,
its
clinical
features,
assessment
techniques
and
principles of safe RTP. Methods to improve education including
web-based resources, educational videos and international out-
reach programmes are important in delivering the message. In
addition, concussion working groups, plus the support and
endorsement of enlightened sport groups such as Fédération
Internationale de Football Association (FIFA), International
Olympic Commission (IOC), International Rugby Board (IRB)
and International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF), who initiated
this endeavour, have enormous value and must be pursued vig-
orously. Fair play and respect for opponents are ethical values
that should be encouraged in all sports and sporting associa-
tions. Similarly, coaches, parents and managers play an import-
ant part in ensuring that these values are implemented on the
ﬁeld of play.58 138–150
SECTION 2: STATEMENT ON BACKGROUND TO THE
CONSENSUS PROCESS
In November
2001, the
1st
International
Conference
on
Concussion in Sport was held in Vienna, Austria. This meeting
was organised by the IIHF in partnership with FIFA and the
Medical Commission of the IOC. As part of the resulting
mandate for the future, the need for leadership and future
updates was identiﬁed. The 2nd International Conference on
Concussion in Sport was organised by the same group with the
additional involvement of the IRB and was held in Prague, the
Czech Republic, in November 2004. The original aims of the
symposia were to provide recommendations for the improve-
ment of safety and health of athletes who suffer concussive
injuries in ice hockey, rugby, football (soccer) as well as other
sports. To this end, a range of experts were invited to both
meetings to address speciﬁc issues of epidemiology, basic and
clinical science, injury grading systems, cognitive assessment,
new research methods, protective equipment, management, pre-
vention and long-term outcome.1 2
The 3rd International Conference on Concussion in Sport
was held in Zurich, Switzerland on 29/30 October 2008 and
was designed as a formal consensus meeting following the
organisational guidelines set forth by the US National Institutes
of Health. (Details of the consensus methodology can be
obtained
at:
http://consensus.nih.gov/ABOUTCDP.htm.)
The
basic principles governing the conduct of a consensus develop-
ment conference are summarised below:
1. A broad-based non-government, non-advocacy panel was
assembled to give balanced, objective and knowledgeable
attention to the topic. Panel members excluded anyone with
scientiﬁc or commercial conﬂicts of interest and included
researchers in clinical medicine, sports medicine, neurosci-
ence, neuroimaging, athletic training and sports science.
2. These experts presented data in a public session, followed
by inquiry and discussion. The panel then met in an
executive session to prepare the consensus statement.
3. A number of speciﬁc questions were prepared and posed
in advance to deﬁne the scope and guide the direction of
the conference. The principal task of the panel was to elu-
cidate responses to these questions. These questions are
outlined below.
4. A systematic literature review was prepared and circulated
in advance for use by the panel in addressing the confer-
ence questions.
5. The consensus statement is intended to serve as the scien-
tiﬁc record of the conference.
6. The consensus statement will be widely disseminated to
achieve maximum impact on both current healthcare prac-
tice and future medical research.
The panel chairperson (WM) did not identify with any advo-
cacy position. The chairperson was responsible for directing the
consensus
session
and
guiding
the
panel’s
deliberations.
Panellists were drawn from clinical practice, academics and
research in the ﬁeld of sports-related concussion. They do not
represent organisations per se, but were selected for their
expertise, experience and understanding of this ﬁeld.
The 4th International Conference on Concussion in Sport
was held in Zurich, Switzerland on 1–3 November 2012 and
followed the same outline as for the third meeting. All speak-
ers, consensus panel members and abstract authors were
required to sign an ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential
Conﬂicts of Interest. Detailed information related to each
author’s afﬁliations and conﬂicts of interests will be made pub-
licly available on the CISG website and published with the
BJSM supplement.
Medical legal considerations
This consensus document reﬂects the current state of knowledge
and will need to be modiﬁed according to the development of
new knowledge. It provides an overview of issues that may be of
importance to healthcare providers involved in the management
of sports-related concussion. It is not intended as a standard of
care, and should not be interpreted as such. This document is
only a guide, and is of a general nature, consistent with the rea-
sonable practice of a healthcare professional. Individual treat-
ment will depend on the facts and circumstances speciﬁc to each
individual case.
It is intended that this document will be formally reviewed
and updated prior to 1 December 2016.
6 of 12
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:250–258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313
Consensus statement
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
11 March 2013. 
10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 7 (native) -----
SECTION 3: ZURICH 2012 CONSENSUS QUESTIONS
Note that each question is the subject of a separate systematic
review that is published in the BJSM (2013:47:5). As such, all cita-
tions and details of each topic will be covered in those reviews.
When you assess an athlete acutely and they do not have a
concussion, what is it? Is a cognitive injury the key
component of concussion in making a diagnosis?
The consensus panel agreed that concussion is an evolving
injury in the acute phase with rapidly changing clinical signs
and symptoms, which may reﬂect the underlying physiological
injury in the brain. Concussion is considered to be among the
most complex injuries in sports medicine to diagnose, assess and
manage. A majority of concussions in sport occur without LOC
or frank neurological signs. At present, there is no perfect diag-
nostic test or marker that clinicians can rely on for an immediate
diagnosis of concussion in the sporting environment. Because of
this evolving process, it is not possible to rule out concussion
when an injury event occurs associated with a transient neuro-
logical symptom. All such cases should be removed from the
playing ﬁeld and assessed for concussion by the treating phys-
ician or healthcare provider as discussed below. It was recog-
nised that a cognitive deﬁcit is not necessary for acute diagnosis
as it either may not be present or detected on examination.
Are the existing tools/examination sensitive and reliable
enough on the day of injury to make or exclude a diagnosis
of concussion?
Concussion is a clinical diagnosis based largely on the observed
injury mechanism, signs and symptoms. The vast majority of
sports-related concussions (hereafter, referred to as concussion)
occur without LOC or frank neurological signs.151–154 In milder
forms of concussion, the athlete might be slightly confused,
without clearly identiﬁable amnesia. In addition, most concus-
sions cannot be identiﬁed or diagnosed by neuroimaging techni-
ques (eg, CT or MRI). Several well-validated neuropsychological
tests are appropriate for use in the assessment of acute concus-
sion in the competitive sporting environment. These tests
provide important data on symptoms and functional impair-
ments that clinicians can incorporate into their diagnostic for-
mulation, but should not solely be used to diagnose concussion.
What is the best practice for evaluating an adult athlete
with concussion on the ‘ﬁeld of play’ in 2012?
Recognising and evaluating concussion in the adult athlete on
the ﬁeld is a challenging responsibility for the healthcare pro-
vider. Performing this task is often a rapid assessment in the
midst of competition with a time constraint and the athlete
eager to play. A standardised objective assessment of injury,
which includes excluding more serious injury, is critical in
determining disposition decisions for the athlete. The on-ﬁeld
evaluation of sports-related concussion is often a challenge
given the elusiveness and variability of presentation, difﬁculty in
making a timely diagnosis, speciﬁcity and sensitivity of sideline
assessment tools, and the reliance on symptoms. Despite these
challenges, the sideline evaluation is based on recognition of
injury, assessment of symptoms, cognitive and cranial nerve
function, and balance. Serial assessments are often necessary.
Concussion is often an evolving injury, and signs and symptoms
may be delayed. Therefore, erring on the side of caution
(keeping an athlete out of participation when there is any suspi-
cion for injury) is important. An SAC is useful in the assessment
of the athlete with suspected concussion but should not take the
place of the clinician’s judgement.
How can the SCAT2 be improved?
It was agreed that a variety of measures should be employed as
part of the assessment of concussion to provide a more com-
plete clinical proﬁle for the concussed athlete. Important clinical
information can be ascertained in a streamlined manner through
the
use
of
a
multimodal
instrument
such
as
the
Sport
Concussion Assessment Tool (SCAT). A baseline assessment is
advised wherever possible. However, it is acknowledged that
further validity studies need to be performed to answer this spe-
ciﬁc issue.
A future SCAT test battery (ie, SCAT3) should include an
initial assessment of injury severity using the Glasgow Coma
Scale (GCS), immediately followed by observing and document-
ing concussion signs. Once this is complete, symptom endorse-
ment and symptom severity, as well as neurocognitive and
balance functions, should be assessed in any athlete suspected of
sustaining a concussion. It is recommended that these latter steps
be conducted following a minimum 15 min rest period on the
sideline to avoid the inﬂuence of exertion or fatigue on the ath-
lete’s performance. Although it is noted that this time frame is an
arbitrary one, the expert panel agreed nevertheless that a period
of rest was important prior to assessment. Future research should
consider the efﬁcacy for inclusion of vision tests such as the King
Devick Test and clinical reaction time tests.155 156 Recent studies
suggest that these may be useful additions to the sideline assess-
ment of concussion. However, the need for additional equipment
may make them impractical for sideline use.
It was further agreed that the SCAT3 would be suitable for
adults and youths aged 13 and over and that a new tool (Child
SCAT3) be developed for younger children.
Advances in neuropsychology: are computerised tests
sufﬁcient for concussion diagnosis?
Sports-related concussions are frequently associated with one or
more symptoms, impaired balance and/or cognitive deﬁcits.
These problems can be measured using symptom scales, balance
testing and neurocognitive testing. All three modalities can iden-
tify signiﬁcant changes in the ﬁrst few days following injury,
generally with normalisation over 1–3 weeks. The presentation
of symptoms and the rate of recovery can be variable, which
reinforces the value of assessing all three areas as part of a com-
prehensive sport concussion programme.
Neuropsychological assessment has been described by the
CISG
as
a
‘cornerstone’
of
concussion
management.
Neuropsychologists are uniquely qualiﬁed to interpret neuro-
psychological tests and can play an important role within the
context of a multifaceted-multimodal and multidisciplinary
approach to managing sports-related concussion. Concussion
management programmes that use neuropsychological assess-
ment to assist in clinical decision-making have been instituted in
professional sports, colleges and high schools. Brief compu-
terised cognitive evaluation tools are the mainstay of these assess-
ments worldwide, given the logistical limitation in accessing
trained neuropsychologists; however, it should be noted that
these are not substitutes for formal neuropsychological assess-
ment. At present, there is insufﬁcient evidence to recommend the
widespread routine use of baseline neuropsychological testing.
What evidence exists for new strategies/technologies in the
diagnosis of concussion and assessment of recovery?
A number of novel technological platforms exist to assess con-
cussion including (but not limited to) iPhone/smart phone apps,
quantitative electroencephalography, robotics—sensory motor
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:250–258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313
7 of 12
Consensus statement
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
11 March 2013. 
10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 8 (native) -----
assessment, telemedicine, eye-tracking technology, functional
imaging/advanced neuroimaging and head impact sensors. At
this stage, only limited evidence exists for their role in this
setting and none have been validated as diagnostic. It will be
important to reconsider the role of these technologies once evi-
dence is developed.
Advances in the management of sport concussion: what is
evidence for concussion therapies
The current evidence evaluating the effect of rest and treatment
following a sports-related concussion is sparse. An initial period
of rest may be of beneﬁt. However, further research to evaluate
the long-term outcome of rest, and the optimal amount and
type of rest, is needed. Low-level exercise for those who are
slow to recover may be of beneﬁt, although the optimal timing
following injury for initiation of this treatment is currently
unknown. Multimodal physiotherapy treatment for individuals
with clinical evidence of cervical spine and/or vestibular dys-
function may be of beneﬁt. There is a strong need for high-level
studies evaluating the effects of a resting period, pharmaco-
logical interventions, rehabilitative techniques and exercise for
individuals who have sustained a sports-related concussion.
The difﬁcult concussion patient—What is the best approach
to investigation and management of persistent (>10 days)
postconcussive symptoms?
Persistent
symptoms
(>10 days)
are
generally
reported
in
10–15% of concussions. This may be higher in certain sports
(eg, elite ice hockey) and populations (eg, children). In general,
symptoms are not speciﬁc to concussion and it is important to
consider and manage co-existent pathologies. Investigations may
include formal neuropsychological testing and conventional
neuroimaging to exclude structural pathology. Currently, there is
insufﬁcient evidence to recommend routine clinical use of
advanced neuroimaging techniques or other investigative strat-
egies. Cases of concussion in sport where clinical recovery falls
outside the expected window (ie, 10 days) should be managed
in a multidisciplinary manner by healthcare providers with
experience in sports-related concussion. Important components
of management after the initial period of physical and cognitive
rest include associated therapies such as cognitive, vestibular,
physical and psychological therapy, consideration of assessment
of other causes of prolonged symptoms and consideration of
commencement of a graded exercise programme at a level that
does not exacerbate symptoms.
Revisiting concussion modiﬁers: how should the evaluation
and management of acute concussion differ in speciﬁc
groups?
The literature demonstrates that the number and severity of
symptoms and previous concussions are associated with pro-
longed recovery and/or increased risk of complications. Brief
LOC, duration of post-traumatic amnesia and/or impact seizures
do not reliably predict outcome following concussion, although a
cautious approach should be taken in an athlete with prolonged
LOC (ie, >1 min). Children generally take longer to recover
from concussions and assessment batteries have yet to be vali-
dated in the younger age group. Currently, there are insufﬁcient
data on the inﬂuence of genetics and gender on outcome follow-
ing concussion. Several modiﬁers are associated with prolonged
recovery or increased risk of complications following concussion
and have important implications for management. Children with
concussion should be managed conservatively, with the emphasis
on return to learn before return to sport. In cases of concussion
managed with limited resources (eg, non-elite players), a conser-
vative approach should also be taken such that the athlete does
not return to sport until fully recovered.
What are the most effective risk reduction strategies in
sport concussion?—from protective equipment to policy?
No new valid evidence was provided to suggest that the use of
current standard headgear in rugby, or of mouthguards in
American football, can signiﬁcantly reduce players’ risk of con-
cussion. No evidence was provided to suggest an association
between neck strength increases and concussion risk reduction.
There was evidence to suggest that eliminating body checking
from Pee Wee ice hockey (ages 11–12 years) and fair-play rules
in
ice
hockey
were
effective
injury
prevention
strategies.
Helmets need to be able to protect from impacts resulting in a
head change in velocity of up to 10 m/s in professional
American football, and up to 7 m/s in professional Australian
football. It also appears that helmets must be capable of redu-
cing head-resultant linear acceleration to below 50 g and
angular acceleration components to below 1500 rad/s2 to opti-
mise their effectiveness. Given that a multifactorial approach is
needed
for
concussion
prevention,
well-designed
and
sport-speciﬁc prospective analytical studies of sufﬁcient power
are warranted for mouthguards, headgear/helmets, facial protec-
tion and neck strength. Measuring the effect of rule changes
should also be addressed by future studies, not only assessing
new rule changes or legislation, but also alteration or reinforce-
ment to existing rules.
What is the evidence for chronic concussion-related
changes?—behavioural, pathological and clinical outcomes
It was agreed that CTE represents a distinct tauopathy with an
unknown incidence in athletic populations. It was further
agreed that CTE was not related to concussions alone or simply
exposure to contact sports. At present, there are no published
epidemiological,
cohort
or
prospective
studies
relating
to
modern CTE. Owing to the nature of the case reports and
pathological case series that have been published, it is not pos-
sible to determine the causality or risk factors with any certainty.
As such, the speculation that repeated concussion or subconcus-
sive impacts cause CTE remains unproven. The extent to which
age-related changes, psychiatric or mental health illness, alcohol/
drug use or co-existing medical or dementing illnesses contrib-
ute to this process is largely unaccounted for in the published
literature. At present, the interpretation of causation in the
modern CTE case studies should proceed cautiously. It was also
recognised that it is important to address the fears of parents/
athletes from media pressure related to the possibility of CTE.
From consensus to action—how do we optimise knowledge
transfer, education and ability to inﬂuence policy?
The value of knowledge transfer (KT) as part of concussion edu-
cation is increasingly becoming recognised. Target audiences
beneﬁt from speciﬁc learning strategies. Concussion tools exist,
but their effectiveness and impact require further evaluation. The
media is valuable in drawing attention to concussion, but efforts
need to ensure that the public is aware of the right information.
Social media as a concussion education tool is becoming more
prominent. Implementation of KT models is one approach orga-
nisations can use to assess knowledge gaps; identify, develop and
evaluate education strategies; and use the outcomes to facilitate
decision-making. Implementing KT strategies requires a deﬁned
plan. Identifying the needs, learning styles and preferred learning
strategies of target audiences, coupled with evaluation, should be
8 of 12
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:250–258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313
Consensus statement
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
11 March 2013. 
10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 9 (native) -----
a piece of the overall concussion education puzzle to have an
impact on enhancing knowledge and awareness.
Author afﬁliations
1The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Heidelberg, Victoria,
Australia
2Faculty of Kinesiology, Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary,
Alberta, Canada
3Faculty of Medicine, Sport Injury Prevention Research Centre, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada
4International Ice Hockey Federation, Switzerland
5IOC Medical Commission Games Group, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
6Ottawa Sport Medicine Centre, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
7Department of Neurosurgery, Boston University Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA
8Center for the Study of Traumatic Encephalopathy, Boston University Medical
Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
9Department of Neurology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
10Schulthess Clinic Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
11F-MARC (FIFA Medical Assessment and Research Center), Zurich, Switzerland
12Psychological and Neurobehavioral Associates, Inc., State College, Pennsylvania, USA
13University of Missouri–Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri, USA
14Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Oslo University Hospital and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Oslo, Norway
15Oslo Sports Trauma Research Center, Norway
16International Olympic Committee (IOC), Lausanne, Switzerland
17Division of Neurosurgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
18Concussion Management Program Athletic Edge Sports Medicine, Toronto, Canada
19Michigan NeuroSport, Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA
20International Rugby Board, Dublin, Ireland
21Department of Neurosurgery, Orthopaedic Surgery and Rehabilitation, Vanderbilt Sports
Concussion Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA
22Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
23Department of Family Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada
24Sport Medicine Centre, Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada
25Department of Neurosurgery, Austin and Cabrini Hospitals & The Florey Institute of
Neuroscience and Mental Health, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
26Theodore S. Roberts Endowed Chair Department of Neurological Surgery University of
Washington Seattle, WA, USA
27NFL Head, Neck and Spine Medical Committee
28Matthew Gfeller Sport-Related Traumatic Brain Injury Research Center, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
29Clinical Professor Departments of Rehabilitation Medicine, Orthopaedics and Sports
Medicine and Neurological Surgery, University of Washington, USA
30Seattle Sports Concussion Program, Team Physician Seattle Seahawks and Seattle
Mariners, Seattle, Washington, USA
31Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada
32Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, New York, USA
33Burke Rehabilitation Hospital, White Plains, New York, USA
34New York State Athletic Commission. New York, New York, USA
35Department of Family Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
36Canadian National Men’s Sledge Hockey Team, Canada
37National Football League Players Association (NFLPA) Mackey-White Traumatic Brain
Injury Committee
38Brain Injury Research, Departments of Neurosurgery and Neurology, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Wisconsin, USA
39Australian Centre for Research into Injury in Sports and its Prevention, Monash Injury
Research Institute, Monash University, Australia
40Transport and Road Safety Research, Faculty of Science, the University of New South
Wales, Australia
41McIntosh Consultancy and Research Pty Ltd. Sydney, Australia
42Perry Maddocks Trollope Lawyers, Melbourne, Australia
43The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Melbourne Brain Centre,
Austin Campus, Melbourne, Australia
44Centre For Health Exercise and Sports Medicine, Melbourne Physiotherapy Department,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
45Department of Pediatrics, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
46David Braley Sport Medicine and Rehabilitation Centre, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada
47Princeton University, New Jersey, USA
48Robert Wood Johnson, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey (UMDNJ),
USA
49Sport Injury Prevention Research Centre, Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
50Toronto Western Hospital and University of Toronto, Canada
51Krembil Neuroscience Centre, Toronto, Canada
52ThinkFirst Canada
53Parachute, Canada
54British Horseracing Authority, London, UK
Competing interests See the supplementary online data for competing interests
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313).
Provenance and peer review Commissioned; internally peer reviewed.
REFERENCES
1
Aubry M, Cantu R, Dvorak J, et al. Summary and agreement statement of the
1st International Symposium on Concussion in Sport, Vienna 2001. Clin J Sport
Med 2002;12:6–11.
2
McCrory P, Johnston K, Meeuwisse W, et al. Summary and agreement statement
of the 2nd International Conference on Concussion in Sport, Prague 2004. Br J
Sports Med 2005;39:196–204.
3
McCrory P, Meeuwisse W, Johnston K, et al. Consensus statement on concussion
in sport—the third international conference on concussion in sport held in Zurich,
November 2008. Phys Sportsmed 2009;37:141–59.
4
Maddocks D, Dicker G. An objective measure of recovery from concussion in
Australian rules footballers. Sport Health 1989;7(Suppl):6–7.
5
Maddocks DL, Dicker GD, Saling MM. The assessment of orientation following
concussion in athletes. Clin J Sport Med 1995;5:32–5.
6
McCrea M. Standardized mental status assessment of sports concussion. Clin J
Sport Med 2001;11:176–81.
7
McCrea M, Kelly J, Randolph C, et al. Standardised assessment of concussion
(SAC): on site mental status evaluation of the athlete. J Head Trauma Rehab
1998;13:27–36.
8
McCrea M, Randolph C, Kelly J. The Standardized Assessment of Concussion
(SAC): manual for administration, scoring and interpretation. 2nd edn. Waukesha,
WI, 2000.
9
McCrea M, Kelly JP, Kluge J, et al. Standardized assessment of concussion in
football players. Neurology 1997;48:586–8.
10
Chen J, Johnston K, Collie A, et al. A validation of the Post Concussion Symptom
Scale in the assessment of complex concussion using cognitive testing and
functional MRI. J Neurol Neurosurg Psych 2007;78:1231–8.
11
Chen J, Johnston K, Frey S, et al. Functional abnormalities in symptomatic
concussed athletes: an fMRI study. Neuroimage 2004;22:68–82.
12
Chen JK, Johnston KM, Collie A, et al. (14) Association between symptom
severity, CogSport tests results, and functional MRI activation in symptomatic
concussed athletes. Clin J Sport Med 2004;14:379.
13
Chen JK, Johnston KM, Collie A, et al. Behavioural and functional imaging
outcomes in symptomatic concussed athletes measured with cogsport and
functional MRI. BJ Sport Med 2004;38:659.
14
Ptito A, Chen JK, Johnston KM. Contributions of functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) to sport concussion evaluation. NeuroRehabilitation
2007;22:217–27.
15
Guskiewicz K. Postural stability assessment following concussion. Clin J Sport Med
2001;11:182–90.
16
Guskiewicz KM. Assessment of postural stability following sport-related
concussion. Curr Sports Med Rep 2003;2:24–30.
17
Guskiewicz KM, Ross SE, Marshall SW. Postural stability and neuropsychological
deﬁcits after concussion in collegiate athletes. J Athl Train 2001;36:263–73.
18
Cavanaugh JT, Guskiewicz KM, Giuliani C, et al. Detecting altered postural
control after cerebral concussion in athletes with normal postural stability. Br J
Sports Med 2005;39:805–11.
19
Cavanaugh JT, Guskiewicz KM, Giuliani C, et al. Recovery of postural control after
cerebral concussion: new insights using approximate entropy. J Athl Train
2006;41:305–13.
20
Cavanaugh JT, Guskiewicz KM, Stergiou N. A nonlinear dynamic approach for
evaluating postural control: new directions for the management of sport-related
cerebral concussion. Sports Med (Auckland, NZ) 2005;35:935–50.
21
Fox ZG, Mihalik JP, Blackburn JT, et al. Return of postural control to baseline
after anaerobic and aerobic exercise protocols. J Athl Train 2008;43:456–63.
22
Kristman VL, Tator CH, Kreiger N, et al. Does the apolipoprotein epsilon 4 allele
predispose varsity athletes to concussion? A prospective cohort study. Clin J Sport
Med 2008;18:322–8..
23
Terrell TR, Bostick RM, Abramson R, et al. APOE, APOE promoter, and Tau
genotypes and risk for concussion in college athletes. Clin J Sport Med
2008;18:10–17.
24
Vagnozzi R, Tavazzi B, Signoretti S, et al. Temporal window of metabolic brain
vulnerability to concussions: mitochondrial-related impairment—part I.
Neurosurgery 2007;61:379–88; discussion 88–9.
25
Hang CH, Chen G, Shi JX, et al. Cortical expression of nuclear factor kappaB after
human brain contusion. Brain Res 2006;1109:14–21..
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:250–258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313
9 of 12
Consensus statement
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
11 March 2013. 
10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 10 (native) -----
26
Peng RY, Gao YB, Xiao XY, et al. [Study on the expressions of basic ﬁbroblast
growth factor and nervous growth factor genes in rat cerebral concussion].
Zhongguo Wei Zhong Bing Ji Jiu Yi Xue 2003;15:213–16.
27
Yunoki M, Kawauchi M, Ukita N, et al. Effects of lecithinized SOD on sequential
change in SOD activity after cerebral contusion in rats. Acta Neurochir Suppl
1998;71:142–5.
28
Hinkle DA, Baldwin SA, Scheff SW, et al. GFAP and S100beta expression in the
cortex and hippocampus in response to mild cortical contusion. J Neurotrauma
1997;14:729–38.
29
Holmin S, Schalling M, Hojeberg B, et al. Delayed cytokine expression in rat brain
following experimental contusion. J Neurosurg 1997;86:493–504.
30
Sandberg Nordqvist AC, von Holst H, Holmin S, et al. Increase of insulin-like
growth factor (IGF)-1, IGF binding protein-2 and -4 mRNAs following cerebral
contusion. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 1996;38:285–93.
31
Fukuhara T, Nishio S, Ono Y, et al. Induction of Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase after
cortical contusion injury during hypothermia. Brain Res 1994;657:333–6.
32
Begaz T, Kyriacou DN, Segal J, et al. Serum biochemical markers for
post-concussion syndrome in patients with mild traumatic brain injury.
J Neurotrauma 2006;23:1201–10.
33
de Boussard CN, Lundin A, Karlstedt D, et al. S100 and cognitive impairment
after mild traumatic brain injury. J Rehabil Med 2005;37:53–7.
34
Lima DP, Simao Filho C, Abib Sde C, et al. Quality of life and neuropsychological
changes in mild head trauma. Late analysis and correlation with S100B
protein and cranial CT scan performed at hospital admission. Injury
2008;39:604–11.
35
Ma M, Lindsell CJ, Rosenberry CM, et al. Serum cleaved tau does not predict
postconcussion syndrome after mild traumatic brain injury. Am J Emerg Med
2008;26:763–8.
36
Stalnacke BM, Tegner Y, Sojka P. Playing ice hockey and basketball increases
serum levels of S-100B in elite players: a pilot study. Clin J Sport Med
2003;13:292–302.
37
Stalnacke BM, Tegner Y, Sojka P. Playing soccer increases serum concentrations of
the biochemical markers of brain damage S-100B and neuron-speciﬁc enolase in
elite players: a pilot study. Brain Inj 2004;18:899–909.
38
Townend W, Ingebrigtsen T. Head injury outcome prediction: a role for protein
S-100B? Injury 2006;37:1098–108.
39
Boutin D, Lassonde M, Robert M, et al. Neurophysiological assessment prior to
and following sports-related concussion during childhood: a case study. Neurocase
2008;14:239–48.
40
De Beaumont L, Brisson B, Lassonde M, et al. Long-term electrophysiological changes
in athletes with a history of multiple concussions. Brain Inj 2007;21:631–44.
41
De Beaumont L, Lassonde M, Leclerc S, et al. Long-term and cumulative effects
of sports concussion on motor cortex inhibition. Neurosurgery 2007;61:329–36;
discussion 36–7.
42
Gaetz M, Weinberg H. Electrophysiological indices of persistent post-concussion
symptoms. Brain Inj 2000;14:815–32.
43
Gosselin N, Theriault M, Leclerc S, et al. Neurophysiological anomalies in
symptomatic and asymptomatic concussed athletes. Neurosurgery
2006;58:1151–61; discussion –61.
44
Lavoie ME, Dupuis F, Johnston KM, et al. Visual p300 effects beyond symptoms
in concussed college athletes. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 2004;26:55–73.
45
Rousseff RT, Tzvetanov P, Atanassova PA, et al. Correlation between cognitive
P300 changes and the grade of closed head injury. Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol
2006;46:275–7.
46
Collie A, Darby D, Maruff P. Computerised cognitive assessment of athletes with
sports related head injury. Br J Sports Med 2001;35:297–302.
47
Collie A, Maruff P. Computerised neuropsychological testing. Br J Sports Med
2003;37:2–3.
48
Collie A, Maruff P, McStephen M, et al. Psychometric issues associated with
computerised neuropsychological assessment of concussed athletes. Br J Sports
Med 2003;37:556–9.
49
Collins MW, Grindel SH, Lovell MR, et al. Relationship between concussion and
neuropsychological performance in college football players [see comments]. JAMA
1999;282:964–70.
50
Lovell MR. The relevance of neuropsychologic testing for sports-related head
injuries. Curr Sports Med Rep 2002;1:7–11.
51
Lovell MR, Collins MW. Neuropsychological assessment of the college football
player. J Head Trauma Rehabil 1998;13:9–26.
52
Bleiberg J, Cernich AN, Cameron K, , et al Duration of cognitive impairment after
sports concussion. Neurosurgery 2004;54:1073–8; discussion 8–80.
53
Bleiberg J, Warden D. Duration of cognitive impairment after sports concussion.
Neurosurgery 2005;56:E1166.
54
Broglio SP, Macciocchi SN, Ferrara MS. Neurocognitive performance of concussed
athletes when symptom free. J Athl Train 2007;42:504–8.
55
Broglio SP, Macciocchi SN, Ferrara MS. Sensitivity of the concussion assessment
battery. Neurosurgery 2007;60:1050–7; discussion 7–8.
56
Gioia G, Janusz J, Gilstein K, et al. Neueopsychological management of
consussion in children and adolescents: effects of age and gender on ImPact
(abstract). Br J Sp Med 2004;38:657.
57
McCrory P, Collie A, Anderson V, et al. Can we manage sport related concussion
in children the same as in adults? Br J Sports Med 2004;38:516–19.
58
Johnston K, Bloom G, Ramsay J, et al. Current concepts in concussion
rehabilitation. Curr Sports Med Rep 2004;3:316–23.
59
Guskiewicz KM, McCrea M, Marshall SW, et al. Cumulative effects associated with
recurrent concussion in collegiate football players. JAMA 2003;290:2549–55.
60
Lovell M, Collins M, Bradley J. Return to play following sports-related concussion.
Clin Sports Med 2004;23:421–41, ix.
61
Collins M, Field M, Lovell M, et al. Relationship between postconcussion headache
and neuropsychological test performance in high school athletes. Am J Sports Med
2003;31:168–73.
62
Collins M, Grindel S, Lovell M, et al. Relationship between concussion and
neuropsychological performance in college football players. J Am Med Assoc
1999;282:964–70.
63
Collins MW, Lovell MR, Iverson GL, et al. Cumulative effects of concussion in high
school athletes. Neurosurgery 2002;51:1175–9; discussion 80–1.
64
McCrea M, Guskiewicz KM, Marshall SW, et al. Acute effects and recovery time
following concussion in collegiate football players. JAMA 2003;290:2556–63.
65
McCrea M, Hammeke T, Olsen G, et al. Unreported concussion in high school
football players: implications for prevention. Clin J Sport Med 2004;14:13–17.
66
Bloom G, Horton A, McCrory P, et al. Sport psychology and concussion: new
impacts to explore. Br J Sports Med 2004;38:519–21.
67
Weiss MR, Gill DL. What goes around comes around: re-emerging themes in sport
and exercise psychology. Res Q Exerc Sport 2005;76:S71–87.
68
McCrory P. Should we treat concussion pharmacologically? The need for evidence
based pharmacological treatment for the concussed athlete. Br J Sports Med
2002;36:3–5.
69
McCrory P. Preparticipation assessment for head injury. Clin J Sport Med
2004;14:139–44.
70
Johnston KM, Lassonde M, Ptito A. A contemporary neurosurgical approach to
sport-related head injury: the McGill concussion protocol. J Am Coll Surg
2001;192:515–24.
71
Delaney J, Lacroix V, Leclerc S, et al. Concussions during the 1997 Canadian
Football League Season. Clin J Sport Med 2000;10:9–14.
72
Delaney J, Lacroix V, Leclerc S, et al. Concussions among university football and
soccer players. Clin J Sport Med 2002;12:331–8.
73
Gessel LM, Fields SK, Collins CL, et al. Concussions among United States high
school and collegiate athletes. J Athl Train 2007;42:495–503.
74
Dvorak J, Junge A, Fuller C, et al. Medical issues in women’s football. Br J Sports
Med 2007;41(Suppl 1):i1.
75
Dvorak J, McCrory P, Kirkendall DT. Head injuries in the female football player:
incidence, mechanisms, risk factors and management. Br J Sports Med 2007;41
(Suppl 1):i44–6.
76
Jennett B, Bond M. Assessment of outcome after severe brain damage: a practical
scale. Lancet 1975;1:480–4.
77
Leninger B, Gramling S, Farrell A, et al. Neuropsychological deﬁcits in
symptomatic minor head injury patients after concussion and mild concussion.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psych 1990;53:293–6.
78
Lovell M, Iverson G, Collins M, et al. Does loss of consciousness predict
neuropsychological decrements after concussion. Clin J Sp Med 1999;9:193–9.
79
McCrea M, Kelly J, Randolph C, et al. Immediate neurocognitive effects of
concussion. Neurosurgery 2002;50:1032–42.
80
Cantu RC. Posttraumatic retrograde and anterograde amnesia: pathophysiology
and implications in grading and safe return to play. J Athl Train 2001;36:244–8.
81
Lovell MR, Collins MW, Iverson GL, et al. Recovery from mild concussion in high
school atheltes. J Neurosurg 2003;98:296–301.
82
McCrory PR, Ariens T, Berkovic SF. The nature and duration of acute concussive
symptoms in Australian football. Clin J Sport Med 2000;10:235–8.
83
Yarnell P, Lynch S. The ‘ding’: amnestic state in football trauma. Neurology
1973;23:196–7.
84
Yarnell PR, Lynch S. Retrograde memory immediately after concussion. Lancet
1970;1:863–4.
85
McCrory PR, Berkovic SF. Video analysis of acute motor and convulsive
manifestations in sport-related concussion. Neurology 2000;54:1488–91.
86
McCrory PR, Bladin PF, Berkovic SF. Retrospective study of concussive convulsions
in elite Australian rules and rugby league footballers: phenomenology, aetiology,
and outcome. BMJ 1997;314:171–4.
87
Fleminger S. Long-term psychiatric disorders after traumatic brain injury. Eur J
Anaesthesiol Suppl 2008;42:123–30..
88
Chen JK, Johnston KM, Petrides M, et al. Neural substrates of symptoms of
depression following concussion in male athletes with persisting postconcussion
symptoms. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2008;65:81–9.
89
Bryant RA. Disentangling mild traumatic brain injury and stress reactions. N Engl J
Med 2008;358:525–7.
10 of 12
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:250–258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313
Consensus statement
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
11 March 2013. 
10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 11 (native) -----
90
Vanderploeg RD, Curtiss G, Luis CA, et al. Long-term morbidities following
self-reported mild traumatic brain injury. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol
2007;29:585–98.
91
Guskiewicz KM, Marshall SW, Bailes J, et al. Recurrent concussion and risk of
depression in retired professional football players. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2007;39:903–9.
92
Kashluba S, Casey JE, Paniak C. Evaluating the utility of ICD-10 diagnostic criteria
for postconcussion syndrome following mild traumatic brain injury. J Int
Neuropsychol Soc 2006;12:111–18.
93
Iverson GL. Misdiagnosis of the persistent postconcussion syndrome in patients
with depression. Arch Clin Neuropsychol 2006;21:303–10.
94
Chamelian L, Feinstein A. The effect of major depression on subjective and
objective cognitive deﬁcits in mild to moderate traumatic brain injury.
J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 2006;18:33–8.
95
Mooney G, Speed J, Sheppard S. Factors related to recovery after mild traumatic
brain injury. Brain Inj 2005;19:975–87.
96
Broshek DK, Freeman JR. Psychiatric and neuropsychological issues in sport
medicine. Clin Sports Med 2005;24:663–79, x.
97
Pellman EJ. Background on the National Football League’s research on concussion
in professional football. Neurosurgery 2003;53:797–8.
98
Purcell L, Carson J. Sport-related concussion in pediatric athletes. Clin Pediatr
(Phila) 2008;47:106–13.
99
Lee LK. Controversies in the sequelae of pediatric mild traumatic brain injury.
Pediatr Emerg Care 2007;23:580–3; quiz 4–6.
100
Schnadower D, Vazquez H, Lee J, et al. Controversies in the evaluation and
management of minor blunt head trauma in children. Curr Opin Pediatr
2007;19:258–64..
101
Wozniak JR, Krach L, Ward E, et al. Neurocognitive and neuroimaging correlates of
pediatric traumatic brain injury: a diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) study. Arch Clin
Neuropsychol 2007;22:555–68.
102
Hayden MG, Jandial R, Duenas HA, et al. Pediatric concussions in sports; a
simple and rapid assessment tool for concussive injury in children and adults.
Childs Nerv Syst 2007;23:431–5.
103
Lee MA. Adolescent concussions—management recommendations: a practical
approach. Conn Med 2006;70:377–80.
104
Kirkwood MW, Yeates KO, Wilson PE. Pediatric sport-related concussion: a review
of the clinical management of an oft-neglected population. Pediatrics
2006;117:1359–71.
105
Guskiewicz KM, Marshall SW, Bailes J, et al. Association between recurrent
concussion and late-life cognitive impairment in retired professional football
players. Neurosurgery 2005;57:719–26; discussion –26.
106
Nandoe RD, Scheltens P, Eikelenboom P. Head trauma and Alzheimer’s disease.
J Alzheimers Dis 2002;4:303–8.
107
Stern MB. Head trauma as a risk factor for Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord
1991;6:95–7.
108
Omalu BI, DeKosky ST, Hamilton RL, et al. Chronic traumatic encephalopathy in a
national football league player: part II. Neurosurgery 2006;59:1086–92; discussion
92–3.
109
Omalu BI, DeKosky ST, Minster RL, et al. Chronic traumatic encephalopathy in a
National Football League player. Neurosurgery 2005;57:128–34; discussion –34.
110
McKee AC, Cantu RC, Nowinski CJ, et al. Chronic traumatic encephalopathy in
athletes: progressive tauopathy after repetitive head injury. J Neuropathol Exp
Neurol 2009;68:709–35.
111
McKee AC, Gavett BE, Stern RA, et al. TDP-43 Proteinopathy and Motor Neuron
Disease in Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
2010;69:918–29.
112
McKee AC, Stein TD, Nowinski CJ, et al. The spectrum of disease in chronic
traumatic encephalopathy. Brain 2013;136:43–64.
113
McCrory P. Sports concussion and the risk of chronic neurological impairment.
Clin J Sport Med 2011;21:6–12.
114
McCrory P. Future advances and areas of future focus in the treatment of
sport-related concussion. Clin Sports Med 2011;30:201–8, xi-ii.
115
Hagel BE, Pless IB, Goulet C, et al. Effectiveness of helmets in skiers and
snowboarders: case-control and case crossover study. BMJ (Clin Res ed)
2005;330:281.
116
McCrory P. The role of helmets in skiing and snowboarding. Br J Sports Med
2002;36:314.
117
Mueller BA, Cummings P, Rivara FP, et al. Injuries of the head, face, and neck in
relation to ski helmet use. Epidemiology 2008;19:270–6.
118
Sulheim S, Holme I, Ekeland A, et al. Helmet use and risk of head injuries in
alpine skiers and snowboarders. JAMA 2006;295:919–24.
119
Delaney JS, Al-Kashmiri A, Drummond R, et al. The effect of protective headgear
on head injuries and concussions in adolescent football (soccer) players. Br J
Sports Med 2008;42:110–15; discussion 5.
120
Viano DC, Pellman EJ, Withnall C, et al. Concussion in professional football:
performance of newer helmets in reconstructed game impacts—part 13.
Neurosurgery 2006;59:591–606; discussion 591–606.
121
Finch C, Braham R, McIntosh A, et al. Should football players wear custom ﬁtted
mouthguards? Results from a group randomised controlled trial. Inj Prev
2005;11:242–6.
122
McIntosh A, McCrory P. The dynamics of concussive head impacts in rugby and
Australian rules football. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2000;32:1980–5.
123
McIntosh A, McCrory P. Impact energy attenuation performance of football
headgear. Br J Sports Med 2000;34:337–42.
124
McIntosh A, McCrory P. Effectiveness of headgear in a pilot study of under 15
rugby union football. Br J Sports Med 2001;35:167–70.
125
McIntosh A, McCrory P, Finch C, et al. Rugby Headgear Study. Sydney: School of
Safety Science, The University of New South Wales, May 2005.
126
Finch C, Newstead S, Cameron M, et al. Head injury reductions in Victoria two
years after the introduction of mandatory bicycle helmet use. Melbourne: Monash
University Accident Research Centre, 1993 July, Report No.: 51.
127
Curnow WJ. Bicycle helmets and public health in Australia. Health Promot J Austr
2008;19:10–15.
128
Hewson PJ. Cycle helmets and road casualties in the UK. Trafﬁc Inj Prev
2005;6:127–34.
129
Davidson JA. Epidemiology and outcome of bicycle injuries presenting to an
emergency department in the United Kingdom. Eur J Emerg Med 2005;12:24–9.
130
Hansen KS, Engesaeter LB, Viste A. Protective effect of different types of bicycle
helmets. Trafﬁc Inj Prev 2003;4:285–90.
131
Andersen T, Arnason A, Engebretsen L, et al. Mechanism of head injuries in elite
football. Br J Sports Med 2004;38:690–6.
132
Hagel B, Meewisse W. Editorial: risk compensation: a “side effect” of sport injury
prevention? Clin J Sp Med 2004;14:193–6.
133
Finch C, Mcintosh AS, McCrory P, et al. A pilot study of the attitudes of
Australian Rules footballers towards protective headgear. J Sci Med Sport
2003;6:505–11.
134
Finch CF, McIntosh AS, McCrory P. What do under 15-year-old schoolboy
rugby union players think about protective headgear? BrJ Sports Med
2001;35:89–94.
135
Finch C, Mcintosh AS, McCrory P. What is the evidence base for the use of
protective headgear and mouthguards in Australian football. Sport Health
2000;18:35–8.
136
Reece RM, Sege R. Childhood head injuries: accidental or inﬂicted? Arch Pediatr
Adolesc Med 2000;154:11–15.
137
Shaw NH. Bodychecking in hockey. CMAJ 2004;170:15–16; author reply 6, 8.
138
Denke NJ. Brain injury in sports. J Emerg Nurs 2008;34:363–4.
139
Gianotti S, Hume PA. Concussion sideline management intervention for
rugby union leads to reduced concussion claims. NeuroRehabilitation
2007;22:181–9.
140
Guilmette TJ, Malia LA, McQuiggan MD. Concussion understanding and
management among New England high school football coaches. Brain Inj
2007;21:1039–47.
141
Hootman JM, Dick R, Agel J. Epidemiology of collegiate injuries for 15 sports:
summary and recommendations for injury prevention initiatives. J Athl Train
2007;42:311–19
142
Valovich McLeod TC, Schwartz C, Bay RC. Sport-related concussion
misunderstandings among youth coaches. Clin J Sport Med 2007;17:140–2.
143
Sye G, Sullivan SJ, McCrory P. High school rugby players’ understanding of
concussion and return to play guidelines. Br J Sports Med 2006;40:1003–5.
144
Theye F, Mueller KA. “Heads up”: concussions in high school sports. Clin Med
Res 2004;2:165–71.
145
Kashluba S, Paniak C, Blake T, et al. A longitudinal, controlled study of patient
complaints following treated mild traumatic brain injury. Arch Clin Neuropsychol
2004;19:805–16.
146
Gabbe B, Finch CF, Wajswelner H, et al. Does community-level Australian football
support injury prevention research? J Sci Med Sport 2003;6:231–6.
147
Kaut KP, DePompei R, Kerr J, et al. Reports of head injury and symptom
knowledge among college athletes: implications for assessment and educational
intervention. Clin J Sport Med 2003;13:213–21.
148
Davidhizar R, Cramer C. The best thing about the hospitalization was that the
nurses kept me well informed” issues and strategies of client education. Accid
Emerg Nurs 2002;10:149–54.
149
McCrory P. What advice should we give to athletes postconcussion? Br J Sports
Med 2002;36:316–18.
150
Bazarian JJ, Veenema T, Brayer AF, et al. Knowledge of concussion guidelines
among practitioners caring for children. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 2001;40:207–12.
151
Guskiewicz KM, Weaver NL, Padua DA Jr, et al. Epidemiology of concussion in
collegiate and high school football players. Am J Sports Med 2000;28:643–50.
152
McCrea M, Guskiewicz KM, Marshall SW, et al. Acute effects and recovery time
following concussion in collegiate football players: the NCAA Concussion Study.
JAMA 2003;290:2556–63.
153
Macciocchi SN, Barth JT, Alves W, et al. Neuropsychological functioning and
recovery after mild head injury in collegiate athletes. Neurosurgery
1996;39:510–14.
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:250–258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313
11 of 12
Consensus statement
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
11 March 2013. 
10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 12 (native) -----
154
Meehan WP III, d’Hemecourt P, Comstock RD. High school concussions in the
2008–2009 academic year: mechanism, symptoms, and management. Am J Sports
Med 2010;38:2405–9.
155
Eckner JT, Kutcher JS, Richardson JK. Between-seasons test-retest reliability of
clinically measured reaction time in National Collegiate Athletic Association
Division I athletes. J Athl Train 2011;46:409–14.
156
Eckner JT, Richardson JK, Kim H, et al. A novel clinical test of recognition reaction
time in healthy adults. Psychol Assess 2012;24:249–54.
12 of 12
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:250–258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313
Consensus statement
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
11 March 2013. 
10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as