

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with 
free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-
19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the 
company's public news and information website. 
 
Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related 
research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this 
research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other 
publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights 
for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means 
with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are 
granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre 
remains active.

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biochemical Pharmacology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biochempharm
Perspective
Non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and organ damage: A
current perspective
Samik Bindua, Somnath Mazumderb,1, Uday Bandyopadhyayb,c,⁎
a Department of Zoology, Cooch Behar Panchanan Barma University, Cooch Behar, West Bengal 736101 India
b Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, 4 Raja S.C. Mullick Road, Kolkata 700032, West Bengal, India
c Division of Molecular Medicine, Bose Institute, P-1/12, CIT Rd, Scheme VIIM, Kankurgachi, Kolkata, West Bengal 700054 India
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
NSAID
Cyclooxygenase
Prostaglandin
Inﬂammation
Mitochondria
Organ damage
Apoptosis
Gastropathy
A B S T R A C T
Owing to the eﬃcacy in reducing pain and inﬂammation, non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are
amongst the most popularly used medicines conﬁrming their position in the WHO’s Model List of Essential
Medicines. With escalating musculoskeletal complications, as evident from 2016 Global Burden of Disease data,
NSAID usage is evidently unavoidable. Apart from analgesic, anti-inﬂammatory and antipyretic eﬃcacies,
NSAIDs are further documented to oﬀer protection against diverse critical disorders including cancer and heart
attacks. However, data from multiple placebo-controlled trials and meta-analyses studies alarmingly signify the
adverse eﬀects of NSAIDs in gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, hepatic, renal, cerebral and pulmonary compli-
cations. Although extensive research has elucidated the mechanisms underlying the clinical hazards of NSAIDs,
no review has extensively collated the outcomes on various multiorgan toxicities of these drugs together. In this
regard, the present review provides a comprehensive insight of the existing knowledge and recent developments
on NSAID-induced organ damage. It precisely encompasses the current understanding of structure, classiﬁcation
and mode of action of NSAIDs while reiterating on the emerging instances of NSAID drug repurposing along with
pharmacophore modiﬁcation aimed at safer usage of NSAIDs where toxic eﬀects are tamed without compro-
mising the clinical beneﬁts. The review does not intend to vilify these ‘wonder drugs’; rather provides a careful
understanding of their side-eﬀects which would be beneﬁcial in evaluating the risk–beneﬁt threshold while
rationally using NSAIDs at safer dose and duration.
1. Introduction
Since the isolation of salicyclate from willow bark in around 1830s,
followed by the discovery of aspirin (acetyl salicyclate) by Felix
Hoﬀman of Bayer industry, Germany, in 1897, non steroidal anti-in-
ﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been enjoying a blockbuster status in
the pharmaceutical industry [1]. In around 500 BCE, even before
conceptualization of clinical trials and scientiﬁc knowledge, Hippo-
crates, wrote about the potential of willow bark and leaves in curing
pain and fever. Thereafter, generations of scientists, chemists and sci-
ence enthusiasts have extensively worked and ushered the development
of these ‘wonder drugs’. At present, NSAIDs are among the most
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcp.2020.114147
Received 27 April 2020; Received in revised form 3 July 2020; Accepted 7 July 2020
Abbreviations: NSAID, Non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug; PGHS, Prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase; PG, Prostaglandin; FDA, US Food and Drug
Administration; IC, Inhibitory concentration; P450, Cytochromes P450; PLA, Phospholipase; Tx, Thromboxane; LTE, Leukotriene; MOS, Mitochondrial oxidative
stress; ETC, Electron transport chain; O2
.-, Superoxide; CVD, Cardiovascular disease; TNF-α, Tumor necrosis factor-alpha; NF-κB, Nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-
enhancer of activated B cells; ICAM-1, Intercellular adhesion molecule 1; MAPK, Mitogen activated protein kinase; PKC, Protein kinase C; DRP1, Dynamin-related
protein 1; LPS, Lipopolysaccharide; HMGB1, High mobility group box 1; DAMP, Damage associated molecular pattern; MEDAL, Multinational Etoricoxib and
Diclofenac Arthritis Long-term trial; GI, Gastrointestinal; MI, Myocardial infarction; HF, Heart failure; VIGOR, Vioxx Gastrointestinal Outcomes Research; APPROVe,
Adenomatous Polyp PRevention On Vioxx trial; PRECISION, Prospective Evaluation of Celecoxib Integrated Safety versus Ibuprofen or Naproxen; NANSAIDs, Non
aspirin NSAIDs; ADMA, Asymmetric dimethyl arginine; eNOS, Endothelial nitric oxide synthase; CKD, Chronic kidney disease; AKI, Acute kidney injury; GFR,
Glomerular ﬁltration rate; PPAR, Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor; CRESCENT, Celecoxib Rofecoxib Eﬃciency and Safety in Cormorbidities Evaluation
Trial; ICH, Intracerebral haemorrhage; AERD, Aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease; CAP, Community Acquired Pneumonia; Cys-LTEs, Cysteinyl leukotrienes
⁎ Corresponding author: Dr. Uday Bandyopadhyay Division of Molecular Medicine, Bose Institute, P-1/12, CIT Road, Scheme VIIM, Kankurgachi, Kolkata West
Bengal 700054, India.
E-mail address: udayb@jcbose.ac.in (U. Bandyopadhyay).
1 Present address: National Institute of Biomedical Genomics, P.O.: N.S.S., Kalyani, West Bengal 741251 India
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
Available online 10 July 2020
0006-2952/ © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
T

----- Page 3 (native) -----
popular over-the-counter drugs across the world, constituting 5% of all
the prescribed medicines [2]. Traditionally NSAIDs were classiﬁed on
the basis of their chemical characteristics wherein most of the popular
NSAIDs are categorized as major derivatives of salicylic acid, acetic
acid, enolic acid, anthranilic acid or propionic acid. However, with the
advancement of scientiﬁc knowledge the classiﬁcation has also been
shifted based on their selectivity for inhibiting cyclooxygenase/pros-
taglandin-endoperoxide synthase (PGHS) enzymes which are the major
targets of these drugs. In addition, a classiﬁcation system has also been
formulated to categorize NSAIDs on the basis of their half-life. Never-
theless, despite the interclass diversity, their functions are relatively
similar. NSAIDs are mostly used for the treatment of patients suﬀering
from pain and inﬂammatory conditions such as chronic pain, osteoar-
thritis, rheumatoid arthritis, postoperative surgical conditions, men-
strual cramps and even used extensively as analgesics and anti-pyretics
[3–4]. Moreover, the superiority of typical NSAIDs (with potent anti-
inﬂammatory action) over acetaminophen (atypical NSAID devoid of
any anti-inﬂammatory action, but with weak, non-speciﬁc cycloox-
ygenase/PGHS-inhibitory and antipyretic action) [5–6] and other an-
tipyretic analgesics like opioids has already been established. Blinde-
d, randomized control trials have demonstrated the eﬃcacy of NSAIDs
over acetaminophen [7]. Several opioid-addiction problems actually
initiate with the therapeutic use of opioid-based painkillers. Therefore,
opiods are far more dangerous than NSAIDs owing to the non-addictive
nature of the latter drugs [8]. Regarding other eﬀects, a recent study on
amyloid beta-induced experimental Alzheimer’s disease (AD) in mice
has shown that mefenamic acid, a fenamate NSAID used to relieve
period pain, could oﬀer protection by suppressing neuroinﬂammation
and memory loss [9]. However, incidents of cognitive impairment in
aspirin users and risk of dementia in elderly people also warn about the
safety concerns and plausible neurotoxic eﬀects of NSAIDs in AD pa-
tients [10–11]. Notably, the protective role of NSAIDs has been sig-
niﬁcantly implicated in various cancers [12]. In addition, there are
some speculations regarding the use of NSAIDs against coronavirus
[13]. In spite of this extensive therapeutic utility, the NSAIDs are in-
famous for multiple severe side eﬀects including gastrointestinal toxi-
cities, cardiovascular risks, renal injuries, and hepatotoxicity as well as
hypertension and other minor disorders [14–17]. The general mode of
action of NSAIDs involves the inhibition of cyclooxygenase/pros-
taglandin-endoperoxide synthase (PGHS-1 and PGHS-2), regulatory
enzymes, involved in the biosynthesis of prostaglandin (PG) which is
strongly implicated in inﬂammation. PGHS-1 is believed to be a
housekeeping gene engaged in multiple biological functions including
protection of gastric mucosa while PGHS-2 is responsible for in-
ﬂammation. Some NSAIDs are non-speciﬁc inhibitors of both the en-
zymes while others are speciﬁc, notably “coxibs” that speciﬁcally in-
hibit PGHS-2. Previously it was believed that PGHS-1 inhibitors, by
inhibiting PG synthesis in gastric mucosa, can indulge in gastro-
intestinal complications. However, contrary to this, a substantial
amount of evidence has emerged in recent years [18–21]. At one point
of time, a shift to coxibs was thought to be eﬀective. Since PGHS-2 is
inducible and is not directly related to gastric mucosal defence, rather
engaged in inﬂammation, inhibition of PGHS-2 by coxibs were sup-
posed to be rather safe and devoid of gastrointestinal and other com-
plications [22]. But emerging evidences have challenged this theory
too. In line with that, in 2000–03 several reports began to emerge re-
garding the cardiovascular adverse eﬀects of PGHS-2 inhibitors and
subsequent placebo controlled trials also showed that those inhibitors
were linked to increased risk of atherothrombotic vascular events
[15–16,23]. Moreover, meta-analyses and randomized trials have fur-
ther conﬁrmed these ﬁndings which led to the withdrawal of several
PGHS-2 inhibitors by US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) [15].
Concurrently with the evolution and establishment of PGHS/PG-de-
pendent mode of NSAID toxicity, a second school of opinions ad-
vocating the direct eﬀect of NSAIDs on mitochondria followed by
generation
of
cellular
oxidative
stress
and
apoptosis
has
also
strengthened its foothold as an independent pathway of NSAID-induced
cytopathology [24]. Other than gastrointestinal and cardiovascular
complications, habitual use of NSAIDs are also associated with ne-
phrotoxicity and eventual renal failure [25] together with other tran-
sient eﬀects on water and electrolyte balance. In addition, idiosyncratic
drug toxicity by NSAIDs has also been signiﬁcantly attributed to mul-
tiple incidences of hepatotoxicity [26]. However, the exact mechanism
involved in inﬂicting these adverse eﬀects by NSAIDs is still elusive. All
these data together eventually challenge the long-standing reputation
of these ‘wonder drugs’ in relation to their rampant medicinal use.
Since, in the current context, NSAID use has become almost unavoid-
able, a relatively safe usage of these drugs is the need of time which can
avert the risk of organ failure. To this end, precise understanding of the
molecular mechanism and signaling pathways involved in NSAID
therapy is quintessential. In addition, chemical modiﬁcation of FDA
approved NSAIDs, by pharmacophore modiﬁcation, aimed at reducing
their toxic eﬀects and improving their bioavailability without com-
promising the therapeutic eﬀects is strongly advocated. Extensive stu-
dies have been already undertaken to analyse the eﬀects of NSAIDs at
the molecular level besides designing new combinatorial formulations
in the form of NSAID-prodrugs with enhanced eﬃcacy. Although there
are discrete individual reports of organ-speciﬁc impact of these drugs
where both PGHS/PG-dependent as well as independent eﬀects of
NSAIDs have been implicated in their cytotoxic actions, till date no
comprehensive document is available which encompasses and accounts
the outcome of diﬀerent randomized trials, meta-analyses, systemic
reviews along with the mode of action of NSAIDs and its eﬀects on
multiple organs in a coherent manner. In this article, we have tried to
provide an overall idea about the structure and function of NSAIDs with
special emphasis on organ damage as well as indicated the possible
strategies of using these drugs in a safer approach by discussing the
previous contributions concurrent with recent understanding of the
ﬁeld.
2. Chemistry and classiﬁcation of NSAIDs
NSAIDs encompass a large class of drugs with extreme structural
and functional diversity. These are mostly weak organic acids (com-
prising of an acidic moiety along with an aromatic functional group). In
terms of functional diversity, isoform-speciﬁc selectivity for PGHS in-
hibition forms the basis of diﬀerentiation; while a third classiﬁcation
takes into account the bioavailability of the NSAIDs in the serum, ac-
counting for the pharmacokinetic aspects of NSAID action in the sys-
temic context. In the following section, a brief description about the
classiﬁcation of NSAIDs is presented.
2.1. Classiﬁcation of NSAIDs based on structure
Based on their chemical structure, NSAIDs can be broadly classiﬁed
into salicylates, aryl and heteroarylacetic acid derivatives, indole/in-
dene acetic acid derivatives, anthranilates and oxicams (enol acids)
(Fig. 1) [27]. The general structure of a typical NSAID consists of an
acidic moiety (carboxylic acid, enols) attached to a planar aromatic
functional group. Salicylates were the ﬁrst identiﬁed NSAIDs following
extraction of salicylic acid from willow bark [1]. They are actually the
derivatives of 2-hydroxybenzoic acid (salicylic acid) [28]. Initially,
salicylic acid was used medicinally in the form of sodium salt; later, this
compound got replaced therapeutically by the acetylated derivative,
acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) or aspirin. Therapeutic utility was enhanced
by the esteriﬁcation of the phenolic hydroxyl group, as in aspirin, or
substitution of a hydrophobic/lipophilic group at C-5 as in diﬂunisal
[28]. After salicylates, aryl or heteroaryl acetic acid derivatives con-
stitute an important class of NSAIDs. Ibuprofen, fenoprofen, naproxen
and oxaprozin are some structural derivatives of aryl or heteroaryl
acetic acid which comprise some of the most popular NSAIDs. The next
category of NSAIDs is indole or indene acetic acid which includes
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
2

----- Page 4 (native) -----
popular pain killers including indomethacin and sulindac. Moving
further, anthranilates are another class of NSAIDs which are N-aryl
substituted derivatives of anthranilic acid. Diclofenac, the derivative of
2-arylacetic acid, is the most widely used anthranilate NSAID found in
diverse formulations including pain killer tablets, injections, topical
ointments and fast acting sprays. Mefenamic acid and meclofenamic
acid are also derived from anthranilic acid. Finally, oxicams, mainly
consisting of piroxicam and meloxicam comprise the last structural
category of NSAIDs, characterized by the presence of 4-hydro-
xybenzothiazine heterocycle [28]. In addition to the structural classi-
ﬁcation, NSAIDs have been also categorized based on their PGHS-spe-
ciﬁc inhibitory activity as well as half life in serum.
2.2. Classiﬁcation of NSAIDs based on the type of PGHS interaction and
selectivity
Bioconversion of arachidonic acid (AA) into inﬂammatory prosta-
noids (prostaglandins and prostacyclin), is mediated by PGHS enzymes;
mainly PGHS-1 and PGHS-2 which are inhibited by NSAIDs. The po-
tency of NSAIDs in inhibiting PGHS-1 and PGHS-2 are often compared
on the basis of their IC50 values (the concentration of NSAIDs that in-
hibits 50% activity of the enzyme) in the in vitro assay system. Of all the
assay systems that have been documented, human whole blood assay is
the most widely accepted [29–30]. Here, it is worthwhile to mention
that almost all the NSAIDs variably inhibit both the PGHS isoforms at
their therapeutic doses. Thus, on the basis of PGHS selectivity, an in-
hibitory ratio is determined which allows a classiﬁcation of NSAIDs.
The inhibitory ratio is based on the PGHS-1 IC50/ PGHS-2 IC50
[29,31–32]. If the ratio is 1, then both the PGHS enzymes are equally
inhibited by the concerned NSAID, if the ratio is less than 1, it means
that the concerned NSAID is less selective for PGHS-2 compared to
PGHS-1 and in case of ratio greater than 1, the NSAID is preferentially
selective towards PGHS-2 [29–32]. It is presumed that side eﬀects of
NSAIDs (such as GI toxicity) are associated with PGHS-1 inhibition
while therapeutic eﬀect (anti-inﬂammatory) is correlated with that of
PGHS-2 and often a high level of PG suppression is needed for ther-
apeutic relevance; however this simplistic view has been questioned
recently [29]. In general, NSAIDs are therapeutically employed at doses
that generate more than 50% reduction of PG production. In this con-
text, it would be important to check the extent to which PGHS-1 gets
inhibited at the same concentration of NSAID that is required for in-
hibiting 80% of PGHS-2 activity. However, in case of diclofenac, the
concentration which inhibits 80% of PGHS-2 activity can also inhibit
almost 70% of PGHS-1 activity at the same time. So, therapeutic dose
(80% inhibition of PGHS-2) can even lead to toxicity (70% inhibition of
PGHS-1). Hence, in this scenario, when relative selectivity varies within
a narrow range, other variables including consumed dose and plasma
half-life should be considered. For example, piroxicam which has long
plasma half life and correlated with GI toxicity in vivo, did not show
notable PGHS-1 selectivity in the in vitro assay [29]. So, it is clear that
the relative potency of NSAIDs vary with their dose, concentration,
plasma half life. Therefore, IC80 value seems to be clinically more re-
levant in comparing NSAIDs’ inhibitory potencies against PGHS-1 and
PGHS-2. Now, on the basis of the potencies to inhibit PGHS isoforms,
NSAIDs can be divided into four main categories (Table 1): (i) non-
selective, complete inhibitors of both PGHS-1 and PGHS-2 (ii) complete
inhibitors of PGHS-1 and PGHS-2, although with speciﬁc preference for
PGHS-2 (iii) strong inhibitors of PGHS-2, although with weak inhibiting
Fig. 1. Classiﬁcation of non steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) based on structure.
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
3

----- Page 5 (native) -----
action against PGHS-1 (iv) weak inhibitors of both PGHS-1 and PGHS-2
[29]. However, in terms of kinetics, NSAID interactions with both the
PGHS isoforms can be also used for their classiﬁcation which is as
follows: freely reversible interaction (ibuprofen), slowly reversible in-
teraction (indomethacin, diclofenac, celecoxib) and irreversible inter-
action (aspirin) [32].
2.3. Classiﬁcation of NSAIDs on the basis of plasma half-life (t½)
NSAIDs can also be divided into short-acting (plasma half-life less
than 6 h) such as aspirin, diclofenac and ibuprofen and long-acting
(half-life approximately greater than 10 h) such as naproxen, celecoxib.
Those with short half-life, like ibuprofen, exhibit quick onset of action
and thus suitable for acute pain. While NSAID like naproxen has a
longer half-life and eﬀective for treating chronic conditions [33].
3. Pharmacology of NSAIDs
More than 90% of the NSAIDS are highly bound to plasma proteins.
These drugs normally exhibit considerably well bioavailability in
monogastric species upon oral, subcutaneous and intramuscular ad-
ministration due to their moderate to high lipid solubility (an aspect
that also allows their penetration of blood–brain barrier) [34]. Direct
urinary excretion of the parent drug is low due to high binding with
plasma proteins; hepatic metabolism clears out the NSAIDs from the
body as inactive metabolites that are excreted in urine and bile. Drug
elimination by clearance and terminal half life is highly species speciﬁc.
The microsomal enzymes cytochrome P450 (CYP)-containing-mixed-
function-oxidase system is responsible for most of the NSAIDs meta-
bolism wherein CYP2C9 is the most important oxidase primarily re-
sponsible for metabolism of a wide range of NSAIDs including cel-
ecoxib, indomethacin, diclofenac, ﬂurbiprofen, ibuprofen, naproxen
and enolic acids like piroxicam and tenoxicam. Notably, allelic varia-
tions in this protein (including CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3) aﬀect the
pharmacotherapeutic eﬃcacy of the medicine in patient-speciﬁc
manner [35]. Hence, pharmacogenomic variability of P450 in a popu-
lation also correlates well with varying degree of metabolism of the
drugs among individuals or ethnic groups [36]. It has been observed
that CYP2C9 predominantly contributes to ibuprofen clearance through
formation of 3-hydroxyibuprofen and 2-hydroxyibuprofen [37]. Apart
from ibuprofen, the action of CYP2C9 on other target NSAIDs has been
reported wherein diclofenac is metabolized to 4′-hydroxydiclofenac,
ﬂurbiprofen is metabolized to 4′-hydroxiﬂurbiprofen and naproxen is
metabolized to 6-desmethylnaproxen [35]. Other than CYP2C9, NSAIDs
are also metabolized by other cytosolic hepatic enzymes of phase I
metabolism including CYP3A4, CYP2C19, CYP2C8 through oxidative
transformations. This is followed by phase II conjugation reactions in-
volving
glucuronidation
by
uridine
5′-dipho-
sphoglucuronosyltransferases (including UGT1A1, UGT2B7, UGT1A9
and UGT2B4) and ultimately biliary excretion of the resultant glucur-
onides and reactive metabolites by ABCC2 eﬄux transporters expressed
on the apical canalicular membranes of hepatocytes and renal tubular
epithelial cells [38–40]. In the aforesaid context, diclofenac metabolism
by UGT2B7, ABCC2 and CYP2C8 has been also linked with hepato-
toxicity due to allelic variations in these enzymes notably, UGT2B7
allele
[38,41].
In
regards
to
ibuprofen
metabolism,
at
high
concentrations, CYP3A4 catalyzes 2-hydroxylation for systemic clear-
ance while 3-OH-ibuprofen (formed by CYP2C9) gets further trans-
formed to carboxy-ibuprofen by cytosolic dehydrogenases [37]. Thus,
NSAIDs may undergo either CYP-mediated phase I followed by UGT-
mediated phase II metabolism or direct UGT-mediated glucuronidation
(phase II metabolism) [5] before ultimate renal excretion mediated by
eﬄux transporters. Around 10–15% of absorbed ibuprofen is glucur-
onidated directly to ibuprofen-acyl glucuronide by multiple UGTs in-
cluding UGT1A9, UGT2B17, UGT1A3 and UGT2B7 [42]. Although
binding to plasma proteins hinder the ready passage of NSAIDs to the
interstitial and transcellular ﬂuids from the plasma, the same aspect
facilitates their penetrance and persistence in the inﬂammatory exu-
dates, thereby allowing for anti-inﬂammatory actions. Inherent diﬀer-
ences in the pharmacokinetic properties of NSAIDs with chiral centers
in their structure (including arylpropionates and etodolac) further de-
mand speciﬁc attention before prescribing a suitable dosage for ad-
ministration. This is due to the structural and hence pharmacokinetic
diﬀerences between the enantiomers of same NSAIDs along with their
potential conversion from R(-) to S(+) form or vice versa, in vivo, that
ultimately dictate their speciﬁcities in terms of systemic clearance,
elimination half lives and distribution volumes of a particular en-
antiomer in the circulation [34]. PGHS inhibition predominantly ac-
counts for the pharmacodynamic and toxicodynamic actions of NSAIDs
[34]; although mitochondrial toxicity and adverse drug-drug interac-
tions also signiﬁcantly contribute to NSAID actions on the system.
While PGHS-1 inhibition primarily contributes to the toxic side eﬀects
of these drugs, PGHS-2 inhibition underlies most of the therapeutic
eﬀects [34]; although instances of PGHS-2 inhibition associated cardi-
otoxicity strongly warrants the risk of coxib usage.
4. Therapeutic uses and repurposing of NSAIDs
With the discovery of aspirin’s mechanism of action by John Vane
(Noble Prize 1982), understanding of NSAIDs increased over the years,
thereby escalating the abilities to develop novel anti-inﬂammatory
therapeutics. Owing to the analgesic, anti-pyretic, anti-inﬂammatory
activities these drugs are extensively used in treating pain, fever and
inﬂammation in rheumatic disorders, osteoarthritis and dysmenorrhoea
[36,43–45]. They are also implicated in sports medicine and popular
among sports persons and soldiers [46–49]. Owing to the increasing
demand for repurposing of already FDA-approved cheaper drugs in
treating new diseases (in addition to the canonical purposes), and
considering the multiple eﬀects of NSAIDs, these drugs are now also
aimed for repurposing against other serious health implications. Use of
aspirin as a cardioprotective agent for treating atherosclerosis can be
considered as the oldest and most classical example of using an anti-
inﬂammatory drug for cardiovascular disease. Exploiting the same ra-
tionale of NSAID-induced PGHS inhibition and PG depletion, these
drugs are gaining immense importance as new generation anti-cancer
agents [50]. Other than PGHS-2 inhibition, induction of tumor cell
apoptosis, downregulation of epidermal growth factor receptor, at-
tenuation of neoangiogenesis and protection from DNA damage are
some of the strategies by which coxib and non-coxib NSAIDs like aspirin
oﬀer chemo preventive as well as therapeutic eﬀect against various
cancers [51]. Evidences of reduced risk for developing cancers (by long
term NSAID-users) as well as regression of tumor mass upon treatment
Table 1
Categorization of NSAIDs based on PGHS-selective inhibitory action.
Categories
PGHS isoform selectivity
Representative NSAIDs
Category 1
PGHS-1 and PGHS-2
Indomethacin, Aspirin, Diclofenac, Naproxen, Ibuprofen
Category 2
5-50 fold selectivity for PGHS-2
Meloxicam, Celecoxib, Nimesulide, Etodolac
Category 3
Greater than 50 fold selectivity for PGHS-2
NS-398
Category 4
Poor selectivity for PGHS-1 and PGHS-2
Sulfasalazine, Sodium salicyclate, Nabumetone,
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
4

----- Page 6 (native) -----
with NSAIDs (used in combination chemotherapy regimen) clearly in-
dicate the preventive as well as therapeutic potencies [52–53]. Because,
inﬂammatory microenvironment is highly conducive for survival and
proliferation of malignant cells along with evasion of anti-tumor im-
mune response and resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs, NSAIDs
strike at the base of these evasive strategies by depleting the in-
ﬂammatory milieu thereby culling the cancer cells [54]. Several studies
have convincingly proved the eﬃcacy of NSAIDs in direct che-
motherapy, combination chemotherapy and even neoadjuvant che-
motherapy owing to their multiple anticancer actions which include,
but not essentially limited to, blocking cell proliferation of diverse
cancer cell types, preventing tumor angiogenesis and metastasis, re-
ducing chemo and radio resistance and of course inducing apoptosis
[55]. Platelet aggregation and adherence to tumor cells aid in immune
evasion of malignant cells thereby facilitating metastasis. NSAIDs sig-
niﬁcantly interfere with these processes. As a novel strategy of potential
anti-cancer therapy, sulindac, aspirin, naproxen and other NSAIDs have
been used to target cancer-associated epigenetic processes and mi-
croRNA (miRNA) expression [56–57]. A system-biological approach
was also used to construct an NSAID-eﬀect model based on the PGHS-
pathway to identify miRNA biomarkers relevant to tumors. The out-
come of this study could be important in development of personalized
medicine [58]. In regards to the PGHS-2 and its impact on cancer,
coxibs have been found to prevent chemo resistance in breast cancer
cells through blocking PGHS-2-dependent-PGE2 production and in-
ﬂammation-associated carcinogenesis [59–60]. Notably, celecoxib has
been found to target breast cancer stem cells, prevent carcinogenic
epithelial to mesenchymal transition and block metastasis via PGE2
depletion and Wnt signaling downregulation [61]. Although PGHS-2
inhibition seems a potential strategy for cancer prevention by coxibs,
serious concerns regarding the long term cardiovascular safety of coxibs
used in Adenomatous Polyp Prevention on Vioxx (APPROVe, rofecoxib)
and Adenoma Prevention with Celecoxib (APC, celecoxib) trials (which
aimed at testing the preventive eﬀect of coxibs on recurrence of col-
orectal polyps) got highlighted. A 2–3 fold elevation in cardiovascular
risk among patients taking 25 mg of rofecoxib in the APPROVe trial led
to premature termination of the study along with subsequent with-
drawal of Vioxx from the market [62]. The cardiovascular risk of se-
lective PGHS-2 inhibitors therefore overshadowed the anti-cancer po-
tency of some of these drugs; although PGHS-2 still remained as a
potential anti-neoplastic target. In this regard, compared to coxibs,
aspirin has proved to be a rather safe NSAID with signiﬁcant eﬃcacy
against diverse tumors. Aspirin-induced PGHS-1 inhibition and asso-
ciated TxA2 depletion blocks platelet aggregation and adherence to
tumor cells, thereby increasing chemo sensitivity of tumors. Aspirin,
which has shown promising preclinical results in preventing cancer is
now being investigated in an Add-Aspirin phase III, double-blind, ran-
domized trial with four non-metastatic solid-tumour cohorts (breast,
colorectal, gastro-oesophageal and prostrate) to check the recurrence
and survival of the patients with those tumours after standard aspirin
use [63]. The interpretation of the preplanned analysis of feasibility of
Add-Aspirin Trial indicates well-tolerability of aspirin after radical
radiotherapy [64]. It is noteworthy to mention that despite its anti-
cancer eﬀect the risk of serious bleeding due to aspirin persists. This has
been well addressed in the Add-Aspirin study where several special
strategies were taken to reduce bleeding with aspirin, such as exclusion
of subjects susceptible to bleeding, randomization of volunteers with
age above 75 years to 100 mg aspirin or placebo due to their dose and
age dependent vulnerability to bleeding and also use of proton pump
inhibitors (PPI) for participants post partial gastrectomy or oesopha-
gectomy [64]. Another randomized phase III placebo-controlled trial is
also undergoing to check the potential of aspirin (300 mg daily) in
preventing the recurrence of cancer in human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 (HER2) negative breast cancer patients post chemotherapy,
surgery
and/or
radiation
therapy
(ClinicalTrials.gov
Identiﬁer:
NCT02927249). In addition, a 10-year population cohort study (aspirin
user is age-sex matched to non-user with a ratio of 1:2) in Honk Kong
depicted signiﬁcant reduction of diﬀerent cancers (liver, stomach, col-
orectum, lung, oesophagus, pancreas, leukaemia), except breast cancer,
in long-term aspirin users compared with those who have not been
prescribed aspirin [65]. Other systemic reviews and cohort studies are
also in agreement with this observation [66–67]. Apart from cancer,
NSAIDs have been also repurposed for other clinical complications
which include diﬂunisal-induced osteoprotection against staphylo-
coccal osteomyelitis [68], mefenamic acid-mediated protection against
schistosomiasis [69], aspirin and ibuprofen-mediated cryptococcal cell
death [70], oxyphenbutazone-induced sensitization of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis to host-derived factors and exogenous antimycobacterial
compounds [71] and piroxicam-induced dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibi-
tion as an alternative strategy for regulating glucose metabolism in
diabetes mellitus [72]. While observations from drug repurposing stu-
dies in pre-clinical and research settings are highly encouraging, further
exploration
and
extensive
validations
are
mandatory
before
re-
purposing of NSAIDs in clinical settings. Recently, induction of PGHS-2
has been also linked with seizures and PGHS-2 inhibitors have been
proposed as potential therapeutic option, targeting PGHS-2 mediated
neuroinﬂammation during epilepsy [73]. In this regard, mefenamic
acid has been linked to neuroprotection and prevention of cognitive
impairment in mice by preventing amyloid beta-induced NLRP3/IL-1β-
dependent inﬂammosome activation, neuroinﬂammation and memory
loss suggesting its putative eﬀect against AD [9,74–75]. In contrast to
aforesaid, instances of NSAID-associated cognitive problems and risk of
dementia in elderly people raise multiple concerns about the safety
proﬁles of NSAIDs for using against AD [10–11,76–77]. The complex
associations (both positive and negative) of AD with NSAID-use there-
fore demands precise randomized clinical trials taking into account the
speciﬁc NSAIDs used by patients, duration, dose, past history of cog-
nitive defects and other relevant confounders in order to deﬁne safety
proﬁles of NSAIDs in AD. Despite these complex and contradictory ef-
fects on cognitivefunctions, NSAIDs have been positively implicated in
post-surgical complications and in treating burn patients [78–79].
Furthermore, in the COVID-19 background, owing to a previous report
of indomethacin in preventing RNA synthesis of coronavirus, a lot of
speculations are ﬂying around the therapeutic use of NSAIDs against
COVID-19 [80]. A schematic representation of the diverse canonical
and emerging applications of NSAIDs has been presented (Fig. 2)
Since, NSAIDs are unfortunately associated with number of serious
complications making diﬀerent organs vulnerable to damage, a thor-
ough understanding about their diverse subcellular eﬀects and mode of
action are extremely essential.
5. Mode of action of NSAIDs
There are several schools of opinions which tend to categorize the
NSAID actions based on major subcellular targets. PGHS dependent and
independent pathways of action are the two most widely accepted
mechanisms by which NSAIDs are reported to act. While the ﬁrst mode
relies on the action of NSAIDs on the production and abundance of
prostanoids (the major inﬂammatory mediators of the system) to reg-
ulate tissue inﬂammation, the second mode of action is dependent on
the toxic action of NSAIDs against the cells specially the subcellular
Fig. 2. Classical applications and emerging uses of NSAIDs.
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
5

----- Page 7 (native) -----
bioenergetic work horses, mitochondria. Before delving deeper into the
organ-speciﬁc action of these drugs, it is essential to provide a com-
prehensive idea about the two basic mechanisms behind NSAIDs-re-
lated organ damage.
5.1. NSAID-PGHS-prostanoid axis
Although human beings have been consuming NSAIDs in diﬀerent
forms for more than 3,500 years, it was not until John Vane in 1971,
when cyclooxygenase 1 enzyme (PGHS-1) was identiﬁed as the mole-
cular target of NSAIDs which proved instrumental in elucidating the
molecular mechanism of NSAID action [81–82]. Vane’s pioneering
work also revealed that these chemically varied drugs, by inhibiting
PGHS-1, actually reduced PG formation [81,83–85]. His elucidation
was followed twenty years later by the identiﬁcation of a second cy-
clooxygenase enzyme named PGHS-2 which is also associated with
prostaglandin synthesis like PGHS-1 [86–87]. Other than PGHS-1 and
2, Chandrasekharan et.al in 2002 described a third distinct cycloox-
ygenase isozyme, cyclooxygenase-3, in brain-tissue of dogs, which is a
splice variant of PGHS-1 and showed some sensitivity to paracetamol
[88]. Although, this sensitivity has not been properly justiﬁed in hu-
mans [89]. However, in this review the main focus would remain on
PGHS-1 and PGHS-2, the two main pharmacological targets of NSAIDs.
Both these isoforms reside predominantly in the endoplasmic reticulum
and are identical in length with just over 600 amino acids (having 63%
homology). The molecular weights of the enzymes are approximately
71 kDa and they are bisfunctional in catalytic activity having both
cyclooxygenase and peroxidase functions [90–91]. The active site of
both the isoforms are at the end of a hydrophobic channel. NSAIDs
prevent the access of the arachidonic acid (AA), the substrate of PGHS,
to this channel. PGHS-1 and PGHS-2 channels diﬀer with non-selective
NSAIDs having access to both the channels; which is not the case for
PGHS-2 [19]. The principal diﬀerence between the isoenzyme is the
substitution of isoleucine 523 in PGHS-1 with valine in PGHS-2 [92]. As
mentioned earlier, these two isoforms are responsible for catalyzing the
rate-limiting step of prostanoid biosynthesis and are negatively regu-
lated by NSAIDs (Fig. 3). Prostanoids are actually the eicosanoids. The
major eicosanoids consist of PGs, thromboxanes (Txs), leukotrienes
(LTEs) and lipoxins (LXs). Of these PGs and Txs are collectively called
prostanoids [93]. PGHS-1 is constitutively expressed in most cells, and
produces prostanoids for housekeeping purposes such as gastric mu-
cosal protection, regulation of acid secretion, and homeostasis as well
as maintaining renal functions. On the other hand, PGHS-2, induced by
inﬂammatory cytokines, mitogens, endotoxins and tumor-promoters,
produces prostanoids during inﬂammation and cancer [94]. PGHS-2
has been mostly linked with immune cells including leukocytes and
macrophages as well as ﬁbroblasts, chondrocytes, endothelial and me-
sangial cells and notably the ensuing inﬂammatory sites in the body
[95–96]. However accumulated evidence now clearly suggests that
PGHS-2 is also constitutively expressed in a number of tissues including
brain, gut, lung, thymus and kidney wherein it produces prostanoids
[97]. Chemically, prostanoids are bioactive lipid molecules which
mediate autocrine and paracrine action via high-aﬃnity G protein
coupled receptors [81]. They are derived from 20 carbon ω-6 fatty acid,
AA, by the action of PGHS on AA [98]. Since AA is highly reactive and
sensitive to oxidation, it is not found freely in cells; rather stored in
membrane phospholipids mainly as phosphatidylcholine, phosphati-
dylethanolamine and phosphatidylinositol. The phospholipases (PLA2)
liberate them from the membrane phospholipids. Subsequently free AA
is ﬁrst oxidized to PGG2 (endoperoxide) by the cyclooxygenase activity
followed by peroxidation to form PGH2 (precursor of prostanoids) by
PGHS enzymes (Fig. 3). PGH2 is the precursor of series-2 prostaglandins
or inﬂammatory prostanoids. Notably, PGHS enzymes can also convert
other polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) such as dihomo-γ-linolenic
acid (DGLA) to series-1 prostaglandin precursor PGH1 (generally con-
sidered as anti-inﬂammatory PGs), eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) to
series-3 prostaglandin precursor PGH3 and linolenic acids to 9- and 13-
hydroxyoctadecaienoic acids (HODE) [99]. Other than by PGHS, PUFA
such as AA can be further metabolized through lipoxygenase (LOX) or
epoxygenase to form other eicosanoids. The structural and functional
distinctions of the PGHS isoforms is attributed to expressional di-
chotomy of the genes in the physiological and pathological contexts as
well as diﬀerences in the requirement of substrate concentrations and
range of substrate speciﬁcity. Notably, PGHS-2 has wider substrate
speciﬁcity, with ability to metabolize AA ester and amide derivatives
and oxygenate diverse PUFAs unlike PGHS-1 [62]. Further, the reten-
tion of AA-oxygenation ability of aspirin-treated PGHS-2 also con-
tributes to the diﬀerence in PGHS isoform-speciﬁc function and holds
physiological relevance owing to the anti-inﬂammatory property of
polyhydroxylated lipids produced in the process [96]. As already stated,
Fig.
3. NSAID-PGHS-prostanoid
axis.
PGHS-1/2
isoenzyme mediated prostanoid biosynthesis from
arachidonic acid. Arachidonic acid is produced from
phospholipids of the plasma membrane under the
action of phospholipase A2. In addition to pros-
taglandin (PG) and thromboxane (Tx) formation by
PGHS isoforms in a cell and tissue-speciﬁc manner,
leukotrienes (LTEs) are other immune mediators
which are produced by the enzyme 5- lipoxygenase
(5-LO). Each prostanoid interacts with its speciﬁc
receptor as indicated in the ﬁgure.
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
6

----- Page 8 (native) -----
the series-2 prostaglandin precursor, PGH2 gives rise to a number of
prostanoids, such as PGD2, PGE2 PGF2α, PGI2 and thromboxane A2
(TxA2) [94], through tissue-speciﬁc isomerisation to produce the di-
verse prostanoids which exert wide range of biological eﬀects upon
interaction with speciﬁc G-protein coupled receptors [96]. The role of
these prostanoids is therefore also tissue speciﬁc and hence determines
the pathophysiological outcomes in a context-dependent manner. While
PGD2, PGE2 and PGI2 are potent vasodilators in cardiovascular system,
TxA2 exhibit vasoconstriction in the same system. TxA2 plays a sig-
niﬁcant role in platelet aggregation, whereas PGI2 displays antic-
oagulant properties. In airways, TxA2 and PGF2α act as bronchocon-
strictors while PGI2 and PGE2 are bronchodilators. PGE2, PGF2α and
PGI2 also give protection to gastric mucosa. Moreover, PGE2 and PGI2
are responsible for renal blood ﬂow and diuresis in compromised kid-
neys. In relation to inﬂammatory response of body, PGE2 is the most
important PG [81]. Regarding the adverse eﬀects of NSAIDs, it is very
important to understand the role of the two PGHS isoforms in produ-
cing these prostanoids as signaling mediators since the eﬀect of PGHS
isoforms could be counter intuitive. For example, in kidney while PGI2
produced by PGHS-2 aﬀects renin secretion, PGE2 produced by PGHS-1
regulates glomerular ﬁltration [85]. Essentially, all the biological ac-
tivities of these prostanoids depend on their binding to G protein-cou-
pled cell-surface receptors for example FP, IP, and TP receptors which
are meant for PGF2, PGI2 and TxA2 respectively [100–101]. The re-
ceptors for PGD2 are DP1 and DP2 or CRTH2 (chemoattractant re-
ceptor-homologous molecule) receptors [100–101]. On the other hand
PGE2 has four subtypes of receptors named EP1-EP4 [100–101]. Here, it
is important to note that although, there is structural diﬀerence be-
tween PGHS-1 and PGHS-2 the enzymatic steps involved in the con-
version of AA to prostanoids by both these isoforms are identical [98].
5.2. NSAIDs, mitochondrial oxidative stress and apoptosis
As already mentioned above, despite their clinical relevance,
NSAIDs are cytotoxic compounds. NSAIDs can exert activation of mi-
tochondrial oxidative stress (MOS), a cytopathological condition char-
acterized by severe mitochondrial damage due to activation of detri-
mental redox-active chain reactions followed by severe bioenergetic
crisis and eventual cell death. Mitochondrial electron transport chain
(ETC) complex-I is the major target of NSAIDs (Fig. 4). Notably, di-
clofenac has been found to be most potent among the NSAIDs in in-
hibiting ETC complex I activity, thereby leading to electron leakage
from the respiratory chain [102]. The leaked e- causes partial reduction
of molecular oxygen to form superoxide, O2
.-, the progenitor reactive
oxygen species (ROS) [103]. Intra-mitochondrial O2
.-, which is mem-
brane impermeable, is immediately converted to H2O2 by the mi-
tochondrial super oxide dismutase, SOD2, as a protective response
against oxidative stress. However, being membrane permeable, H2O2
escapes the mitochondria (before subsequent neutralization) causing
oxidative damage to cellular macromolecules including DNA, protein,
lipids and carbohydrates, rendering them functionally inactive. While
inside mitochondria, O2
.- damages various Fe-S cluster proteins in-
cluding aconitase and cytochrome c, leading to Fe2+ release which in
turn reacts with H2O2 via Fenton reaction to produce hydroxyl radical
(.OH), the most damaging ROS [104]. All these events perturb the
cellular redox homeostasis leading to the activation of intrinsic
pathway of apoptosis. Elevated ROS also triggers mitochondrial depo-
larization and detrimentally shifts the mitochondrial structural dy-
namic balance towards hyperﬁssion [105]. NSAIDs further enhance
ubiquitination-dependent mitochondrial clearance. In course, the da-
maged mitochondrial membrane proteins release cytochrome c which
moves on to form the apoptosome complex required for activating the
executioner caspases leading to nuclear DNA damage and eventual cell
death. During these processes, damaged mitochondrial DNA is often
released from the necrotic cells which act as damage associated mole-
cular patterns to attract immune cells for phagocytic clearance of the
dying cells. In this way MOS leads to tissue inﬂammation which oper-
ates in a positive feedback loop during chronic insults leading to organ
damage. The cytotoxic actions of NSAID also include arrested cell
proliferation, activation of multiple death pathways including extrinsic
apoptosis [106–107] and most notably increasing the sensitivity of
cancer cells to apoptosis while overcoming chemo and radioresistance
along with inhibiting tumor-associated angiogenesis [108–109]. Within
the purview of this NSAID-PGHS-prostanoid axis and NSAID-MOS-
apoptosis axis, we can now proceed to discuss the basic mechanism
involved in NSAIDs-mediated damage to diﬀerent organs.
6. NSAIDs and organ damage
With
their
antinociceptive,
anti-inﬂammatory
and
anticancer
properties, NSAIDs which are friends in need often become formidable
foes (owing to their non speciﬁc cytotoxic eﬀects), leading to multiple
organ pathologies. Here, we will focus on the detrimental impact of
NSAIDs on 6 major organs whose coordinated functioning is pivotal for
maintaining healthy life. A schematic representation summarizing the
underlying cytotoxic eﬀects of NSAIDs on human body is presented
(Fig. 5).
6.1. Risk to the gastric mucosal and small bowel injuries
In the treatment of chronic inﬂammatory conditions by NSAIDs,
development of gastric mucosal injury creates the major limitation.
Prevalence of gastric mucosal lesions has been observed in patients,
with rheumatoid arthritis or pain, who have taken NSAIDs [110–111].
A prospective, cross-sectional multi-centred study in India, which in-
cluded 8 medical colleges across the country, reported NSAID-related
GI complications in 30.08% cases [112]. In a study performed in Pa-
kistan, analysing 820 patients who have undergone upper gastro-
intestinal (GI) endoscopy (1998–2000), it was found that 14.7% pa-
tients reﬂected NSAIDs-related peptic ulcer. Notably, duodenal ulcer
(65.3%) was found more frequently than gastric ulcer (42.3%) [111]. In
all the cases the duration and dose of NSAID usage were the major
determinants of the severity of complications [112]. The risk of GI
complications by NSAIDs increases by 2.5–5.0% in patients with a
previous history of GI incidents [113]. In United States, in 2000, more
than 111 million prescriptions were written for NSAIDs with an ap-
proximate cost of $4.8 billion [114]. Since these drugs have a wide
range of applications, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is-
sued a health advisory which stated that NSAIDs should be used at the
lowest eﬀective dose and for the minimum duration consistent with
individual patient treatment goals [114]. However, several studies have
linked relatively short-time use of NSAIDs to risk of GI, CVD and renal
complications [114]. Initially, it was believed that traditional NSAIDs
inhibit gastroprotective PGHS-1-derived PGE2 and PGI2 thereby in-
ﬂicting injury in the gastric mucosa [115]. This instigated the devel-
opment of PGHS-2 selective NSAIDS [115]. PGHS-2 is generally in-
duced during inﬂammation [116]. So, the idea was, PGHS-2 speciﬁc
NSAIDs would take care of the pain and inﬂammation while not in-
terfering with PGHS-1 pathway. However, this simplistic view has been
challenged by overwhelming evidence, one of which shows that PGHS-
2 also plays a signiﬁcant role in resolving gastric mucosal inﬂammation
and healing the ulcers [20]. Subsequently, in a meta-analysis study by
Coxib and traditional NSAID Trialists’ (CNT) Collaboration, which
comprised of 124,514 participants, the CNT researchers compared the
NSAID-induced GI complications among various NSAIDs including na-
proxen, diclofenac, ibuprofen and PGHS-2 inhibitors such as rofecoxib,
lumiracoxib, etoricoxib, valdecoxib, GW40368. They found an in-
creased risk of upper GI complications across all the medicines analyzed
[117]. On top of that, since the beginning of this millennium, a number
of randomized control trials (RCT), aimed at evaluating GI complica-
tions of NSAIDs, have linked PGHS-2 selective NSAIDs with cardio-
vascular diseases (CVD) (detailed in the next section) which led to the
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
7

----- Page 9 (native) -----
withdrawal of a number of NSAIDs [118–119]. Thus ‘shift-to-PGHS-2’
strategy did not give expected results. Now, it is really important to
verify the notion whether PGHS-1 inhibition is really the actual per-
petrator. Surprisingly, one study has shown that in PGHS-1 knock-out
mice, aspirin predominantly induced gastric mucosal injury possibly by
a PG-independent mechanism, questioning the previous understanding
of PGHS-1-mediated gastroprotection [21]. In addition, aspirin in-
creased gastric mucosal PGE2 expression in PGHS-1 knock-out mice,
probably through induction of PGHS-2. Now, it is clear that PGHS-1
pathway is not the only pathway underlying NSAID-toxicity in the
gastric mucosa. Hence, the question is what is that PG-independent
mechanism? However, in that study the authors also proposed reduced
surface hydrophobicity as a possible explanation for the damage [21].
NSAIDs, which are weak acids, have been reported to interact with the
mucosal cell surface phospholipid bilayer and reduce hydrophobicity in
the gastroduodenal mucosa. This compromises the hydrophobic lining,
thereby exposing the mucosa to luminal aggressive factors (including
gastric acid). A study has shown that when aspirin was co-administered
with a phospholipid, there was reduced gastric injury even after
treatment with otherwise toxic combination of aspirin and a PGHS-2
selective agent [19]. However, disruption of phospholipid bilayer alone
is still not suﬃcient to explain the severity of NSAID-induced gastric
toxicity. In this regard, recently NSAID-mediated uncoupling of oxida-
tive phosphorylation, MOS and apoptosis has been implicated. Owing
to ‘ion trapping’ during absorption, micromolar to millimolar con-
centration of NSAIDs can uncouple oxidative phosphorylation, thereby
destabilizing ATP production in the mitochondria leading to bioener-
getic crisis [19]. Electron microscopic studies and sub-cellular organelle
marker enzyme analysis revealed the uncoupling eﬀect of NSAIDs in
both in vitro and in vivo [120] pre-clinical settings of experimental
gastropathy. In a dose dependent manner, NSAIDs were found to inhibit
electron transfer through complex I [102,120]. Furthermore, electron
paramagnetic studies using sub-mitochondrial particles, revealed that
indomethacin, a very well known non-selective NSAID, could bind to a
site near Complex I and ubiquinone thereby generating radical species
[121]. Accumulated evidence has supported this ﬁnding by demon-
strating ampliﬁcation of ROS in the gastric mucosa with severe MOS
and apoptosis [104,122–127]. Further studies with antioxidant-therapy
have found to ameliorate NSAID-inﬂicted gastric mucosal complica-
tions indicating a crucial role of oxidative stress in the pathophysiology
[128–130]. In addition to apoptosis and MOS, NSAIDs can also unleash
myriad of pro-inﬂammatory factors (TNF-α, NF-κB, ICAM-1) in the
gastric mucosa leading to profound inﬂammation [115,131–132]. Very
recently,
an
anti-inﬂammatory
molecule,
polydeoxyribonucleotide
Fig. 4. Overview of NSAID-induced mitochondrial reactive oxidants production leading to cellular pathology. NSAID triggers electron leakage from complex I of the
electron transport chain (ETC) leading to incomplete reduction of molecular oxygen followed by superoxide (O2
.-) production. O2
.- is the precursor of most reactive
oxygen species (ROS); itself rapidly being converted to H2O2 by superoxide dismutase (SOD2). In the presence of transitional metals (such as Fe2+), H2O2 can be
converted to hydroxyl radical (HO·). H2O2 may be scavenged by glutathione peroxidise (GPx) in presence of GSH. The oxidised glutathione (GSSG) is reduced back to
GSH by glutathione reductase (GR) in presence of NADPH. Ampliﬁcation of ROS causes fall of mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm). Reactive radicals react with
biomolecules like membrane lipids, proteins and mtDNA producing lipid peroxides, protein carbonyls and DNA damage. Cytochrome C gets released from damaged
mitochondrial to cytosol through outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM) permeabilization and activate apoptotic pathway. All these events together contribute to a
wide range of cellular pathologies. Dotted arrows indicate detrimental reactions involving free radicals.
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
8

----- Page 10 (native) -----
(PDRN) has been found to reduce NSAID-induced gastropathy by re-
ducing pro-inﬂammatory cytokines and apoptosis via MAPK/NF-κB
signaling pathway [131]. Moreover, due to the inhibition of PGHS
isoforms, AA metabolism probably shifts towards 5-lipoxygenase
pathway producing leukotrienes which can also induce inﬂammation in
the gastric mucosa [18]. Lately, it has been also shown that via PKCζ-
P38-DRP1 pathway, indomethacin triggered the subcellular activation
of mitochondrial hyper-ﬁssion which is critical in contributing to gas-
tric mucosal injury [105]. Having discussed all these mechanisms, it is
important to mention that gastric acid secretion along with inhibition of
PGHS-derived PGs may be attributed to the aggravation of the pa-
thology inﬂicted by MOS. Conforming to the aforementioned; the most
critical consequence of PGHS-inhibition could be perturbation of mi-
crocirculation [19]. Other than PGs, nitric oxide (NO) also plays a
signiﬁcant role in maintaining intestinal microcirculation. However, a
long-term clinical trial did not signiﬁcantly show any diﬀerence be-
tween AZD3582 (PGHS-inhibiting nitric oxide donator) versus NSAID
in osteoarthritis patients [133]. In addition, neutrophil inﬁltration has
been also implicated in the mechanically compromised micro vascular
blood ﬂow [19]. However, vascular eﬀects could not be considered as
the primary event in NSAID-mediated gastric mucosal damage [19].
Since gastric mucosal lining is constantly exposed to gastric acid, a role
of acid should also be discussed in regard to NSAID-toxicity. The “ion
trapping theory” demonstrates that the acidic pH of the gastric lumen
facilitates passive cellular diﬀusion of the non-ionized, lipid soluble
NSAIDs followed by re-conversion into ionized and lipophobic form
within the neutral cytosolic pH of the gastric mucosal cell where they
are assumed to induce subsequent toxicity [24]. In addition, the gastric
acid synergistically acts as an aggravating necrotic factor to further
erode the mucosa thereby worsening the gastric consequences of long
term NSAIDs-treatment [19]. In relationtomucosalerosion, it is note-
worthy that NSAIDS also prevent re-epithelialization of the injured
mucosal layer [134]. As a remedial measure, clinicians mostly depend
on histamine H2 receptor antagonists, proton pump inhibitors (PPIs)
and antacids which predominantly act by suppressing gastric acid se-
cretion and neutralizing luminal acidity respectively [115]. There is
also evidence that PPIs like omeprazole exert anti-oxidant eﬀect at a
dose much lower than their acid suppressing dose [126], thereby in-
dicating a dual eﬀect of PPI-based treatment. However, complications
of excessive gastric acid suppression, like dyspepsia, luminal dysbiosis,
gastric microﬂoral imbalance, vitamin B12 deﬁciency, pernicious an-
emia, osteoarthritis, malabsorption of certain drugs active in the acidic
microenvironment and even gastric parietal cell hyperplasia and gastric
cancer staunchly warrant against rampant use of PPIs and histamine
receptor blockers [104]. In fact, a recent study also indicated that PPIs
can actually exacerbate indomethacin-induced small intestinal damage
by detrimentally altering intestinal microbiome composition [135].
Hence, gastric acid is in no way a physiological evil and opting for anti-
oxidant-based therapeutic strategy to prevent the gastric mucosa from
NSAID-induced cytopathies is a rather safer approach than indis-
criminate usage of acid suppressors.
In addition to upper gut complications, detrimental impact of
NSAIDs on lower gastrointestinal tract is equally crucial in the risk
evaluation of these drugs. In fact, over the past decade hospitalizations
due to NSAID-associated lower gut complications have increased com-
pared to the upper gut pathologies [136], thereby underscoring the
relevance of NSAID-enteropathy manifested as iron deﬁciency anemia,
protein loss and hypoalbuminemia, indigestion, and abdominal pain.
Severe complications include luminal perforation, occult bleeding, in-
testinal stricture, obstructions and ulcers [137]. Advent of modern
imaging techniques including capsule endoscopy and double balloon
endoscopy have eased the detection of myriad enteric lesions including
erosions, petechiae, varix, reddened folds, loss of villi and ulcers
[137–138]. Incidentally, enteric injuries are evident in approximately
71% of chronic NSAID users [139], while prevalence rate of direct
mucosal breach has been found in around 50% of chronic NSAID users
Fig. 5. Eﬀect of NSAIDs on diﬀerent target organs. The action of NSAIDs on major organs including stomach, small intestine, heart, liver, kidney, respiratory tract
and brain is mainly mediated through PGHS-dependent prostanoid modulation and alteration of mitochondrial functional integrity leading to mitochondrial oxi-
dative stress (MOS) generation, depolarization of mitochondrial transmembrane potential (ΔΨm) and consequent cell death. However, in heart, low dose aspirin
actually oﬀers cardioprotection through anti-thrombotic eﬀect. Upward arrows indicate upregulation/elevation; downward arrows indicate downregulation/de-
pletion.
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
9

----- Page 11 (native) -----
[140]. Mode of NSAID absorption within the enterocytes is more direct
and diﬀerent from “trapping theory” applicable in the gastric cells.
However, both NSAID-mediated PG depletion and mitochondrial pa-
thology have been found to be instrumental in the early stage of injury
leading to impairment of intestinal mucosal barrier function. As a
consequence, the invasion of gram negative enterobacteria initiate the
inﬂammatory cascade wherein Toll like receptor-4 (TLR-4)-induced
proinﬂammatory cytokine upsurge along with NLRP3 inﬂammosome
activation attract the neutrophils eventually leading to oxidative burst,
chronic inﬂammation, apoptosis and ultimately intestinal ulceration
[140]. Although, the pathogenesis of enteropathy diﬀers with that of
gastropathy in the later stages, uncoupling of mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation, ATP deﬁciency, elevation of cytosolic Ca2+ and Na+/
K+ imbalance and consequent induction of apoptosis are some of the
hall mark and common events triggered in both these gut compart-
ments by NSAIDs. As a result the barrier function is severely compro-
mised due to osmotic imbalance of enteric epithelial cells leading to
increased permeability and invasion by luminal aggressive and noxious
factors including bile acids, pancreatic secretions, hydrolytic/proteo-
lytic enzymes and gram negative bacteria. Intercellular tight junctions
are severely compromised by the aforesaid events along with ag-
gravation due to apoptotic loss of enterocytes [24] and proteolytic
disruption of intestinal capillaries. Bacterial LPS along with TNF-α and
High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1), a DAMP released from necrotic
enterocytes [141] are chemotactic signals for macrophage and neu-
trophil inﬁltration to the injured mucosa. Intestinal pathogens and bile
acids further strengthen inﬂammation and the process proceeds in a
feedback loop leading to severe tissue injury in chronic NSAID users.
Bile acids are especially instrumental factors that highly aggravate
NSAID-induced damage as there are reports showing that NSAID alone
can trigger less macroscopic injuries in spite of increasing membrane
permeability and inﬂammation in bile duct-ligated rats [142]. An in-
teresting study revealed that insoluble dietary ﬁbers and gliadin (con-
tained in wheat gluten) lead to intestinal epithelial injury and increase
in intestinal permeability mainly when mucus levels are low due to
NSAID usage [143–144]. It was evident from the post hoc analysis of the
data, obtained from Multinational Etoricoxib and Diclofenac Arthritis
Long-term (MEDAL) trial that small intestinal complications accounted
for 40% of severe gastrointestinal complications in patients using
NSAIDs [145]. Regarding the relevance of NSAIDs in inducing entero-
pathy, it is a noteworthy fact that the diﬃculty in identifying the pri-
mary site of injury in the distal small intestine is one of the major
drawbacks in diagnosis of enteropathy. However recently, exfoliated
cell transcriptome (exfoliome), which closely resembles small intestinal
mucosal-transcriptome, has been recognized as a promising tool in non-
invasive scrutinizing of NSAID enteropathy [146]. Having stated the
direct action of NSAIDs on gastrointestinal cellular integrity, the role of
gut microbiota, in indirectly regulating NSAID-induced enteropathy, is
worth highlighting as a promising ﬁeld to explore. There are already
preliminary indications that probiotic treatment can modulate in-
testinal gram negative bacteria-induced pathogenesis wherein protec-
tive action of some bacteria like Lactobacillus casei, L. gasseri and Biﬁ-
dobacterium breve Bif195 against NSAIDs is already evident [147–149];
although establishing speciﬁc and precise patterns of microbial proﬁle
among regular NSAID users is yet elusive. All these, demonstrate the
possible underlying mechanisms by which NSAIDS aﬀect the upper and
lower GI tracts thereby warranting eﬀective use of NSAIDs without GI
complications.
6.2. Risk of cardiovascular disease
Cardiovascular diseases (CVD), which include events like myo-
cardial infarction (MI), stroke, hypertension and heart failure, to name
a few, are one of the major causes of morbidity and mortality across the
world (2020 Heart Disease and Stroke Statistical Update Fact Sheet At-a-
Glance). During 2014–15, in the United States, the estimated average
annual direct and indirect expenses due to CVD and stroke was $351.2
billion which reconﬁrms the severity of the disease and the economic
burden on society [150]. So, it would be highly relevant to enquire the
link between one of the leading causes of death globally i.e. CVD and one
of the most-prescribed-drugs on the planet i.e. NSAIDs. Over the years, a
large number of scientiﬁc reports have associated NSAIDs with CVD.
Although, aspirin has been known to be eﬀective in secondary pre-
vention of MI and stroke, it does not depict the actual connection be-
tween CVD and NSAIDs. Since traditional NSAIDs including aspirin
(targeting PGHS-1, thereby suppressing PGE2 & PGI2 in the GIS tract
and TxA2 in the platelets) inﬂict severe gastropathy, it was the ‘gas-
trointestinal safety concern’ which motivated the development of
PGHS-2 speciﬁc NSAIDs. Moreover, the analgesic eﬃcacy of NSAIDs
was largely attributed to the suppression of PGHS-2 derived PGE2 &
PGI2 [151]. As a result, despite the fact that PGHS-2 also implies some
‘mucosal defence’, the competition for getting approval of PGHS-2 in-
hibitors gained momentum [20,152]. With the development of coxibs,
it was thought that now gastric complications could be safely taken care
oﬀwithout compromising the analgesic eﬃcacy of NSAIDs. With this
view, after the introduction of the ﬁrst coxib, a number of RCT were
arranged to evaluate their gastrointestinal tolerability. However, the
ﬁrst Trial in 2000, the Vioxx Gastrointestinal Outcomes Research
(VIGOR) Trial, showed a link between PGHS-2-speciﬁc NSAIDs and
CVD risk. This TRIAL, including 8076 patients with a history of os-
teoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis and being treated with rofecoxib or
naproxen, showed a ﬁve fold increase in MI events in patients treated
with rofecoxib compared to naproxen. In September 2004, Merck re-
called rofecoxib (Vioxx) from the market and later US-FDA had to issue
a black box warning against valdecoxib (Bextra) [118–119]. Further,
the VIGOR Trail ﬁndings got support from Adenomatous Polyp PRe-
vention On Vioxx (APPROVe) trial, which was primarily aimed at
studying the prevention of intestinal polyps by rofecoxib. This study,
where 2586 patients were treated with either rofecoxib or placebo,
inferred that long term use of rofecoxib is associated with twice the risk
of heart attack or stroke versus placebo [118–119]. Recently, the results
of PRECISION (Prospective Evaluation of Celecoxib Integrated Safety
versus Ibuprofen or Naproxen) Trial, funded by Pﬁzer, concluded that
in regard to cardiovascular hazards, there exists no signiﬁcant diﬀer-
ence between these three NSAIDs [153]. A number of other trials have
also linked the risk of CVD with NSAIDs [118]. Albeit, these RCTs
seemed to provide ‘gold-standard’ evidence; still their interpretations
are not beyond the scope of interrogation in the scientiﬁc community.
G.A FitzGerald has pointed out a number of issues regarding the in-
terpretation of PRECISION trial. He suggested a more intense pheno-
typic study at individual level to identify factors that diﬀerentially
predispose to beneﬁts versus risks, thereby being more precise about
NSAID usage [154]. Hence, it is clear that whatever be the issues re-
garding the nuances of the interpretation of various outcomes of dif-
ferent RCTs, there is no doubt about the link between NSAID-use and
compromised cardiovascular health. In line with this, Garcia-Rodriguez
et.al, in 2008, reported a positive correlation between increasing PGHS-
2 inhibitory potency with increasing CVD incidents [155]. On the
contrary to those trials which used patients with long term use of
NSAIDs, studies have raised doubts on the risk of coronary events due to
NSAID usage at lower doses for short durations which are practically
the case for over the counter use or prescription-based intake of NSAIDs
for managing acute pain or fever [156].
At this point it is however noteworthy that, following all the trials,
meta-analyses and cohort studies traditional NSAIDs (nonspeciﬁc PGHS
inhibitors) have also been negatively linked to CVDs other than the
coxibs [157]. Nevertheless, lower doses of aspirin were found to oﬀer
protective eﬀects through secondary prevention of CVD. Low dose as-
pirin (≥30 mg/day) can signiﬁcantly prevent platelet aggregation
without aﬀecting important endothelial cell functions. It was Dr.
Lawrence Craven who, in the early 20th century, conducted some stu-
dies to prove his hypothesis that aspirin prevents coronary thrombosis
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
10

----- Page 12 (native) -----
[158]. Further studies revealed that antithrombotic eﬀects of aspirin
were due to acetylation of PGHS-1 at a serine 530 in platelets (the si-
milar acetylation site on PGHS-2 being Ser 516; although platelets only
express PGHS-1) which prevented the interaction of AA with PGHS-1,
thus limiting the synthesis of TxA2 [158]. On one hand, PGHS-1 is the
major source of TxA2 production in platelets leading to proaggregation
and vasoconstriction; on the other hand, both PGHS-1 constitutively
synthesized in the arterial wall and endothelium, are involved in the
production of the vasodilator and anti-aggregant PGI2. A healthy
equilibrium exists through balanced inhibition of TxA2 and PGI2. In-
hibition of PGHS-1 in platelets creates a disruption of the equilibrium in
favour of PGI2, with a cardioprotective anti-aggregant eﬀect, mani-
fested due to low dose-use of aspirin [85,156,159]. Since the plasma
half-life of aspirin is 20 min, the enucleate platelets cannot produce any
new PGHS-1; so the eﬀect of aspirin remains as long as the platelets
survive (10 days) [160]. Unlike platelets, in endothelial cells the PGHS-
1 is restored within a short period of time after being inhibited by as-
pirin thus without much aﬀecting the PGI2 production [161]. Since
enhanced calcium is required for platelet aggregation or vessels to
contract, PGI2 exerts it anti-thrombotic eﬀect by activating PKA
through IP receptors which in turn cause profound reduction of in-
tracellular calcium in platelets or vascular smooth muscle cells by a
mechanism still unknown [98]. However, non-aspirin NSAIDs (NAN-
SAIDs) can cause incomplete and reversible inhibition of PGHS-1 in
platelets [162]. Hence, eﬀect of aspirin in secondary prevention of CVD
is mediated through irreversible inhibition of PGHS-1-derived TxA2 in
platelets and not through PGHS-2 [156]. Regarding primary prevention
of CVD by aspirin, the current guidelines are very close to what Dr.
Craven recommended for the primary prevention of CVD by aspirin in
males aged between 45 and 65 years [157–158]. A recent meta-analysis
based report has pointed out an insuﬃcient beneﬁt-risk ratio for as-
pirin-mediated primary prevention of CVD [163] which was supported
by further studies [164]. The risk of ‘bleeding’ such as intracerebral
haemorrhage or gastrointestinal bleeding is, however, one of the key
limitations of aspirin use in CVD [163]. Since the eﬃcacy of aspirin
against MI and ischemic stroke (secondary prevention) is indisputable
over the years, doctors have to evaluate the risk–beneﬁt balance while
prescribing it. However, very recently G. Ravach et.al mentioned that
according to European Cardiovascular prevention recommendations,
aspirin should be prohibited from prescriptions for the primary pre-
vention of CVD [164]. All these issues have made cardiovascular safety
of NSAIDs a highly controversial subject [157]. Although aspirin stands
out alone among other NSAIDs in giving cardio-protection, a number of
pathophysiological mechanisms have been proposed to explain non-
aspirin NSAID-associated CVD. One key explanation postulated that
inhibition of the endothelial PGI2 which normally prevents thrombosis,
by NSAIDs, could be responsible for the onset of CVDs. Recently it is
believed that, in endothelial cells, primarily, PGHS-1 plays the pivotal
role in PGI2 biosynthesis replacing the previous concept of PGHS-2
mediated PGI2 production in those cells. Therefore, non-speciﬁc
NSAIDs can block PGHS-1 mediated production of cardio-protective
PGI2 at therapeutic doses [98]. However, it is noteworthy that, while
deletion of TP (TxA2) receptors minimizes atherogenesis, deletion of IP
(PGI2) receptors enhances atherogenesis which indicates that selective
inhibition of PGHS-2 can also disturb the physiological balance be-
tween PGI2 and TxA2, thereby increasing the risk of CVD [152,165].
Despite this observation, the role of PGHS-2 in PGI2 production in en-
dothelial cells is controversial. Then how do PGHS-2 speciﬁc NSAIDs
induce CVD? It is important to note that, the previously predominant
hypothesis of PGHS-2 mediated PGI2 production in endothelial cells,
which ﬁtted well with ‘PGHS-2-CVD’ link, was actually based on two
major observations [98]. First being the decrease in urinary metabolite
of PGI2 (2,3-dinor-6-keto-PGF1α) in subjects treated with PGHS-2 se-
lective NSAIDs and the second being PGHS-2 gene deletion in en-
dothelial cells of mice causing thrombosis. However, later these ob-
servations were challenged by evidence of PGHS-1 being responsible
solely for the physiological synthesis of PGI2 in endothelium [98].
Hence, the link between PGHS-2 and CVD is still elusive. Growing
evidence supports the presence of a constitutively expressed PGHS-2 in
the kidney or systemic vascular endothelium which is responsible for
cardio-protective eﬀect of PGHS-2 [98]. In the context of inter-organ
communication, it is known that response of one organ to the sur-
rounding changes may aﬀect or modulate the performance of other
organs. In line with that, a kidney-heart link has been proposed. Hence,
inhibiting renal PGHS-2 by NSAIDs could increase asymmetric dimethyl
arginine (ADMA), an endogenous eNOS inhibitor, which eventually
could block eNOS, minimizing the protective eﬀect of NO and thereby
increasing hypertension, atherosclerosis and thrombosis [98,166].
However, contrary to this, in relation to ADMA, another group has
proposed that this increased level of ADMA is actually a result of PGHS-
2 deletion or inhibition-associated renal dysfunction. No alteration of
ADMA was found in the context of normal renal function. Now, in re-
lation to NO, initially it was assumed that vascular NO might com-
pensate for the reduction in PGI2; but subsequent studies have dis-
approved this assumption [167]. Surprisingly, it was reported in a
PGHS-2 depletion study that endothelial NO synthase expression is
actually regulated by PGHS-2 mediated PGI2 production [168], which
in turn likely magniﬁes the eﬀect of PGHS-2 inhibition [167–168].
Moreover, PGHS-2 inhibition has also been associated with sodium and
water retention, augmenting heart failure and hypertension as well as
adverse ventricular remodelling [157]. So, even after so many years of
research, the role of PGHS-2 and its cell speciﬁc expression is one of the
most enigmatic topics of this ﬁeld. Other than PGHS-prostanoid
pathway, MOS has been also implicated in the pathogenesis of CVD
[92]. Since cardiac cells are highly active, myocardial energy demand is
predominantly met by the ATP produced in huge amount by the car-
diomyocyte mitochondria. Inhibition of PGHS can lead to accumulation
of AA which in turn enhances cardiac mitochondrial dysfunction. In an
in vitro study with bovine heart mitochondria, AA was found to inhibit
complex I and III, thereby generating increased ROS and subsequently
releasing cytochrome C, which is the rate limiting event in apoptosis
[165]. In addition, the mitochondrial antioxidant superoxide dismutase
(SOD2) has been largely associated with the prevention of athero-
sclerotic lesion through protecting mtDNA [165]. In another study,
diclofenac was found to induce ROS (detected with increased H2DCFDA
ﬂuorescence), decrease proteasomal activity (indicated by reduced β5
proteasome activity, increased polyubiquitination) and enhance apop-
tosis (detected by increased caspase 3 activity) unlike aspirin which did
not show any eﬀect on ROS and cell viability. In the same study, the
generation of ROS has been mechanistically linked to diclofenac-
mediated disruption of mitochondrial complex III, and fall of mi-
tochondrial membrane potential [169]. Recently, diclofenac and cel-
ecoxib-treated cardiomyocyte microarray analyses revealed diﬀerential
gene expression (around 2-fold increase of 32 genes in diclofenac and
560 genes in celecoxib while around 2-fold decrease in 424 genes for
diclofenac and 1718 genes in celecoxib). Interestingly, genes associated
with calcium and potassium signaling were found to be signiﬁcantly
aﬀected by NSAIDs along with involvement of major signaling path-
ways including apoptosis [170]. In NSAID-treated cardiomyocytes,
pathway analyses suggested changes in gene expression pattern in
major cellular pathways such as apoptotic, signal transduction and
transcription [170]. Hence, it indicates as well as essentially warrants
that role of PG-independent pathway, specially MOS in CVD, needs to
be deeply explored in the context of NSAID treatment. Although, hi-
therto, NSAID-mediated inhibition of PGHS-derived PGI2 is still the
dominant mechanism by which NSAIDs aﬀect cardiac health while
contributing to CVD [167].
6.3. Risk of renal injury
In addition to CVD and GI complications, NSAIDs also carry a sig-
niﬁcant
risk
of
kidney
damage
[171]
which
includes
multiple
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
11

----- Page 13 (native) -----
nephrological complications like acute kidney injury (AKI), and chronic
kidney disease (CKD) encompassing electrolyte imbalance, glomer-
ulonephritis, renal papillary necrosis, ﬂuid retention-induced hy-
pertension, renal tubular acidosis, hyponatremia and hyperkalemia to
name a few [172–173]. While high dose of NSAIDs has been associated
with AKI, long term NSAID-use also severely increase the risk of CKD.
NSAIDs come next to aminoglycosides as the most common cause of
nephrotoxicity and acute renal failure [174]. Annually 2.5 million
Americans suﬀer from NSAID-related renal complications [175]. Con-
sumption of NSAIDs by individuals suﬀering from chronic pain, rheu-
matoid arthritis, osteoarthritis and other musculoskeletal disorders
render them more susceptible to nephrotoxicity [171]. Signiﬁcant risk
of renal failure was evaluated in an older study with inpatient mean age
15.2 ± 2.3 years (ten females and ﬁve males) [176]. 15% cases of AKI
have been found associated with NSAID usage, with 25% greater pro-
pensity of contraction in patients older than 65 years [175]. In addition,
recent reports have documented the risk of over-the-counter NSAID
usage in pediatric population leading to acute renal failure [173,177].
Thus, it reveals the risk of using these drugs even at therapeutic dose. In
a recent histopathological study on rat, meloxicam has been linked to
nephrotoxicity along with hepatotoxicity, and gastric metaplasia [178].
Given that kidney is the organ for drug excretion, receiving almost 25%
of the cardiac output, the renal arterioles and glomerular capillaries are
signiﬁcantly vulnerable to NSAIDs [171]. Regarding the mode of ac-
tion, invariably, PGHS-derived prostanoid inhibition by NSAIDs plays a
pivotal role in the progression of nephrotoxicity. PGHS-1 is synthesized
constitutively in the collecting ducts and in diverse cells of the Bow-
man’s capsule. On the other hand, medullary interstitial cells of renal
papillae, epithelial cell lining of the ascending loop of Henle and cells of
macula densa exhibit PGHS-2 expression [175]. PGHS-1 primarily
controls the glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR), while PGHS-2 is important
for sodium and water retention. Blocking PGHS enzymes in turn blocks
PG production, of which PGE2 (tubular) and PGI2 (vascular) are im-
portant [179]. Notably, PGs and their suppression by selective and non-
selective PGHS-inhibitors have been also associated with renal devel-
opment [175]. PGs, with their vasodilatation eﬀect, control pre-glo-
merular resistance, maintain GFR and preserve renal blood ﬂow espe-
cially in ﬂuid-depleted state [171,174]. Localized PG synthesis (PGI2,
PGE2, PGD2) causes vasodilatation of aﬀerent arteriole, increases renal
perfusion together with redistribution of the cortical ﬂow to the ne-
phron in juxta-medullary region [171,174]. PGE2 and PGF2α prevent
sodium and chloride transport in thick ascending limb of the loop of
Henle and colleting ducts. While PGE1 antagonizes vasopressin, PGI2
maintains glomerular ﬁltration. During volume depletion, the renin-
angiotensin-aldosterone axis is activated, leading to vasoconstriction
and increased reabsorption of sodium and chloride along with increased
sympathetic blood ﬂow, further enhancing the vascular tone [174]. In
this setting of decreased perfusion pressure, PGs are responsible for
vasodilatation of aﬀerent arterioles, thereby maintaining normal GFR.
This action of PGs is further reinforced by angiotensin II, nor-
epinephrine, endothelin and vasopressin [175]. During NSAID-medi-
ated inhibition of PGHS-derived PG production, normal GFR is com-
promised, eventually leading to ischemic injury and acute tubular
necrosis [175]. PGs in the macula densa cells impose a check on the
renin secretion which in turn would enhance under PGHS inhibition,
eventually intensifying the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone pathway and
ultimately leading to sodium reabsorption, hypertension and oedema
[175]. AKI is aggravated when NSAIDs are used in the background of
heart failure, or usage of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors,
angiotensin receptor blockers as well as intravascular volume depletion
to name a few [175,180]. Having said about the mechanistic basis of
NSAID-induced nephrotoxicity, precise mention about some of the ty-
pical and prominent nephrological complications is essential to project
the cytotoxic spectrum of these drugs in the renal context. Interstitial
Nephritis: Approximately 15% of the cases of acute kidney injury are
acute interstitial nephritis which is characterised by poor renal function
as a result of acute inﬂammation and edema of renal interstitium. Both
PGHS-speciﬁc and non-speciﬁc NSAIDs are one of the major causes of
this situation [175]. Minimal Change Disease: In this case, PGHS-in-
hibition by NSAIDs favours the conversion of AA to leukotriene which
eventually activates helper T lymphocytes to inﬁltrate glomeruli
causing podocyte injury leading to minimal change disease (MCD)
[175]. Papillary necrosis: PGs maintain adequate perfusion and oxy-
genation in the renal medullary and papillary regions. Inhibition of
PGHS by NSAIDs inﬂicts ischemia and necrosis in the medullary and
papillary regions thereby causing renal failure [175]. In addition to the
aforesaid, some of the prominent renal complications associated with
ionic imbalance, experienced as a side eﬀect of rampant NSAID usage
essentially deserves special mention. Hyponatremia: The antidiuretic
hormone, ADH, or vasopressin is regulated by PGs. In presence of
NSAIDs, PG-mediated ADH’s role of free-water clearance is prohibited,
thereby forcing the nephron to absorb free water leading to hypona-
tremia and associated renal pathology [175]. Hyperkalemia: There are
two predominant mechanisms regulating NSAID-induced hyperka-
lemia; either causing reduced secretion of potassium in the principal
cells of collecting duct or by compromising GFR, thereby resulting in
attenuated potassium secretion through sodium–potassium exchanger
which in turn aggravates the renal complications [175]. Renal Tubular
Acidosis: Prolonged hyperkalemia is associated with decreased net
renal acid excretion in the distal nephron leading to renal tubular
acidosis type 4 (hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis) and consequent
nephritis [175]. Hypertension: In a patient with CKD, within 1–2 weeks
of taking NSAIDs, hypertension may develop leading to heart failure
(HF). NSAID-mediated inhibition of PGs, causing sodium retention and
vasoconstriction, leads to edema and high blood pressure. Under
normal condition a healthy kidney can respond to such a situation by
minimizing the clinical side eﬀects thereby maintaining a steady-state
homeostasis. However, in a patient suﬀering from CKD, the ﬂuid load
will exacerbate the edema and hypertension leading to HF. Another
mechanism involves NSAID-mediated blocking of glucuronidation of
aldosterone by human kidney which eventually increases the level of
circulating aldosterone, ultimately leading to hypertension, edema and
HF. In the previous section, the role of constitutive PGHS-2 in renal
medulla has been mentioned in relation to CVD. This constitutive
PGHS-2 has been shown to be under transcriptional control of NFAT
(nuclear factor of activated T cells). It has been proposed that in kidney,
the constitutive PGHS-2 regulates renal blood ﬂow by PGI2-controlled
PPAR-β/δ (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor β/δ)-mediated
vasodilation pathway. NSAIDs prevent this blood ﬂow by blocking
PGHS-2, thereby inducing hypertension [181]. In a recent study, am-
bulatory blood pressure and GFR were compared for two drugs, diclo-
fenac and rofecoxib, wherein it was found that 24-hour systolic blood
pressure (BP) was increased and GFR was decreased by diclofenac
compared to celecoxib. In the Celecoxib Rofecoxib Eﬃciency and Safety
in Cormorbidities Evaluation Trial (CRESCENT), the systolic BP was
evaluated for monitoring the eﬀect of NSAIDs in subjects treated with
antihypertensive therapy. The study documented that a 25 mg daily
dose of rofecoxib resulted in 24-hour systolic pressure greater than
135 mm Hg in 30% patients compared to 16% and 19% of patients
randomly assigned to celecoxib and naproxen respectively [175,182].
Therefore, it is incumbent upon the clinicians to prescribe the selective
and non-selective NSAIDs with caution. Since a lower dose of NSAID
can also induce renal failure, there is actually no safer dose of these
drugs for patients with CKD. Because CKD patients are often on medi-
cations like ACEs, ARBs and diuretics, which in fact can interact with
NSAIDS worsening the situation, clinicians should be utterly careful in
treating these patients with NSAIDs. Among the patients with CKD, in
primary care, use of NSAIDs is variable and relatively high which es-
sentially demand for thorough research speciﬁcally aimed at strategies
to reduce NSAID-use in this patient population [183]. Regarding the
PGHS-independent mechanism of NSAID-induced renal damage (in-
cluding both AKI and CKD), oxidative stress and inﬂammation has been
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
12

----- Page 14 (native) -----
associated [161,184]. Cells found in kidney vasculature such as vas-
cular smooth muscle cells, endothelial cells, adventitial ﬁbroblast and
inﬂammatory cells are able to produce ROS. NADPH oxidase, along
with MOS, majorly contributes to ROS production in kidney [184]. In
an old study, indomethacin was found to inﬂict mitochondrial ab-
normalities in the proximal tubules with evidence of oxidative stress
(lipid peroxidation), mitochondrial dysfunction (fall of respiratory
control ratio) and neutrophil inﬁltration (characterized by increased
myeloperoxidase activity) [185]. Diclofenac, on the other hand, in-
duced oxidative stress, renal cell apoptosis and upregulation of pro-
inﬂammatory cytokines (NF-κB) in AKI as evident from a recent study
[186].
Thus, both PGHS-dependent and independent pathways play sig-
niﬁcant role in kidney injury. However, it is important to note that,
young patients without renal diseases or comorbidities are not under
great risk of NSAIDs; although, there is no place for complacency.
6.4. Risk of hepatotoxicity
Hepatotoxicity is another serious complication that has been linked
to NSAIDs although the incidences are less frequent compared to that of
gastrointestinal damage, CVD and renal insuﬃciency. In line with that,
a recent study in Brazil, conducted in the primary health care units,
inferred drug-induced-liver-injury as a rare event [187]. However, the
seriousness of the issue lies elsewhere. Considering the case of USA,
where approximately 30 million Americans take NSAIDs each year, it is
clear that a huge number of individuals are actually exposed to the
potential threat of NSAID-induced liver injury [188]. Hence, studies on
the role of NSAIDs in hepatotoxicity are scientiﬁcally pertinent. Since
premarketing studies are insuﬃcient, hepatotoxicity is mostly en-
countered in the post-marketing studies [189–190]. A number of drugs
have been withdrawn from the market due to hepatotoxicity which
includes NSAIDs like bromfenac (1999) and lumiracoxib (2008)
[189,191]. Liver injury caused by most NSAIDs is likely to be idio-
syncratic and clinically apparent liver injury is rare (1–10 cases ap-
proximately per 100,000 prescriptions). Although two NSAIDs, sulindac
and
diclofenac,
are
most
commonly
linked
to
hepatotoxicity
[188,191–192], at least in rare cases, virtually all the extensively used
NSAIDs are clinically linked to apparent drug-induced liver injury
[188–189]. However, in a very recent systemic review, ibuprofen has
been regarded safe in relation to hepatotoxicity despite a number of
published reports previously linking it otherwise [193]. Several other
systemic reviews are also available which have evaluated the risk of
NSAIDs in hepatotoxicity [189,191,194–195]. Notably, PGHS-2 speciﬁc
NSAIDs are less frequent in causing hepatotoxicity compared to non-
selective NSAIDs [194]. It is important to realize that NSAIDs can ac-
tually lead to two major clinical patterns of hepatotoxicity; ﬁrst being
acute hepatitis (characterized by jaundice, nausea and fever together
with elevated serum levels of transaminases) while the other being
chronic active hepatitis (characterized by serological and histopatho-
logical abnormalities) [192]. Analyzing the published studies, aspartate
transaminase (AST) and alanine transaminase (ALT) could be con-
sidered as the two most common biomarkers linked with hepatotoxi-
city. Nevertheless, serological abnormalities in alkaline phosphatase
and total bilirubin levels are also reported [191]. Regarding the hepa-
totoxic mode of action of NSAIDs, a number of mechanisms have been
implicated depending on the concerned drug [189,192]. However, two
predominant mechanisms have been identiﬁed; hypersensitivity and
metabolic aberration [192]. Patients who have suﬀered hepatotoxicity
from one NSAID, often experience the same reaction in case the drug is
re-initiated or a sister drug with identical structure is given. Hy-
persensitivity reactions are characterized by elevated anti-nuclear
factor or anti-smooth muscle antibody titres, eosinophilia and lym-
phadenopathy [192]. On the other hand, metabolic aberrations could
be due to genetic polymorphisms and varied susceptibility to a spec-
trum of drugs as evident from in vitro studies which showed phenotypic
variability of aceclofenac-metabolism amongst donor liver cells [192].
Studies with isolated rat liver mitochondria or rat hepatocytes have
demonstrated that diphenylamine, which is structurally identical with
NSAIDs, actually acts as an uncoupler of oxidative phosphorylation
thereby disrupting ATP formation leading to hepatocyte bioenergetic
crisis and death. Mitochondrial swelling, fall of mitochondrial mem-
brane potential and diminished cellular ATP were observed after in-
cubation of mitochondria with diphenylamine, mefenamic acid and
diclofenac [196]. In case of naproxen, ferrous iron (Fe2+) release is
responsible for naproxen-induced lipid peroxidation in rat liver mi-
crosomes [197]. Diclofenac was found to be more toxic in drug meta-
bolizing cells (isolated primary hepatocytes) compared to non-meta-
bolizing cells (HepG2, FaO). The toxicity may be due to diclofenac-
induced mitochondrial impairment along with a pointless and super-
ﬂuous consumption of NADPH during the reduction of N,5-hydro-
xydiclofenac to 5-hydroxydiclofenac; which is otherwise only oxidized
to N,5-hydroxydiclofenac [197]. Mitochondrial permeability transition
followed by production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), mitochondrial
swelling, oxidation of NADP, proteins and thiols are also linked to di-
clofenac-induced liver injury [198]. Similar to diclofenac, oxidative
stress is also connected with salicylic acid-induced hepatotoxicity
[199]. Notably, genetic predisposition has been an important factor in
diclofenac-induced idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity [38]. Polymorphism in
genes for UGT2B7 and CYP2C8 (which forms reactive diclofenac me-
tabolites) and in ABCC2 (encoding the transporter MRP2 that helps in
biliary excretion) may predispose to the formation and accumulation of
diclofenac metabolites which are implicated in hepatotoxicity [38]. On
the other hand, sulindac can induce cholestasis by competitively in-
hibiting canalicular bile salt transport [200]. In one study with Wistar
rats, naproxen has been linked to increased ROS (indicated by enhanced
lipid peroxidation and reduced GSH) and hepatotoxicity. In the same
study, naproxen also induced an adaptive response to ROS by in-
creasing SOD and catalase. Interestingly, this increased ROS was sup-
posed to be the underlying cause for signiﬁcant genotoxic eﬀect and fall
of liver function exerted by naproxen [201]. Although, less frequent,
coxibs may also cause liver damage via PG-dependent pathway. This
hypothesis is supported by the proposed mechanism that implies the
inhibition of PGHS-2-derived PGE2, by coxibs, which can then reduce
the anti-apoptotic mitochondrial protein Bcl-2 (which oﬀers protection
against bile acid-induced apoptosis), leading to hepatocyte apoptosis
[202]. Hence, it can be summarized that increased reporting, surveil-
lance and awareness of NSAID-related hepatotoxicity will help the
physicians and hepatologists to precisely assess the hepatotoxic po-
tential of NSAIDs during prescription of these unavoidable drugs.
6.5. Risk of intracerebral haemorrhage
Bleeding within brain tissue leads to intracerebral haemorrhage
(ICH), a severe type of stroke (haemorrhagic stroke, HS) [203]. Stroke
events are characterized as either ischemic (blood supply to brain is
blocked) or hemorrhagic (bleeding), of which ischemic strokes (IS) are
more predominant [204]. A multinational European database study has
shown that IS risk diﬀers among individual NSAIDs and speciﬁcally it
was found to be higher in patients with a previous history of IS or
transient ischemic attack [205]. Since NSAIDs can predominantly cause
gastrointestinal bleeding, risk of ICH cannot be excluded. Under-
standing the eﬀect of NSAIDs on platelet-function suggests that NSAIDs
can lead to enhanced risk of ICH via regulation of thrombosis. The
antithrombotic eﬀect of aspirin is linked to irreversible and almost
complete inhibition of platelet PGHS activity which results in a re-
duction of thrombotic events, thereby increasing the chances of HS
[206]. A relationship between NANSAIDs and HS (including sub-
arachnoid haemorrhagic stroke and ICH stroke) was explored in a na-
tionwide multicenter case control study in Korea [206]. In this study
the potential confounders were adjusted. Within 14 days, proportion of
NANSAIDs exposure was 2.9% for HS patients while 2.0% for controls.
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
13

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Comparing NANSAID-users with nonusers, the adjusted odds ratios of
stroke was 1.12 for all HS, 1.03 for subarachnoid haemorrhage and 1.19
for ICH. Thus the study concludes that there is no signiﬁcant rise of HS
among NANSAIDs users [206]. The explanation for the probable no-
antithrombotic eﬀect of non-selective NSAIDs, other than aspirin, could
be attributed either to incomplete/reversible inhibition of PGHS-1 in
platelets or concomitant prevention of PGHS-2-derived PGI2 synthesis
in endothelial cells; although the latter notion is still yet elusive [162].
However, Islam et.al in 2018, published a meta-analysis of observational
studies including articles from 1999 to 2017. The study signiﬁcantly
linked NSAIDs-use with higher risk of developing HS [207]. In line with
that, in a recent study in March 2019, L. Ge et.al have demonstrated
that long term use of aspirin and clopidogrel (antithrombotic drug)
increases the risk of cerebral microbleeds which is a marker of ICH
[208]. Later in the same year, Paciaroni et. al. have shown a lower risk
of bleeding event for clopidogrel monotherapy compared to aspirin
[208]. Having said this, it should be mentioned that the advantage of
aspirin in secondary prevention of IS is greater over its risk for ICH
[160]. Since a large population is exposed to NSAIDs, these drugs
should be prescribed judiciously by the clinicians keeping in mind the
risk–beneﬁt thresholds which determine the safety proﬁles.
6.6. Risk of respiratory tract inﬂammation and infection
It was until 1922, the correlation between asthma, nasal polyposis
and aspirin sensitivity (Samter’s Triad) was not known [209]. Later, it
was found that about 7% of asthma patients experience bronchospasms
after taking aspirin or other PGHS-1 inhibiting NSAIDs which could be
potentially fatal [210]. This condition, characterised by asthma,
chronic rhinitis, nasal polyps and acute respiratory tract reaction, in
response to aspirin and NSAIDs is referred to as aspirin-exacerbated
respiratory disease (AERD). Recollections of patients have made it clear
that 50% of AERD occurred after viral respiratory tract infections
[210]. In cells, such as mast cells, a precarious balance is maintained
between cysteinyl leukotrienes (Cys-LTEs), product of 5-lipoxygenase
pathway, and prostanoids, products of PGHS pathways. NSAID-induced
inhibition of PGHS-1, coupled with excessive production of leukotrienes
disrupts the physiologic brake and triggers the release of plethora of
proinﬂammatory cytokines (such as IFN-γ, IL-4) responsible for the
pathophysiology of the AERD [209]. It is important to note that of all
the leukotrienes (LTEs), elevated cysteinyl LTE4 has been suggested to
play a signiﬁcant role in the pathophysiology of AERD. Presence of
LTE4 increases airway responsiveness to histamine, a phenomenon not
observed with LTD4 and LTC4 indicating the presence of speciﬁc LTE4
receptor [210]. Regarding the prostanoids, PGE2 generally exerts an
inhibitory eﬀect on mast cells and eosinophils to prevent LTE release.
When PGE2 is prevented by NSAID treatment, the PGE2-inhibitory
control on mast cell gets lost, unleashing histamine and LTEs by mast
cells, a hallmark event in AERD [209–210]. Furthermore, during AERD,
downregulation of anti-inﬂammatory lipoxins, which normally com-
pete for Cys-LTEs-receptors and prevent expression of proinﬂammatory
cytokines (IFN-γ, IL-5, IL-6), also contributes to the pathophysiology
[209]. In addition, the role of PGD2, type II inﬂammation and group 2
innate lymphoid cells are also implicated in AERD [211]. On the other
hand, PGHS-2 speciﬁc inhibitors, which are larger molecules and
cannot ﬁt to PGHS-1 channels, are not responsible for respiratory re-
actions in patients with AERD [210]. PGHS-2 inhibitors are therefore
unable to aﬀect the constitutive activity of PGHS-1 and production of
PGE2 by mast cells, platelets, basophils and eosinophils [210]. Never-
theless, meloxicam, which is one of the two PGHS-2 inhibitors available
in US market (other than celecoxib), can cause mild symptoms of re-
spiratory reaction in AERD patients at 15 mg dose, behaving as a partial
PGHS-1 inhibitor [210]. So shifting to PGHS-2 from PGHS-1 could be a
better strategy; however PGHS-2 is not available without prescriptions
[210]. Other than its role in AERD, NSAIDs are known to be frequently
used in Community Acquired Pneumonia (CAP) or acute respiratory
tract infections [212–213]; although NSAIDs have never been found to
signiﬁcantly reduce total symptoms or duration of acute respiratory
infections. A nationwide case cross-over study showed that NSAID use
during acute respiratory infection was associated with increased risk of
MI [213]. In relation to CAP, diﬀerent surveys and observational stu-
dies have also shown that half of the patients of CAP were treated with
NSAIDs [212]. However, this extensive use of NSAIDs was neither ap-
proved by medical guidelines or any clinical data in pneumonia pa-
tients. From the mechanistic point of view NSAIDs rather worsen the
situation by preventing the recruitment and functioning of poly-
morphonuclear neutrophils [212]. Ibuprofen was found to inhibit TNF-
α and NF-κB transcriptional activity, thereby limiting pro-inﬂammatory
cytokine production [214]. Therefore, it may be presumed that NSAIDs
could enhance pulmonary susceptibility to secondary infection to CAP.
However, conﬂicting results were also obtained when role of NSAIDs
were evaluated in animal models of pulmonary bacterial infection
[212]. So, pre-existing medication and conditions should be considered
before prescribing a drug. In one study, in human airway epithelial cells
Parainﬂuenza virus (PIV3) reduced PGE2 generation. However, cel-
ecoxib treatment on PIV3-infected airway epithelial cells signiﬁcantly
aggravated the PGE2 reduction along with reduced PGHS-2 expression
[215]. In the current perspective of COVID-19 outbreak, several spec-
ulations are popping up regarding the use of NSAIDs. Although in-
domethacin has been shown previously to block coronavirus RNA
synthesis in dogs, in a PGHS-independent pathway, still there are no
direct data advocating clinical use of NSAIDs against the recent COVID-
19 situation [13]; even though, the nucleocapsid protein of the SARS
coronavirus, which was responsible for 2003 outbreak, was found to
interact with PGHS-2 promoter along with up regulating its expression,
thereby suggesting a putative role of NSAIDs in virus prevention [216].
However, use of NSAIDs against COVID-19 is still elusive [217]. It is
important to state that in the midst of this topsy-turvy situation, where
the world is desperately seeking for eﬀective COVID-19 antidote, re-
cently a warning regarding a probable adverse eﬀect of ibuprofen in
aggravating the current coronavirus infection has also come up [80];
although clinicians have also assured patients from not withdrawing
this drug who are already using it for other reasons just out of the fear
of increased COVID-19 risk. Nevertheless, it has been also mentioned
that patients suﬀering from COVID-19 should not be administered
NSAIDs, as treatment, unless a strong evidence of NSAIDs against
COVID-19 is obtained, because that might predispose those patients
with other NSAID-associated comorbidities [80].
7. Pharmacophore modiﬁcation
Since NSAIDs are associated with severe toxicities, newer ap-
proaches or alternative strategies were taken for “pharmacophore
modiﬁcation” to tame down the toxic side eﬀects without compro-
mising their beneﬁcial health eﬀects. In this regard, recently, prodrugs
are gaining immense popularity. These are bioreversible derivatives of
pharmacologically active agents which undergo chemical transforma-
tion and/or enzymatic cleavage, in vivo, to release the parent drug
which then exhibits the desired pharmacological impact. The non-
parent moiety may/may not be pharmaceutically active in a context
speciﬁc manner [218]. Emerging documents on NSAID prodrugs have
pointed towards a promising ﬁeld where pharmacological research can
be logically channelized. Interestingly, the palatable form of salicyclic
acid i.e. acetylsalicyclic acid or aspirin itself acts as a prodrug. In vivo,
aspirin liberates salicyclic acid to elicit the anti-inﬂammatory action
while the acetyl group particularly induces PGHS inactivation. A si-
milar mode of action is actually found in several ‘aspirin like drugs’
including indomethacin, ibuprofen and naproxen. Thus, irreversible
acetylation of serine residue in PGHS-1, mediated by the acetyl group,
is one of the ways aspirin exert its therapeutic eﬀect; although few
complications like GI toxicity, disruption of platelet functions, renal
failure still accompany, leaving room for further chemical modiﬁcation
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
14

----- Page 16 (native) -----
of this unavoidable NSAID into a more potent prodrug to use it eﬀec-
tively. Several aspirin prodrugs have been reported such as aspirin
triglycerides, cyclic aspirin triglycerides, methysulfonylmethyl and
nitro aspirin [218]. On the other hand, non acetylated salicyclates are
also another class of prodrugs (salsalate and choline magnesium trisa-
licyclate), considered as viable options in perioperative conditions
owing to minimum hemorrhagic eﬀects, negligible PGHS-1 inhibition,
no eﬀect on renal blood ﬂow and platelet functions [219]. A furoxan-
containing ester of aspirin was found to show signiﬁcant anti-in-
ﬂammatory and anti-platelet activity in vivo, although with reduced
gastric toxicity [220]. In general, for synthesis of NSAID prodrugs, focus
has been laid on masking its acidic functional group or the carboxyl
moiety since reports have already linked it to the toxic actions of
NSAIDs. For instance, mitochondrial-uncoupling potential of NSAIDs is
inversely correlated with drug pKa. In this regard, modiﬁcation of the
carboxyl moiety of ﬂurbiprofen (dimero-ﬂurbiprofen and nitrobutyl
ﬂurbiprofen) led to reduced mitochondrial uncoupling [221]. In addi-
tion, coupling of sulfonamides with free carboxylic group of NSAIDs
(ﬂurbiprofen, ibuprofen, diclofenac) was also found to increase their
PGHS-2 selectivity while providing relief in gastric ulceration [222],
thereby highlighting avoidance of NSAID-gastrotoxicity. However, over
time, designing of NSAID prodrug has evolved from ‘just masking the
carboxylic group’ to meticulously designed conjugates bearing moieties
aimed at speciﬁc goals, including antioxidant activity, increasing water
solubility and dissolution, NO release, hydrogen sulphide (H2S) release,
acetylcholine esterase inhibitory (AChEI) activity and site speciﬁc de-
livery [220]. For example, many NSAID prodrugs, synthesized by
coupling an antioxidant moiety through amide linkage, as well as
several mutual prodrugs (both moieties are pharmacologically active)
made with naturally found phenolic antioxidants including guaiacol,
thymol, eugenol and other alcoholic compounds have yielded gastro-
sparing results; although without compromising the typical functions of
NSAIDs [223]. On the other hand, PGHS-2 inhibiting prodrugs, such as
apricoxib (marketed by Tragara Pharmaceuticals) were made to im-
prove oral bioavailability or increase water solubility for parenteral use
[220]. The characteristic features of PGHS-2 inhibitors include a para-
sulfonamide (SO2NH2) or a para methanesulfonyl (SO2Me) pharmaco-
phore on one of the aryl rings which bestow PGHS-2-active-site-speci-
ﬁcity to the drug [224]. Apricoxib, mentioned above is an anticancer
NSAID, having 1,2-diphenyl moiety attached to a central 5-membered
pyrrole ring together with a para-SO2NH2 PGHS-2-speciﬁc pharmaco-
phore [224]. Moving further, it is worth mentioning that owing to the
importance of NO and H2S as two vital endogenous gaseous signaling
molecules involved in diﬀerent physiological functions, a group of
NSAID prodrugs have been made which release either NO or H2S or
both the gastro-transmitters. These compounds have supposed potential
in treating diﬀerent complications. A new class of drug called ‘cy-
clooxygenase inhibitor nitric oxide donor’ (CINOD) was developed by
adding NO generating group to the parent NSAID with an ester linkage.
Naproxcinod, (the ﬁrst CINOD), has undergone phase-II and III clinical
trials; but also got disapproved by FDA owing to the lack of long-term
controlled studies [225–226]. Moreover, NCX-4016 (NO-aspirin), al-
though forbidden from production (since 2007) due to generating
mutagenic metabolites, has showed reduced gastro-toxicity in phase-I
trials compared to aspirin [227]. As mentioned above, in a phase-II
trial, the primary end point of 6 week endoscopic gastroduodenal ulcer
did not reveal signiﬁcant diﬀerence between naproxen and AZD3582
(naproxcinod) at doses eﬀective in treating osteoarthritis; however, the
secondary endpoints favoured AZD3582 [133]. It is worthwhile to note
that often the NO-NSAIDs have intrinsic pharmacological activity
which may not have been predicted during the prodrug designing
[220]. P2026, a NO-diclofenac in which the diclofenac moiety is linked
to the –ONO2 (nitrate) group via alkyl spacer, showed no gastric toxi-
city. In addition, another NO-releasing diclofenac derivative with a
benzofuroxan moiety has been also synthesised, whereupon it was
found to oﬀer anti-inﬂammatory action devoid of gastrointestinal
toxicity [222]. While the organic nitrate derivatives release NO only
after metabolic reduction, in a NONOate derivative of NO-NSAID, NO is
released spontaneously in physiological media [220]. Moreover, many
of the NO-NSAIDs have been progressed through clinical trials for
evaluating their eﬀect in cardiovascular safety and pain-killing attri-
bute [133,227]. Other than NO, H2S also plays a signiﬁcant role in
mucosal defence by inhibiting leucocyte adherence on vascular en-
dothelium, neutralizing gastric acid and enhancing gastric mucosal
blood ﬂow. Based on these ideas, researchers have developed a number
of H2S-releasing NSAIDs (HS-NSAID) of which a number of molecules
have been already progressed to clinical trials such as H2S-releasing
naproxen, ATB-346 [228]. This is supported by a phase-II-B study,
where subjects with ATB-346 (250 mg once daily) showed lesser ulcers
per subject compared to naproxen (550 mg twice daily) and also lesser
incidence of large ulcers (≥5 mm diameter) and marked reduction of
GI complication [229]. Interestingly, ATB-337, another HS-NSAID, has
been made out of linking DTT to diclofenac where DTT acts as H2S
donor. HS-NSAIDs including HS-sulindac, HS-ibuprofen and HS-aspirin
have also been reported to act as anticancer agents. Moving further,
NBS-1120, which releases H2S, NO and aspirin, simultaneously, has
been attributed with the most potent anti-cancer potency [230]. Since
H2S has been linked to cardiovascular homeostasis and normal phy-
siology of kidney, H2S prodrugs can be also eﬀective against CVD and
renal failure [231–232]. Another promising group of NSAID-prodrugs
are phospho-NSAIDs, such as phospho-aspirin (MDC-22), phospho-su-
lindac (OXT-328) and phospho-ibuprofen (MDC-917) which probably
exert their action via COX-independent pathway [220]. In addition,
NSAID prodrugs with anticholinergic agents, acetylcholinesterase in-
hibitory activity (AChEI-NSAIDs) and chemically stable nitroxides,
2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy (TEMPO) and 4-hydroxy-TEMPO
(TEMPOL), have also been designed and tested for their eﬃcacy, albeit
with reduced toxicity [220]. Most of these NSAID prodrugs are en-
dowed with anti-inﬂammatory potential as tested in in vitro andinvivo
studies and clinical trials; however, the gastro-toxic eﬀect of their re-
spective parent NSAIDs are rationally bypassed thereby improving their
utility. A schematic representation of some common NSAID prodrugs
has been presented (Fig. 6). Other than these few examples, a myriad of
other NSAID-associated prodrugs, mutual prodrugs and hybrid mole-
cules have been prepared and tested and many more are in the pipeline
[218,223]. Hence, it is evident that prodrugs can be useful to manage
the gruesome challenges of therapeutic handling of NSAIDs. However,
extensive research is strongly advocated to ﬁne tune the actual ther-
apeutic potential of these molecules.
8. Conclusion
Thus, it is evident that the success of NSAIDs comes with a huge
cost. NSAIDs are associated with 30% hospital admissions for pre-
ventable adverse drug reactions [233]. However, it is not our motto to
project NSAIDs in a negative perspective; rather, presenting a com-
prehensive view of the susceptibility of some major organs to an almost
unavoidable drug rampantly used in the day-to-day life. This would
increase the awareness in prudent usage of these drugs. Reports of
randomized clinical trials, meta-analysis, cohort studies, systemic re-
views and observational studies would lead to understanding the actual
drug-related risk while mechanistic details will provide indications
about the potential therapeutic candidates/targets. However, various
aspects of NSAID-induced organ damage still need to be investigated
which should also include other organs and systems of the body. A
number of areas need to be explored from mechanistic point of view,
such as the link between ROS and PGs, role of PGHS-2 in CVD, role of
mitochondria and other organelles in NSAID-pathophysiology along
with genetic polymorphisms plausibly linked with NSAID-suscept-
ibility. Population based studies may prove helpful in answering com-
plex gene-driven eﬀects on xenobiotics metabolism in the context of
NSAIDs. With respect to age, older individuals are at a higher baseline
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
15

----- Page 17 (native) -----
risk of cardiovascular, GI, renal and hepatic complications. So a special
strategy should be developed regarding the usage of NSAIDs by the
older people [233]. Answers to these issues will deﬁnitely advance the
current strategies of NSAID-related risk management, albeit in a more
rationally organised manner while maintaining high safety proﬁles of
these unavoidable ‘wonder drugs’ in days to come.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Samik Bindu: Conceptualization, Writing - original draft, Writing -
review & editing. Somnath Mazumder: Writing - original draft,
Writing - review & editing. Uday Bandyopadhyay: Conceptualization,
Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Project administration,
Funding acquisition.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
SB acknowledges research grants from Early Career Research
Award, SERB (Department of Science and Technology, Govt. of India)
and Higher Education, Science & Technology and Biotechnology (Dept.
of Science and Technology, Govt. of West Bengal). UB acknowledges
J.C. Bose National Fellowship (Department of Science and Technology,
Govt. of India) to perform this work.
References
[1] M.R. Montinari, S. Minelli, R. De Caterina, The ﬁrst 3500years of aspirin history
from its roots - A concise summary, Vasc.Pharmacol. 113 (2019) 1–8.
[2] S. Tsutsumi, T. Gotoh, W. Tomisato, S. Mima, T. Hoshino, H.J. Hwang,
H. Takenaka, T. Tsuchiya, M. Mori, T. Mizushima, Endoplasmic reticulum stress
response is involved in nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug-induced apoptosis,
Cell Death Diﬀer. 11 (9) (2004) 1009–1016.
[3] A. Gupta, M. Bah, NSAIDs in the Treatment of Postoperative Pain, Curr. Pain
Headache Rep. 20 (11) (2016) 62.
[4] P.W. Budoﬀ, Use of mefenamic acid in the treatment of primary dysmenorrhea,
JAMA 241 (25) (1979) 2713–2716.
[5] R.W.U. Daniel E. Furst, Shraddha Prakash Nonsteroidal Anti-Inﬂammatory Drugs,
Disease-Modifying Antirheumatic Drugs, Nonopioid Analgesics, & Drugs Used in
Gout, in: B.G. Katzung (Ed.), Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.2012, pp. 635-657.
[6] E.M.S. Tilo Grosser, and Garret A. FitzGerald, Pharmacotherapy of Inﬂammation,
Fig. 6. Structural representation of some NSAID prodrugs.
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
16

----- Page 18 (native) -----
Fever, Pain, and Gout, in: L.L. Brunton (Ed.), GOODMAN & GILMAN'S THE
PHARMACOLOGICAL BASIS OF THERAPEUTICS, McGraw-Hill Education2018,
pp. 685-709.
[7] C.K. Ong, P. Lirk, C.H. Tan, R.A. Seymour, An evidence-based update on non-
steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs, Clin. Med. Res. 5 (1) (2007) 19–34.
[8] I.A. Dhalla, T. Gomes, M.M. Mamdani, D.N. Juurlink, Opioids versus nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs in noncancer pain, Can. Fam. Physician 58 (1) (2012) 30.
[9] M.J. Daniels, J. Rivers-Auty, T. Schilling, N.G. Spencer, W. Watremez, V. Fasolino,
S.J. Booth, C.S. White, A.G. Baldwin, S. Freeman, R. Wong, C. Latta, S. Yu,
J. Jackson, N. Fischer, V. Koziel, T. Pillot, J. Bagnall, S.M. Allan, P. Paszek,
J. Galea, M.K. Harte, C. Eder, C.B. Lawrence, D. Brough, Fenamate NSAIDs inhibit
the NLRP3 inﬂammasome and protect against Alzheimer's disease in rodent
models, Nat. Commun. 7 (2016) 12504.
[10] M.A. Wichmann, K.J. Cruickshanks, C.M. Carlsson, R. Chappell, M.E. Fischer,
B.E. Klein, R. Klein, C.R. Schubert, NSAID Use and Incident Cognitive Impairment
in a Population-based Cohort, Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 30 (2) (2016)
105–112.
[11] J.C. Breitner, S.J. Haneuse, R. Walker, S. Dublin, P.K. Crane, S.L. Gray,
E.B. Larson, Risk of dementia and AD with prior exposure to NSAIDs in an elderly
community-based cohort, Neurology 72 (22) (2009) 1899–1905.
[12] C.V. Rao, A. Rivenson, B. Simi, E. Zang, G. Kelloﬀ, V. Steele, B.S. Reddy,
Chemoprevention of colon carcinogenesis by sulindac, a nonsteroidal anti-in-
ﬂammatory agent, Cancer Res. 55 (7) (1995) 1464–1472.
[13] C. Amici, A. Di Caro, A. Ciucci, L. Chiappa, C. Castilletti, V. Martella, N. Decaro,
C. Buonavoglia, M.R. Capobianchi, M.G. Santoro, Indomethacin has a potent an-
tiviral activity against SARS coronavirus, Antivir Ther 11 (8) (2006) 1021–1030.
[14] D.S. James, The multisystem adverse eﬀects of NSAID therapy, J. Am. Osteopath.
Assoc. 99 (11 Suppl) (1999) S1–S7.
[15] W.P. Hooper, H. Gerber, Monte Carlo simulations of laser-generated sea surface
aureole, Appl. Opt. 27 (24) (1988) 5111–5118.
[16] A. Arfe, L. Scotti, C. Varas-Lorenzo, F. Nicotra, A. Zambon, B. Kollhorst, T. Schink,
E. Garbe, R. Herings, H. Straatman, R. Schade, M. Villa, S. Lucchi, V. Valkhoﬀ,
S. Romio, F. Thiessard, M. Schuemie, A. Pariente, M. Sturkenboom, G. Corrao,
Non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs and risk of heart failure in four European
countries: nested case-control study, BMJ 354 (2016) i4857.
[17] T. Dreischulte, D.R. Morales, S. Bell, B. Guthrie, Combined use of nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs with diuretics and/or renin-angiotensin system inhibitors
in the community increases the risk of acute kidney injury, Kidney Int. 88 (2)
(2015) 396–403.
[18] J.C. Becker, W. Domschke, T. Pohle, Current approaches to prevent NSAID-in-
duced gastropathy–COX selectivity and beyond, Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 58 (6)
(2004) 587–600.
[19] I. Bjarnason, C. Scarpignato, E. Holmgren, M. Olszewski, K.D. Rainsford, A. Lanas,
Mechanisms of Damage to the Gastrointestinal Tract From Nonsteroidal Anti-
Inﬂammatory Drugs, Gastroenterology 154 (3) (2018) 500–514.
[20] J.L. Wallace, P.R. Devchand, Emerging roles for cyclooxygenase-2 in gastro-
intestinal mucosal defense, Br. J. Pharmacol. 145 (3) (2005) 275–282.
[21] R.L. Darling, J.J. Romero, E.J. Dial, J.K. Akunda, R. Langenbach,
L.M. Lichtenberger, The eﬀects of aspirin on gastric mucosal integrity, surface
hydrophobicity, and prostaglandin metabolism in cyclooxygenase knockout mice,
Gastroenterology 127 (1) (2004) 94–104.
[22] N.R. Jana, NSAIDs and apoptosis, Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 65 (9) (2008) 1295–1301.
[23] C. Bombardier, L. Laine, A. Reicin, D. Shapiro, R. Burgos-Vargas, B. Davis, R. Day,
M.B. Ferraz, C.J. Hawkey, M.C. Hochberg, T.K. Kvien, T.J. Schnitzer, Comparison
of Upper Gastrointestinal Toxicity of Rofecoxib and Naproxen in Patients with
Rheumatoid Arthritis, N. Engl. J. Med. 343 (21) (2000) 1520–1528, https://doi.
org/10.1056/NEJM200011233432103.
[24] H. Matsui, O. Shimokawa, T. Kaneko, Y. Nagano, K. Rai, I. Hyodo, The patho-
physiology of non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug (NSAID)-induced mucosal
injuries in stomach and small intestine, J Clin Biochem Nutr 48 (2) (2011)
107–111.
[25] M.D. Murray, D.C. Brater, Renal toxicity of the nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory
drugs, Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 33 (1993) 435–465.
[26] U.A. Boelsterli, Diclofenac-induced liver injury: a paradigm of idiosyncratic drug
toxicity, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 192 (3) (2003) 307–322.
[27] M.L. Kowalski, J.S. Makowska, Seven steps to the diagnosis of NSAIDs hy-
persensitivity: how to apply a new classiﬁcation in real practice? Allergy Asthma
Immunol Res 7 (4) (2015) 312–320.
[28] J.O.B.F.J.R.A. Chicoine, Non‐steroidal Anti‐inﬂammatory Drugs in: J.F.K.J.D.M.J.
Wang (Ed.), Chemical Analysis of Non‐antimicrobial Veterinary Drug Residues in
Food, Wiley Online Library2016, pp. 427-496.
[29] T.D. Warner, F. Giuliano, I. Vojnovic, A. Bukasa, J.A. Mitchell, J.R. Vane,
Nonsteroid drug selectivities for cyclo-oxygenase-1 rather than cyclo-oxygenase-2
are associated with human gastrointestinal toxicity: a full in vitro analysis, Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 (13) (1999) 7563–7568.
[30] S. Tacconelli, A. Bruno, R. Grande, P. Ballerini, P. Patrignani, Nonsteroidal anti-
inﬂammatory drugs and cardiovascular safety - translating pharmacological data
into clinical readouts, Expert Opin Drug Saf 16 (7) (2017) 791–807.
[31] P. Rao, E.E. Knaus, Evolution of nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs):
cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibition and beyond, J. Pharm. Pharm. Sci. 11 (2) (2008)
81s–110s.
[32] R.S.Y. Wong, Role of Nonsteroidal Anti-Inﬂammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) in Cancer
Prevention and Cancer Promotion, Adv. Pharmacol. Sci. 2019 (2019) 3418975.
[33] P.G. Conaghan, A turbulent decade for NSAIDs: update on current concepts of
classiﬁcation, epidemiology, comparative eﬃcacy, and toxicity, Rheumatol. Int.
32 (6) (2012) 1491–1502.
[34] P. Lees, M.F. Landoni, J. Giraudel, P.L. Toutain, Pharmacodynamics and phar-
macokinetics of nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs in species of veterinary
interest, J. Vet. Pharmacol. Ther. 27 (6) (2004) 479–490.
[35] J.E. Wyatt, W.L. Pettit, S. Harirforoosh, Pharmacogenetics of nonsteroidal anti-
inﬂammatory drugs, Pharmacogenomics J. 12 (6) (2012) 462–467.
[36] L.J. Croﬀord, Use of NSAIDs in treating patients with arthritis, Arthritis Res. Ther.
15 (Suppl 3) (2013) S2.
[37] L.L. Mazaleuskaya, K.N. Theken, L. Gong, C.F. Thorn, G.A. FitzGerald,
R.B. Altman, T.E. Klein, PharmGKB summary: ibuprofen pathways,
Pharmacogenet. Genom. 25 (2) (2015) 96–106.
[38] A.K. Daly, G.P. Aithal, J.B. Leathart, R.A. Swainsbury, T.S. Dang, C.P. Day, Genetic
susceptibility to diclofenac-induced hepatotoxicity: contribution of UGT2B7,
CYP2C8, and ABCC2 genotypes, Gastroenterology 132 (1) (2007) 272–281.
[39] K. Jemnitz, K. Heredi-Szabo, J. Janossy, E. Ioja, L. Vereczkey, P. Krajcsi, ABCC2/
Abcc2: a multispeciﬁc transporter with dominant excretory functions, Drug Metab.
Rev. 42 (3) (2010) 402–436.
[40] G. Jedlitschky, U. Hoﬀmann, H.K. Kroemer, Structure and function of the MRP2
(ABCC2) protein and its role in drug disposition, Expert Opin. Drug Metab.
Toxicol. 2 (3) (2006) 351–366.
[41] L. Meunier, D. Larrey, Recent Advances in Hepatotoxicity of Non Steroidal Anti-
Inﬂammatory Drugs, Ann. Hepatol. 17 (2) (2018) 187–191.
[42] G.E. Kuehl, J.W. Lampe, J.D. Potter, J. Bigler, Glucuronidation of nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs: identifying the enzymes responsible in human liver mi-
crosomes, Drug Metab. Dispos. 33 (7) (2005) 1027–1035.
[43] R.S.Y. Wong, Disease-Modifying Eﬀects of Long-Term and Continuous Use of
Nonsteroidal Anti-Inﬂammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) in Spondyloarthritis, Adv
Pharmacol Sci 2019 (2019) 5324170.
[44] C. Cooper, R. Chapurlat, N. Al-Daghri, G. Herrero-Beaumont, O. Bruyere,
F. Rannou, R. Roth, D. Uebelhart, J.Y. Reginster, Safety of Oral Non-Selective Non-
Steroidal Anti-Inﬂammatory Drugs in Osteoarthritis: What Does the Literature
Say? Drugs Aging 36 (Suppl 1) (2019) 15–24.
[45] J. Marjoribanks M. Proctor C. Farquhar R.S. Derks Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory
drugs for dysmenorrhoea Cochrane Database Syst Rev (1) 2010 CD001751.
[46] T.R. Lundberg, G. Howatson, Analgesic and anti-inﬂammatory drugs in sports:
Implications for exercise performance and training adaptations, Scand. J. Med. Sci.
Sports 28 (11) (2018) 2252–2262.
[47] F.M. Steckling, F.D. Lima, J.B. Farinha, P.C. Rosa, L.F.F. Royes, M.J. Cuevas,
G. Bresciani, F.A. Soares, J. Gonzalez-Gallego, R.P. Barcelos, Diclofenac attenuates
inﬂammation through TLR4 pathway and improves exercise performance after
exhaustive swimming, Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 30 (2) (2020) 264–271.
[48] T. Gorski, E.L. Cadore, S.S. Pinto, E.M. da Silva, C.S. Correa, F.G. Beltrami,
L.F. Kruel, Use of NSAIDs in triathletes: prevalence, level of awareness and reasons
for use, Br. J. Sports Med. 45 (2) (2011) 85–90.
[49] L.A. Walker, E.J. Zambraski, R.F. Williams, Widespread Use of Prescription
Nonsteroidal Anti-Inﬂammatory Drugs Among U.S. Army Active Duty Soldiers,
Mil. Med. 182 (3) (2017) e1709–e1712.
[50] P. Pantziarka, V. Sukhatme, G. Bouche, L. Meheus, V.P. Sukhatme, Repurposing
Drugs in Oncology (ReDO)-diclofenac as an anti-cancer agent,
Ecancermedicalscience 10 (2016) 610.
[51] Z. Zhang, F. Chen, L. Shang, Advances in antitumor eﬀects of NSAIDs, Cancer
Manag. Res. 10 (2018) 4631–4640.
[52] M.J. Thun, S.J. Henley, C. Patrono, Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs as an-
ticancer agents: mechanistic, pharmacologic, and clinical issues, J. Natl. Cancer
Inst. 94 (4) (2002) 252–266.
[53] P. Ricchi, R. Zarrilli, A. Di Palma, A.M. Acquaviva, Nonsteroidal anti-in-
ﬂammatory drugs in colorectal cancer: from prevention to therapy, Br. J. Cancer
88 (6) (2003) 803–807.
[54] R. Pallu, Anti-inﬂammatory Drugs for Cancer Prevention and Treatment: Emerging
Options, J. Cancer Sci. Ther. 4 (12) (2012).
[55] L. Hilovska, R. Jendzelovsky, P. Fedorocko, Potency of non-steroidal anti-in-
ﬂammatory drugs in chemotherapy, Mol. Clin. Oncol. 3 (1) (2015) 3–12.
[56] R. Ma, B. Yi, G.A. Piazza, Y. Xi, Mechanistic Role of MicroRNA in Cancer
Chemoprevention by Nonsteroidal Anti-inﬂammatory Drugs, Curr. Pharmacol
Rep. 1 (3) (2015) 154–160.
[57] A. Izzotti, R. Balansky, G. Ganchev, M. Iltcheva, M. Longobardi, A. Pulliero,
A. Camoirano, F. D'Agostini, M. Geretto, R.T. Micale, S. La Maestra, M.S. Miller,
V.E. Steele, S. De Flora, Early and late eﬀects of aspirin and naproxen on
microRNAs in the lung and blood of mice, either unexposed or exposed to cigarette
smoke, Oncotarget 8 (49) (2017) 85716–85748.
[58] J. Li, U.R. Mansmann, Modeling of non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug eﬀect
within signaling pathways and miRNA-regulation pathways, PLoS ONE 8 (8)
(2013) e72477.
[59] J. Ishida, M. Konishi, N. Ebner, J. Springer, Repurposing of approved cardiovas-
cular drugs, J. Transl. Med. 14 (2016) 269.
[60] M.C. Zatelli, A. Luchin, F. Tagliati, S. Leoni, D. Piccin, M. Bondanelli, R. Rossi, E.C.
degli Uberti, Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors prevent the development of chemore-
sistance phenotype in a breast cancer cell line by inhibiting glycoprotein p-170
expression, Endocr Relat Cancer 14(4) (2007) 1029-38.
[61] C. Huang, Y. Chen, H. Liu, J. Yang, X. Song, J. Zhao, N. He, C.J. Zhou, Y. Wang,
Q. Dong, Celecoxib targets breast cancer stem cells by inhibiting the synthesis of
prostaglandin E2 and down-regulating the Wnt pathway activity, Oncotarget 8
(70) (2017) 115254–115269.
[62] A.L. Blobaum, L.J. Marnett, Structural and functional basis of cyclooxygenase
inhibition, J. Med. Chem. 50 (7) (2007) 1425–1441.
[63] C. Coyle, F.H. Caﬀerty, S. Rowley, M. MacKenzie, L. Berkman, S. Gupta,
C.S. Pramesh, D. Gilbert, H. Kynaston, D. Cameron, R.H. Wilson, A. Ring,
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
17

----- Page 19 (native) -----
R.E. Langley, ADD-ASPIRIN: A phase III, double-blind, placebo controlled, ran-
domised trial assessing the eﬀects of aspirin on disease recurrence and survival
after primary therapy in common non-metastatic solid tumours, Contemp. Clin
Trials 51 (2016) 56–64.
[64] N. Joharatnam-Hogan, F. Caﬀerty, R. Hubner, D. Swinson, S. Sothi, K. Gupta,
S. Falk, K. Patel, N. Warner, V. Kunene, S. Rowley, K. Khabra, T. Underwood,
J. Jankowski, J. Bridgewater, A. Crossley, V. Henson, L. Berkman, D. Gilbert,
H. Kynaston, A. Ring, D. Cameron, F. Din, J. Graham, T. Iveson, R. Adams,
A. Thomas, R. Wilson, C.S. Pramesh, R. Langley, Aspirin as an adjuvant treatment
for cancer: feasibility results from the Add-Aspirin randomised trial, Lancet
Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 4 (11) (2019) 854–862.
[65] K.K.F. Tsoi, J.M.W. Ho, F.C.H. Chan, J.J.Y. Sung, Long-term use of low-dose as-
pirin for cancer prevention: A 10-year population cohort study in Hong Kong, Int.
J. Cancer 145 (1) (2019) 267–273.
[66] D.J. Magee, S. Jhanji, G. Poulogiannis, P. Farquhar-Smith, M.R.D. Brown,
Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs and pain in cancer patients: a systematic
review and reappraisal of the evidence, Br. J. Anaesth. 123 (2) (2019) e412–e423.
[67] F.M. Shebl, A.W. Hsing, Y. Park, A.R. Hollenbeck, L.W. Chu, T.E. Meyer,
J. Koshiol, Non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs use is associated with reduced
risk of inﬂammation-associated cancers: NIH-AARP study, PLoS ONE 9 (12)
(2014) e114633.
[68] A.S. Hendrix, T.J. Spoonmore, A.D. Wilde, N.E. Putnam, N.D. Hammer,
D.J. Snyder, S.A. Guelcher, E.P. Skaar, J.E. Cassat, Repurposing the Nonsteroidal
Anti-inﬂammatory Drug Diﬂunisal as an Osteoprotective, Antivirulence Therapy
for Staphylococcus aureus Osteomyelitis, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 60 (9)
(2016) 5322–5330.
[69] E.M. Lago, M.P. Silva, T.G. Queiroz, S.F. Mazloum, V.C. Rodrigues, P.U. Carnauba,
P.L. Pinto, J.A. Rocha, L.L.G. Ferreira, A.D. Andricopulo, J. de Moraes, Phenotypic
screening of nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs identiﬁed mefenamic acid as a
drug for the treatment of schistosomiasis, EBioMedicine 43 (2019) 370–379.
[70] A.O. Ogundeji, C.H. Pohl, O.M. Sebolai, Repurposing of Aspirin and Ibuprofen as
Candidate Anti-Cryptococcus Drugs, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 60 (8) (2016)
4799–4808.
[71] B. Gold, M. Pingle, S.J. Brickner, N. Shah, J. Roberts, M. Rundell, W.C. Bracken,
T. Warrier, S. Somersan, A. Venugopal, C. Darby, X. Jiang, J.D. Warren,
J. Fernandez, O. Ouerfelli, E.L. Nuermberger, A. Cunningham-Bussel, P. Rath,
T. Chidawanyika, H. Deng, R. Realubit, J.F. Glickman, C.F. Nathan, Nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drug sensitizes Mycobacterium tuberculosis to endogenous and
exogenous antimicrobials, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 (40) (2012)
16004–16011.
[72] V. Chittepu, P. Kalhotra, T. Osorio-Gallardo, T. Gallardo-Velazquez, G. Osorio-
Revilla, Repurposing of FDA-Approved NSAIDs for DPP-4 Inhibition as an
Alternative for Diabetes Mellitus Treatment: Computational and in Vitro Study,
Pharmaceutics 11 (5) (2019).
[73] C. Rawat, S. Kukal, U.R. Dahiya, R. Kukreti, Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors:
future therapeutic strategies for epilepsy management, J. Neuroinﬂammation 16
(1) (2019) 197.
[74] Y. Joo, H.S. Kim, R.S. Woo, C.H. Park, K.Y. Shin, J.P. Lee, K.A. Chang, S. Kim,
Y.H. Suh, Mefenamic acid shows neuroprotective eﬀects and improves cognitive
impairment in in vitro and in vivo Alzheimer's disease models, Mol. Pharmacol. 69
(1) (2006) 76–84.
[75] S. Wongrakpanich, A. Wongrakpanich, K. Melhado, J. Rangaswami, A
Comprehensive Review of Non-Steroidal Anti-Inﬂammatory Drug Use in The
Elderly, Aging Dis. 9 (1) (2018) 143–150.
[76] L.J. Thal, S.H. Ferris, L. Kirby, G.A. Block, C.R. Lines, E. Yuen, C. Assaid,
M.L. Nessly, B.A. Norman, C.C. Baranak, S.A. Reines, A randomized, double-blind,
study of rofecoxib in patients with mild cognitive impairment,
Neuropsychopharmacology 30 (6) (2005) 1204–1215.
[77] C. Cunningham, D.T. Skelly, Non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs and cognitive
function: are prostaglandins at the heart of cognitive impairment in dementia and
delirium? J. Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 7 (1) (2012) 60–73.
[78] H. Zhao-Fleming, A. Hand, K. Zhang, R. Polak, A. Northcut, D. Jacob,
S. Dissanaike, K.P. Rumbaugh, Eﬀect of non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs on
post-surgical complications against the backdrop of the opioid crisis, Burns
Trauma 6 (2018) 25.
[79] C. Griggs, J. Goverman, E.A. Bittner, B. Levi, Sedation and Pain Management in
Burn Patients, Clin. Plast. Surg. 44 (3) (2017) 535–540.
[80] G.A. FitzGerald, Misguided drug advice for COVID-19, Science 367 (6485) (2020)
1434.
[81] A. Zarghi, S. Arfaei, Selective COX-2 Inhibitors: A Review of Their Structure-
Activity Relationships, Iran J. Pharm. Res. 10 (4) (2011) 655–683.
[82] J.R. Vane, Inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis as a mechanism of action for as-
pirin-like drugs, Nat. New. Biol. 231 (25) (1971) 232–235.
[83] T.D. Warner, J.A. Mitchell, Cyclooxygenase-3 (COX-3): ﬁlling in the gaps toward a
COX continuum? Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 99 (21) (2002) 13371–13373.
[84] J.R. Vane, The ﬁght against rheumatism: from willow bark to COX-1 sparing
drugs, J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 51 (4 Pt 1) (2000) 573–586.
[85] Z. Varga, S.R.A. Sabzwari, V. Vargova, Cardiovascular Risk of Nonsteroidal Anti-
Inﬂammatory Drugs: An Under-Recognized Public Health Issue, Cureus 9 (4)
(2017) e1144.
[86] D.L. Simmons, D.B. Levy, Y. Yannoni, R.L. Erikson, Identiﬁcation of a phorbol
ester-repressible v-src-inducible gene, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 86 (4) (1989)
1178–1182.
[87] W.L. Xie, J.G. Chipman, D.L. Robertson, R.L. Erikson, D.L. Simmons, Expression of
a mitogen-responsive gene encoding prostaglandin synthase is regulated by mRNA
splicing, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 88 (7) (1991) 2692–2696.
[88] N.V. Chandrasekharan, H. Dai, K.L. Roos, N.K. Evanson, J. Tomsik, T.S. Elton,
D.L. Simmons, COX-3, a cyclooxygenase-1 variant inhibited by acetaminophen
and other analgesic/antipyretic drugs: cloning, structure, and expression, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 99 (21) (2002) 13926–13931.
[89] M. Jozwiak-Bebenista, J.Z. Nowak, Paracetamol: mechanism of action, applica-
tions and safety concern, Acta Pol. Pharm. 71 (1) (2014) 11–23.
[90] J.R. Vane, Y.S. Bakhle, R.M. Botting, Cyclooxygenases 1 and 2, Annu. Rev.
Pharmacol. Toxicol. 38 (1998) 97–120.
[91] J.R. Vane, Introduction: mechanism of action of NSAIDs, Br. J. Rheumatol. 35
(Suppl 1) (1996) 1–3.
[92] R. Ghosh, A. Alajbegovic, A.V. Gomes, NSAIDs and Cardiovascular Diseases: Role
of Reactive Oxygen Species, Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2015 (2015) 536962.
[93] M.W. King, Lipids: The Eicosanoids: Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes, and
Thromboxanes, Integrative medical biochemistry : examination and board review,
New York : McGraw-Hill Education/Medical2014.
[94] E.M. Smyth, T. Grosser, M. Wang, Y. Yu, G.A. FitzGerald, Prostanoids in health and
disease, J. Lipid Res. 50 (Suppl) (2009) S423–S428.
[95] J.K. Gierse, J.J. McDonald, S.D. Hauser, S.H. Rangwala, C.M. Koboldt, K. Seibert,
A single amino acid diﬀerence between cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) and -2 (COX-2)
reverses the selectivity of COX-2 speciﬁc inhibitors, J. Biol. Chem. 271 (26) (1996)
15810–15814.
[96] C.A. Rouzer, L.J. Marnett, Cyclooxygenases: structural and functional insights, J.
Lipid Res. 50 (Suppl) (2009) S29–S34.
[97] N.S. Kirkby, A.K. Zaiss, P. Urquhart, J. Jiao, P.J. Austin, M. Al-Yamani,
M.H. Lundberg, L.S. MacKenzie, T.D. Warner, A. Nicolaou, H.R. Herschman,
J.A. Mitchell, LC-MS/MS conﬁrms that COX-1 drives vascular prostacyclin whilst
gene expression pattern reveals non-vascular sites of COX-2 expression, PLoS ONE
8 (7) (2013) e69524.
[98] J.A. Mitchell, N.S. Kirkby, Eicosanoids, prostacyclin and cyclooxygenase in the
cardiovascular system, Br. J. Pharmacol. 176 (8) (2019) 1038–1050.
[99] V. Allaj, C. Guo, D. Nie, Non-steroid anti-inﬂammatory drugs, prostaglandins, and
cancer, Cell Biosci 3 (1) (2013) 8.
[100] R.M. Breyer, C.K. Bagdassarian, S.A. Myers, M.D. Breyer, Prostanoid receptors:
subtypes and signaling, Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 41 (2001) 661–690.
[101] H. Harizi, The immunobiology of prostanoid receptor signaling in connecting in-
nate and adaptive immunity, Biomed Res. Int. 2013 (2013) 683405.
[102] C. Sandoval-Acuna, C. Lopez-Alarcon, M.E. Aliaga, H. Speisky, Inhibition of mi-
tochondrial complex I by various non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs and its
protection by quercetin via a coenzyme Q-like action, Chem. Biol. Interact. 199 (1)
(2012) 18–28.
[103] M.P. Murphy, How mitochondria produce reactive oxygen species, Biochem. J.
417 (1) (2009) 1–13.
[104] S. Mazumder, R. De, S. Sarkar, A.A. Siddiqui, S.J. Saha, C. Banerjee, M.S. Iqbal,
S. Nag, S. Debsharma, U. Bandyopadhyay, Selective scavenging of intra-mi-
tochondrial superoxide corrects diclofenac-induced mitochondrial dysfunction
and gastric injury: A novel gastroprotective mechanism independent of gastric
acid suppression, Biochem. Pharmacol. 121 (2016) 33–51.
[105] S. Mazumder, R. De, S. Debsharma, S. Bindu, P. Maity, S. Sarkar, S.J. Saha,
A.A. Siddiqui, C. Banerjee, S. Nag, D. Saha, S. Pramanik, K. Mitra,
U. Bandyopadhyay, Indomethacin impairs mitochondrial dynamics by activating
the PKCzeta-p38-DRP1 pathway and inducing apoptosis in gastric cancer and
normal mucosal cells, J. Biol. Chem. 294 (20) (2019) 8238–8258.
[106] F.K. Braun, N. Al-Yacoub, M. Plotz, M. Mobs, W. Sterry, J. Eberle, Nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs induce apoptosis in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma cells and
enhance their sensitivity for TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand, J, Invest.
Dermatol. 132 (2) (2012) 429–439.
[107] G. Farrugia, R. Balzan, The proapoptotic eﬀect of traditional and novel non-
steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs in mammalian and yeast cells, Oxid Med Cell
Longev 2013 (2013) 504230.
[108] E.R. Rayburn, S.J. Ezell, R. Zhang, Anti-Inﬂammatory Agents for Cancer Therapy,
Mol Cell Pharmacol 1 (1) (2009) 29–43.
[109] C. Rosas, M. Sinning, A. Ferreira, M. Fuenzalida, D. Lemus, Celecoxib decreases
growth and angiogenesis and promotes apoptosis in a tumor cell line resistant to
chemotherapy, Biol. Res. 47 (2014) 27.
[110] S. Tsujimoto, S. Mokuda, K. Matoba, A. Yamada, K. Jouyama, Y. Murata, Y. Ozaki,
T. Ito, S. Nomura, Y. Okuda, The prevalence of endoscopic gastric mucosal damage
in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, PLoS ONE 13 (7) (2018) e0200023.
[111] S. Hamid, J. Yakoob, W. Jafri, S. Islam, S. Abid, M. Islam, Frequency of NSAID
induced peptic ulcer disease, J. Pak. Med. Assoc. 56 (5) (2006) 218–222.
[112] S. Chatterjee, G.P. Dureja, G. Kadhe, A. Mane, A.A. Phansalkar, S. Sawant,
V. Kapatkar, Cross-Sectional Study for Prevalence of Non-Steroidal Anti-
Inﬂammatory Drug-Induced Gastrointestinal Cardiac and Renal Complications in
India: Interim Report, Gastroenterology Res 8 (3–4) (2015) 216–221.
[113] R.W. Dubois, G.Y. Melmed, J.M. Henning, L. Laine, Guidelines for the appropriate
use of non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs, cyclo-oxygenase-2-speciﬁc in-
hibitors and proton pump inhibitors in patients requiring chronic anti-in-
ﬂammatory therapy, Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 19 (2) (2004) 197–208.
[114] M. Fine, Quantifying the impact of NSAID-associated adverse events, Am. J.
Manag. Care 19 (14 Suppl) (2013) s267–s272.
[115] M. Sinha, L. Gautam, P.K. Shukla, P. Kaur, S. Sharma, T.P. Singh, Current per-
spectives in NSAID-induced gastropathy, Mediators Inﬂamm. 2013 (2013)
258209.
[116] J. Claria, Cyclooxygenase-2 biology, Curr. Pharm. Des. 9 (27) (2003) 2177–2190.
[117] N. Bhala, J. Emberson, A. Merhi, S. Abramson, N. Arber, J.A. Baron,
C. Bombardier, C. Cannon, M.E. Farkouh, G.A. FitzGerald, P. Goss, H. Halls,
E. Hawk, C. Hawkey, C. Hennekens, M. Hochberg, L.E. Holland, P.M. Kearney,
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
18

----- Page 20 (native) -----
L. Laine, A. Lanas, P. Lance, A. Laupacis, J. Oates, C. Patrono, T.J. Schnitzer,
S. Solomon, P. Tugwell, K. Wilson, J. Wittes, C. Baigent, Vascular and upper
gastrointestinal eﬀects of non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs: meta-analyses of
individual participant data from randomised trials, Lancet 382 (9894) (2013)
769–779.
[118] F. Salvo, S. Antoniazzi, M. Duong, M. Molimard, F. Bazin, A. Fourrier-Reglat,
A. Pariente, N. Moore, Cardiovascular events associated with the long-term use of
NSAIDs: a review of randomized controlled trials and observational studies,
Expert. Opin. Drug. Saf. 13 (5) (2014) 573–585.
[119] P. Pirlamarla, R.M. Bond, FDA labeling of NSAIDs: Review of nonsteroidal anti-
inﬂammatory drugs in cardiovascular disease, Trends Cardiovasc. Med. 26 (8)
(2016) 675–680.
[120] S. Somasundaram, S. Raﬁ, J. Hayllar, G. Sigthorsson, M. Jacob, A.B. Price,
A. Macpherson, T. Mahmod, D. Scott, J.M. Wrigglesworth, I. Bjarnason,
Mitochondrial damage: a possible mechanism of the “topical” phase of NSAID
induced injury to the rat intestine, Gut 41 (3) (1997) 344–353.
[121] S. Somasundaram, R. Simpson, S. Raﬁ, J.K. Shergill, I. Bjarnason,
J. Wrigglesworth, 2, 4-diamino-6- hydroxy pyrimidine inhibits NSAIDs induced
nitrosyl-complex EPR signals and ulcer in rat jejunum, BMC Gastroenterol. 2
(2002) 8.
[122] P. Maity, S. Bindu, S. Dey, M. Goyal, A. Alam, C. Pal, K. Mitra, U. Bandyopadhyay,
Indomethacin, a non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug, develops gastropathy by
inducing reactive oxygen species-mediated mitochondrial pathology and asso-
ciated apoptosis in gastric mucosa: a novel role of mitochondrial aconitase oxi-
dation, J. Biol. Chem. 284 (5) (2009) 3058–3068.
[123] P. Maity, S. Bindu, S. Dey, M. Goyal, A. Alam, C. Pal, R. Reiter, U. Bandyopadhyay,
Melatonin reduces indomethacin-induced gastric mucosal cell apoptosis by pre-
venting mitochondrial oxidative stress and the activation of mitochondrial
pathway of apoptosis, J. Pineal Res. 46 (3) (2009) 314–323.
[124] C. Pal, S. Bindu, S. Dey, A. Alam, M. Goyal, M.S. Iqbal, P. Maity, S.S. Adhikari,
U. Bandyopadhyay, Gallic acid prevents nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug-in-
duced gastropathy in rat by blocking oxidative stress and apoptosis, Free Radic.
Biol. Med. 49 (2) (2010) 258–267.
[125] I. Chattopadhyay, U. Bandyopadhyay, K. Biswas, P. Maity, R.K. Banerjee,
Indomethacin inactivates gastric peroxidase to induce reactive-oxygen-mediated
gastric mucosal injury and curcumin protects it by preventing peroxidase in-
activation and scavenging reactive oxygen, Free Radic. Biol. Med. 40 (8) (2006)
1397–1408.
[126] K. Biswas, U. Bandyopadhyay, I. Chattopadhyay, A. Varadaraj, E. Ali,
R.K. Banerjee, A novel antioxidant and antiapoptotic role of omeprazole to block
gastric ulcer through scavenging of hydroxyl radical, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (13)
(2003) 10993–11001.
[127] U. Bandyopadhyay, K. Biswas, R. Chatterjee, D. Bandyopadhyay,
I. Chattopadhyay, C.K. Ganguly, T. Chakraborty, K. Bhattacharya, R.K. Banerjee,
Gastroprotective eﬀect of Neem (Azadirachta indica) bark extract: possible in-
volvement of H(+)-K(+)-ATPase inhibition and scavenging of hydroxyl radical,
Life Sci. 71 (24) (2002) 2845–2865.
[128] I. Chattopadhyay, B. Nandi, R. Chatterjee, K. Biswas, U. Bandyopadhyay,
R.K. Banerjee, Mechanism of antiulcer eﬀect of Neem (Azadirachta indica) leaf
extract: eﬀect on H+-K+-ATPase, oxidative damage and apoptosis,
Inﬂammopharmacology 12 (2) (2004) 153–176.
[129] Y. Fu, H.Q. Wu, H.L. Cui, Y.Y. Li, C.Z. Li, Gastroprotective and anti-ulcer eﬀects of
oxymatrine against several gastric ulcer models in rats: Possible roles of anti-
oxidant, antiinﬂammatory, and prosurvival mechanisms, Phytother. Res. 32 (10)
(2018) 2047–2058.
[130] R.N. Hegab II, M.T. Abd-Ellatif, Sadek, The gastroprotective eﬀect of N-acet-
ylcysteine and genistein in indomethacin-induced gastric injury in rats, Can. J.
Physiol. Pharmacol. 96 (11) (2018) 1161–1170.
[131] I.G. Ko, J.J. Jin, L. Hwang, S.H. Kim, C.J. Kim, J.H. Han, M.S. Kwak, J.Y. Yoon,
J.W. Jeon, Evaluating the mucoprotective eﬀect of polydeoxyribonucleotide
against indomethacin-induced gastropathy via the MAPK/NF-kappaB signaling
pathway in rats, Eur. J. Pharmacol. 874 (2020) 172952.
[132] S. Bindu, S. Mazumder, S. Dey, C. Pal, M. Goyal, A. Alam, M.S. Iqbal, S. Sarkar,
A. Azhar Siddiqui, C. Banerjee, U. Bandyopadhyay, Nonsteroidal anti-in-
ﬂammatory drug induces proinﬂammatory damage in gastric mucosa through NF-
kappaB activation and neutrophil inﬁltration: anti-inﬂammatory role of heme
oxygenase-1 against nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug, Free Radic. Biol. Med.
65 (2013) 456–467.
[133] L.S. Lohmander, D. McKeith, O. Svensson, M. Malmenas, L. Bolin, A. Kalla,
G. Genti, J. Szechinski, C. Ramos-Remus, A randomised, placebo controlled,
comparative trial of the gastrointestinal safety and eﬃcacy of AZD3582 versus
naproxen in osteoarthritis, Ann. Rheum. Dis. 64 (3) (2005) 449–456.
[134] R. Pai, I.L. Szabo, A.Q. Giap, H. Kawanaka, A.S. Tarnawski, Nonsteroidal anti-
inﬂammatory drugs inhibit re-epithelialization of wounded gastric monolayers by
interfering with actin Src, FAK, and tensin signaling, Life Sci. 69 (25–26) (2001)
3055–3071.
[135] Y. Nadatani, T. Watanabe, W. Suda, A. Nakata, Y. Matsumoto, S. Kosaka,
A. Higashimori, K. Otani, S. Hosomi, F. Tanaka, Y. Nagami, N. Kamata, K. Taira,
H. Yamagami, T. Tanigawa, M. Hattori, Y. Fujiwara, Gastric acid inhibitor ag-
gravates indomethacin-induced small intestinal injury via reducing Lactobacillus
johnsonii, Sci. Rep. 9 (1) (2019) 17490.
[136] C. Sostres, C.J. Gargallo, A. Lanas, Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs and
upper and lower gastrointestinal mucosal damage, Arthritis Res. Ther. 15 (Suppl
3) (2013) S3.
[137] S.J. Shin, C.K. Noh, S.G. Lim, K.M. Lee, K.J. Lee, Non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory
drug-induced enteropathy, Intest. Res. 15 (4) (2017) 446–455.
[138] L. Maiden, B. Thjodleifsson, A. Theodors, J. Gonzalez, I. Bjarnason, A quantitative
analysis of NSAID-induced small bowel pathology by capsule enteroscopy,
Gastroenterology 128 (5) (2005) 1172–1178.
[139] D.Y. Graham, A.R. Opekun, F.F. Willingham, W.A. Qureshi, Visible small-intestinal
mucosal injury in chronic NSAID users, Clin. Gastroenterol Hepatol. 3 (1) (2005)
55–59.
[140] T. Watanabe, Y. Fujiwara, F.K.L. Chan, Current knowledge on non-steroidal anti-
inﬂammatory drug-induced small-bowel damage: a comprehensive review, J.
Gastroenterol. (2019).
[141] Y. Nadatani, T. Watanabe, T. Tanigawa, H. Machida, H. Okazaki, H. Yamagami,
K. Watanabe, K. Tominaga, Y. Fujiwara, T. Arakawa, High mobility group box 1
promotes small intestinal damage induced by nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory
drugs through Toll-like receptor 4, Am. J. Pathol. 181 (1) (2012) 98–110.
[142] M. Jacob, R. Foster, G. Sigthorsson, R. Simpson, I. Bjarnason, Role of bile in pa-
thogenesis of indomethacin-induced enteropathy, Arch. Toxicol. 81 (4) (2007)
291–298.
[143] H. Satoh, S. Shiotani, N. Otsuka, K. Hatao, S. Nishimura, Role of dietary ﬁbres,
intestinal hypermotility and leukotrienes in the pathogenesis of NSAID-induced
small intestinal ulcers in cats, Gut 58 (12) (2009) 1590–1596.
[144] S. Shimada, T. Tanigawa, T. Watanabe, A. Nakata, N. Sugimura, S. Itani,
A. Higashimori, Y. Nadatani, K. Otani, K. Taira, S. Hosomi, Y. Nagami, F. Tanaka,
N. Kamata, H. Yamagami, M. Shiba, Y. Fujiwara, Involvement of gliadin, a com-
ponent of wheat gluten, in increased intestinal permeability leading to non-ster-
oidal anti-inﬂammatory drug-induced small-intestinal damage, PLoS ONE 14 (2)
(2019) e0211436.
[145] L. Laine, S.P. Curtis, M. Langman, D.M. Jensen, B. Cryer, A. Kaur, C.P. Cannon,
Lower gastrointestinal events in a double-blind trial of the cyclo-oxygenase-2 se-
lective inhibitor etoricoxib and the traditional nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory
drug diclofenac, Gastroenterology 135 (5) (2008) 1517–1525.
[146] C.M. Whitﬁeld-Cargile, N.D. Cohen, K. He, I. Ivanov, J.S. Goldsby, A. Chamoun-
Emanuelli, B.R. Weeks, L.A. Davidson, R.S. Chapkin, The non-invasive exfoliated
transcriptome (exfoliome) reﬂects the tissue-level transcriptome in a mouse model
of NSAID enteropathy, Sci. Rep. 7 (1) (2017) 14687.
[147] H. Endo, T. Higurashi, K. Hosono, E. Sakai, Y. Sekino, H. Iida, Y. Sakamoto,
T. Koide, H. Takahashi, M. Yoneda, C. Tokoro, M. Inamori, Y. Abe, A. Nakajima,
Eﬃcacy of Lactobacillus casei treatment on small bowel injury in chronic low-dose
aspirin users: a pilot randomized controlled study, J. Gastroenterol. 46 (7) (2011)
894–905.
[148] T. Suzuki, A. Masui, J. Nakamura, H. Shiozawa, J. Aoki, H. Nakae, S. Tsuda,
J. Imai, O. Hideki, M. Matsushima, T. Mine, A. Tamura, T. Ohtsu, Y. Asami,
A. Takagi, Yogurt Containing Lactobacillus gasseri Mitigates Aspirin-Induced
Small Bowel Injuries: A Prospective Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-
Controlled Trial, Digestion 95 (1) (2017) 49–54.
[149] B. Mortensen C. Murphy J. O'Grady M. Lucey G. ElsaﬁL. Barry V. Westphal A.
Wellejus O. Lukjancenko A.C. Eklund H.B. Nielsen A. Baker A. Damholt J.E.T. van
Hylckama Vlieg F. Shanahan M. Buckley Biﬁdobacteriumbreve Bif195 Protects
Against Small-Intestinal Damage Caused by Acetylsalicylic Acid in Healthy
Volunteers Gastroenterology 157 3 2019 pp. 637–646 e4.
[150] E.J. Benjamin, P. Muntner, A. Alonso, M.S. Bittencourt, C.W. Callaway,
A.P. Carson, A.M. Chamberlain, A.R. Chang, S. Cheng, S.R. Das, F.N. Delling,
L. Djousse, M.S.V. Elkind, J.F. Ferguson, M. Fornage, L.C. Jordan, S.S. Khan,
B.M. Kissela, K.L. Knutson, T.W. Kwan, D.T. Lackland, T.T. Lewis, J.H. Lichtman,
C.T. Longenecker, M.S. Loop, P.L. Lutsey, S.S. Martin, K. Matsushita, A.E. Moran,
M.E. Mussolino, M. O'Flaherty, A. Pandey, A.M. Perak, W.D. Rosamond, G.A. Roth,
U.K.A. Sampson, G.M. Satou, E.B. Schroeder, S.H. Shah, N.L. Spartano, A. Stokes,
D.L. Tirschwell, C.W. Tsao, M.P. Turakhia, L.B. VanWagner, J.T. Wilkins,
S.S. Wong, S.S. Virani, Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics-2019 Update: A Report
From the American Heart Association, Circulation 139 (10) (2019) e56–e528.
[151] T. Grosser, Y. Yu, G.A. Fitzgerald, Emotion recollected in tranquility: lessons
learned from the COX-2 saga, Annu. Rev. Med. 61 (2010) 17–33.
[152] T. Grosser, S. Fries, G.A. FitzGerald, Biological basis for the cardiovascular con-
sequences of COX-2 inhibition: therapeutic challenges and opportunities, J. Clin.
Invest. 116 (1) (2006) 4–15.
[153] S.E. Nissen, N.D. Yeomans, D.H. Solomon, T.F. Luscher, P. Libby, M.E. Husni,
D.Y. Graham, J.S. Borer, L.M. Wisniewski, K.E. Wolski, Q. Wang, V. Menon,
F. Ruschitzka, M. Gaﬀney, B. Beckerman, M.F. Berger, W. Bao, A.M. Lincoﬀ,
Cardiovascular Safety of Celecoxib, Naproxen, or Ibuprofen for Arthritis, N. Engl.
J. Med. 375 (26) (2016) 2519–2529.
[154] G.A. FitzGerald, Imprecision: Limitations to Interpretation of a Large Randomized
Clinical Trial, Circulation 135 (2) (2017) 113–115.
[155] L.A. Garcia Rodriguez, S. Tacconelli, P. Patrignani, Role of dose potency in the
prediction of risk of myocardial infarction associated with nonsteroidal anti-in-
ﬂammatory drugs in the general population, J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 52 (20) (2008)
1628–1636.
[156] N. Moore, Coronary Risks Associated with Diclofenac and Other NSAIDs: An
Update, Drug Saf. 43 (4) (2020) 301–318.
[157] F. Marsico, S. Paolillo, P.P. Filardi, NSAIDs and cardiovascular risk, J Cardiovasc
Med (Hagerstown) 18 Suppl 1: Special Issue on The State of the Art for the
Practicing Cardiologist: The 2016 Conoscere E Curare Il Cuore (CCC) Proceedings
from the CLI Foundation (2017) e40-e43.
[158] J. Miner, A. Hoﬀhines, The discovery of aspirin's antithrombotic eﬀects, Tex. Heart
Inst. J. 34 (2) (2007) 179–186.
[159] O. Belton, D. Byrne, D. Kearney, A. Leahy, D.J. Fitzgerald, Cyclooxygenase-1 and
-2-dependent prostacyclin formation in patients with atherosclerosis, Circulation
102 (8) (2000) 840–845.
[160] R. Behrouz, C.M. Miller, Aspirin and intracerebral hemorrhage: Where are we
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
19

----- Page 21 (native) -----
now? Neurol. Clin. Pract. 5 (1) (2015) 11–16.
[161] S.F. Rapa, B.R. Di Iorio, P. Campiglia, A. Heidland, S. Marzocco, Inﬂammation and
Oxidative Stress in Chronic Kidney Disease-Potential Therapeutic Role of Minerals,
Vitamins and Plant-Derived Metabolites, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21 (1) (2019).
[162] S. Bak, M. Andersen, I. Tsiropoulos, L.A. Garcia Rodriguez, J. Hallas,
K. Christensen, D. Gaist, Risk of stroke associated with nonsteroidal anti-in-
ﬂammatory drugs: a nested case-control study, Stroke 34 (2) (2003) 379–386.
[163] G. Gelbenegger, M. Postula, L. Pecen, S. Halvorsen, M. Lesiak, C. Schoergenhofer,
B. Jilma, C. Hengstenberg, J.M. Siller-Matula, Aspirin for primary prevention of
cardiovascular disease: a meta-analysis with a particular focus on subgroups, BMC
Med. 17 (1) (2019) 198.
[164] G. Ravach, S. Fournier, L. Mazzolai, D. Nanchen, Aspirin for primary cardiovas-
cular prevention : the end of an era ? Rev. Med. Suisse 16 (684) (2020) 459–462.
[165] E. Fosslien, Cardiovascular complications of non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory
drugs, Ann. Clin. Lab. Sci. 35 (4) (2005) 347–385.
[166] B. Ahmetaj-Shala, N.S. Kirkby, R. Knowles, M. Al'Yamani, S. Mazi, Z. Wang,
A.T. Tucker, L.S. Mackenzie, P.C. Armstrong, R.M. Nusing, J.A. Tomlinson,
T.D. Warner, J. Leiper, J.A. Mitchell, Reply to letter regarding article, “evidence
that links loss of cyclooxygenase-2 with increased asymmetric dimethylarginine:
novel explanation of cardiovascular side eﬀects associated with anti-inﬂammatory
drugs”, Circulation 132 (17) (2015) e213–e214.
[167] E. Ricciotti, C. Castro, S.Y. Tang, W.T.E. Briggs, J.A. West, D. Malik, S.D. Rhoades,
H. Meng, X. Li, N.F. Lahens, J.A. Sparks, E.W. Karlson, A.M. Weljie, J.L. Griﬃn,
G.A. FitzGerald, Cyclooxygenase-2, Asymmetric Dimethylarginine, and the
Cardiovascular Hazard From Nonsteroidal Anti-Inﬂammatory Drugs, Circulation
138 (21) (2018) 2367–2378.
[168] Y. Yu, E. Ricciotti, R. Scalia, S.Y. Tang, G. Grant, Z. Yu, G. Landesberg, I. Crichton,
W. Wu, E. Pure, C.D. Funk, G.A. FitzGerald, Vascular COX-2 modulates blood
pressure and thrombosis in mice, Sci Transl Med 4(132) (2012) 132ra54.
[169] R. Ghosh, S.K. Goswami, L. Feitoza, B. Hammock, A.V. Gomes, Diclofenac induces
proteasome and mitochondrial dysfunction in murine cardiomyocytes and hearts,
Int. J. Cardiol. 223 (2016) 923–935.
[170] C.K. Oh, M.S.F. Ahmed, C. Xie, J.H. Ryu, J. Choi, J.S. Chung, G.S. Roh, H.J. Kim,
G.J. Cho, W.S. Choi, S.S. Kang, D.H. Lee, Microarray analysis of NSAIDs-treated
cardiomyocytes to search for genes involved in COX-2 inhibitor cardiotoxicity,
Genet. Mol. Res. 17 (4) (2018) GMR18068.
[171] G.N.C. Lucas, A.C.C. Leitao, R.L. Alencar, R.M.F. Xavier, E.F. Daher, G.B.D. Silva
Junior, Pathophysiological aspects of nephropathy caused by non-steroidal anti-
inﬂammatory drugs, J. Bras. Nefrol. 41 (1) (2019) 124–130.
[172] Y. Ziya Sener, M. Oksul, Eﬀects of NSAIDs on kidney functions and cardiovascular
system, J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich) 22(2) (2020) 302.
[173] A. Bensman, Non-steroidal Anti-inﬂammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) Systemic Use: The
Risk of Renal Failure, Front. Pediatr. 7 (2019) 517.
[174] P. Ejaz, K. Bhojani, V.R. Joshi, NSAIDs and kidney, J. Assoc. Physicians India 52
(2004) 632–640.
[175] S. Rahman, A. Malcoun, Nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory drugs, cyclooxygenase-2,
and the kidneys, Prim. Care 41 (4) (2014) 803–821.
[176] M. Dixit, T. Doan, R. Kirschner, N. Dixit, Signiﬁcant Acute Kidney Injury Due to
Non-steroidal Anti-inﬂammatory Drugs: Inpatient Setting, Pharmaceuticals (Basel)
3 (4) (2010) 1279–1285.
[177] S. Clave, C. Rousset-Rouviere, L. Daniel, M. Tsimaratos, The Invisible Threat of
Non-steroidal Anti-inﬂammatory Drugs for Kidneys, Front. Pediatr. 7 (2019) 520.
[178] D. Burukoglu, C. Baycu, F. Taplamacioglu, E. Sahin, E. Bektur, Eﬀects of non-
steroidal anti-inﬂammatory meloxicam on stomach, kidney, and liver of rats,
Toxicol. Ind. Health 32 (6) (2016) 980–986.
[179] D.E. MacIntyre, M. Bushﬁeld, L.J. MacMillan, K.J. Moﬀat, F.A. Murdoch,
A. Thomson, A.G. Rossi, A. McNicol, Receptors and receptor mechanisms of en-
dogenous platelet stimulatory and inhibitory mediators, Agents Actions Suppl. 20
(1986) 45–62.
[180] F. Lapi, L. Azoulay, H. Yin, S.J. Nessim, S. Suissa, Concurrent use of diuretics,
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, and angiotensin receptor blockers with
non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs and risk of acute kidney injury: nested case-
control study, BMJ 346 (2013) e8525.
[181] Correction to: Cyclooxygenase-2 Selectively Controls Renal Blood Flow Through a
Novel PPARbeta/delta-Dependent Vasodilator Pathway, Hypertension 71(3)
(2018) e10.
[182] J.R. Sowers, W.B. White, B. Pitt, A. Whelton, L.S. Simon, N. Winer, A. Kivitz,
H. van Ingen, T. Brabant, J.G. Fort, The Eﬀects of cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors and
nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory therapy on 24-hour blood pressure in patients
with hypertension, osteoarthritis, and type 2 diabetes mellitus, Arch. Intern. Med.
165 (2) (2005) 161–168.
[183] C. Lefebvre, J. Hindie, M. Zappitelli, R.W. Platt, K.B. Filion, Non-steroidal anti-
inﬂammatory drugs in chronic kidney disease: a systematic review of prescription
practices and use in primary care, Clin Kidney J 13 (1) (2020) 63–71.
[184] B.B. Ratliﬀ, W. Abdulmahdi, R. Pawar, M.S. Wolin, Oxidant Mechanisms in Renal
Injury and Disease, Antioxid. Redox Signal. 25 (3) (2016) 119–146.
[185] J. Basivireddy, M. Jacob, A.B. Pulimood, K.A. Balasubramanian, Indomethacin-
induced renal damage: role of oxygen free radicals, Biochem. Pharmacol. 67 (3)
(2004) 587–599.
[186] V. Fattori, S.M. Borghi, C.F.S. Guazelli, A.C. Giroldo, J. Crespigio,
A.J.C. Bussmann, L. Coelho-Silva, N.G. Ludwig, T.L. Mazzuco, R. Casagrande,
W.A. Verri Jr., Vinpocetine reduces diclofenac-induced acute kidney injury
through inhibition of oxidative stress, apoptosis, cytokine production, and NF-
kappaB activation in mice, Pharmacol. Res. 120 (2017) 10–22.
[187] N. Prado, G.C. Messias, G.O. Santos Junior, V.S. Nunes, M.I. Schinonni, R. Parana,
Prospective Monitoring of Drug Use: Drug-Induced Liver Injury in a Primary
Healthcare Center, Arq. Gastroenterol. 56 (4) (2019) 390–393.
[188] Nonsteroidal Antiinﬂammatory Drugs (NSAIDs), (2012).
[189] F. Bessone, Non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs: What is the actual risk of liver
damage? World J. Gastroenterol. 16 (45) (2010) 5651–5661.
[190] W.M. Lee, Drug-induced hepatotoxicity, N. Engl. J. Med. 349 (5) (2003) 474–485.
[191] P. Sriuttha, B. Sirichanchuen, U. Permsuwan, Hepatotoxicity of Nonsteroidal Anti-
Inﬂammatory Drugs: A Systematic Review of Randomized Controlled Trials, Int J
Hepatol 2018 (2018) 5253623.
[192] N. O'Connor, P.I. Dargan, A.L. Jones, Hepatocellular damage from non-steroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs, QJM 96 (11) (2003) 787–791.
[193] M.E. Zoubek, M.I. Lucena, R.J. Andrade, C. Stephens, Systematic review: ibu-
profen-induced liver injury, Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 51 (6) (2020) 603–611.
[194] F. Bessone, N. Hernandez, M.G. Roma, E. Ridruejo, M. Mendizabal, I. Medina-
Caliz, M. Robles-Diaz, M.I. Lucena, R.J. Andrade, Hepatotoxicity induced by
coxibs: how concerned should we be? Expert Opin Drug Saf 15 (11) (2016)
1463–1475.
[195] J. Kwon, S. Kim, H. Yoo, E. Lee, Nimesulide-induced hepatotoxicity: A systematic
review and meta-analysis, PLoS ONE 14 (1) (2019) e0209264.
[196] Y. Masubuchi, S. Yamada, T. Horie, Possible mechanism of hepatocyte injury in-
duced by diphenylamine and its structurally related nonsteroidal anti-in-
ﬂammatory drugs, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 292 (3) (2000) 982–987.
[197] R. Bort, X. Ponsoda, R. Jover, M.J. Gomez-Lechon, J.V. Castell, Diclofenac toxicity
to hepatocytes: a role for drug metabolism in cell toxicity, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.
288 (1) (1999) 65–72.
[198] Y. Masubuchi, S. Nakayama, T. Horie, Role of mitochondrial permeability tran-
sition in diclofenac-induced hepatocyte injury in rats, Hepatology 35 (3) (2002)
544–551.
[199] H. Doi, T. Horie, Salicylic acid-induced hepatotoxicity triggered by oxidative
stress, Chem. Biol. Interact. 183 (3) (2010) 363–368.
[200] U. Bolder, N.V. Trang, L.R. Hagey, C.D. Schteingart, H.T. Ton-Nu, C. Cerre,
R.P. Elferink, A.F. Hofmann, Sulindac is excreted into bile by a canalicular bile salt
pump and undergoes a cholehepatic circulation in rats, Gastroenterology 117 (4)
(1999) 962–971.
[201] M.H. Ahmad, M. Fatima, M. Hossain, A.C. Mondal, Evaluation of naproxen-in-
duced oxidative stress, hepatotoxicity and in-vivo genotoxicity in male Wistar rats,
J. Pharm. Anal. 8 (6) (2018) 400–406.
[202] E.O. Souto, H. Miyoshi, R.N. Dubois, G.J. Gores, Kupﬀer cell-derived cycloox-
ygenase-2 regulates hepatocyte Bcl-2 expression in choledocho-venous ﬁstula rats,
Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 280 (5) (2001) G805–G811.
[203] M.M. Rymer, Hemorrhagic stroke: intracerebral hemorrhage, Mo. Med. 108 (1)
(2011) 50–54.
[204] K. Park, A.A. Bavry, Risk of stroke associated with nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory
drugs, Vasc Health Risk Manag 10 (2014) 25–32.
[205] T. Schink, B. Kollhorst, C. Varas Lorenzo, A. Arfe, R. Herings, S. Lucchi, S. Romio,
R. Schade, M.J. Schuemie, H. Straatman, V. Valkhoﬀ, M. Villa, M. Sturkenboom, E.
Garbe, Risk of ischemic stroke and the use of individual non-steroidal anti-in-
ﬂammatory drugs: A multi-country European database study within the SOS
Project, PLoS One 13(9) (2018) e0203362.
[206] N.K. Choi, B.J. Park, S.W. Jeong, K.H. Yu, B.W. Yoon, Nonaspirin nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs and hemorrhagic stroke risk: the Acute Brain Bleeding
Analysis study, Stroke 39 (3) (2008) 845–849.
[207] M.M. Islam, T.N. Poly, B.A. Walther, H.C. Yang, M.C. Lin, Y.C. Li, Risk of
Hemorrhagic Stroke in Patients Exposed to Nonsteroidal Anti-Inﬂammatory Drugs:
A Meta-Analysis of Observational Studies, Neuroepidemiology 51 (3–4) (2018)
166–176.
[208] L. Ge, X. Ouyang, C. Ban, H. Yu, Q. Wu, H. Wu, J. Liang, Cerebral microbleeds in
patients with ischemic cerebrovascular disease taking aspirin or clopidogrel,
Medicine (Baltimore) 98(9) (2019) e14685.
[209] K.L. Li, A.Y. Lee, W.M. Abuzeid, Aspirin Exacerbated Respiratory Disease:
Epidemiology, Pathophysiology, and, Management, Med Sci (Basel) 7 (3) (2019).
[210] A.A. White, D.D. Stevenson, Aspirin-Exacerbated Respiratory Disease, N. Engl. J.
Med. 379 (11) (2018) 1060–1070.
[211] A.A. White, T.A. Doherty, Role of group 2 innate lymphocytes in aspirin-ex-
acerbated respiratory disease pathogenesis, Am J Rhinol Allergy 32 (1) (2018)
7–11.
[212] G. Voiriot, Q. Philippot, A. Elabbadi, C. Elbim, M. Chalumeau, M. Fartoukh, Risks
Related to the Use of Non-Steroidal Anti-Inﬂammatory Drugs in Community-
Acquired Pneumonia in Adult and Pediatric Patients, J Clin Med 8 (6) (2019).
[213] Y.C. Wen, F.Y. Hsiao, K.A. Chan, Z.F. Lin, L.J. Shen, C.C. Fang, Acute Respiratory
Infection and Use of Nonsteroidal Anti-Inﬂammatory Drugs on Risk of Acute
Myocardial Infarction: A Nationwide Case-Crossover Study, J. Infect. Dis. 215 (4)
(2017) 503–509.
[214] N. Dauletbaev, J. Lam, D. Eklove, M. Iskandar, L.C. Lands, Ibuprofen modulates
NF-kB activity but not IL-8 production in cystic ﬁbrosis respiratory epithelial cells,
Respiration 79 (3) (2010) 234–242.
[215] A. Lewandowska-Polak, M. Brauncajs, M. Jarzebska, M. Pawelczyk, M. Kurowski,
J. Makowska, M.L. Kowalski, Parainﬂuenza virus infection enhances NSAIDs-in-
duced inhibition of PGE2 generation and COX-2 expression in human airway
epithelial cells, Adv. Med. Sci. 64 (2) (2019) 338–343.
[216] X. Yan, Q. Hao, Y. Mu, K.A. Timani, L. Ye, Y. Zhu, J. Wu, Nucleocapsid protein of
SARS-CoV activates the expression of cyclooxygenase-2 by binding directly to
regulatory elements for nuclear factor-kappa B and CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein, Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 38 (8) (2006) 1417–1428.
[217] B. Russell, C. Moss, A. Rigg, M. Van Hemelrijck, COVID-19 and treatment with
NSAIDs and corticosteroids: should we be limiting their use in the clinical setting?
Ecancermedicalscience 14 (2020) 1023.
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
20

----- Page 22 (native) -----
[218] P.R.Y. Jaya PreethiPeesa, Arun Rasheed, Venkata Basaveswara Rao Mandava, A
perspective review on role of novel NSAID prodrugs in the management of acute
inﬂammation, J. Acute Dis. 5 (5) (2016) 364–381.
[219] T.J.A. Maureen Younan Jeﬀrey, Fudin, A Practical Approach to Discontinuing
NSAID Therapy Prior to a Procedure (Accessed 10 2013 13).
[220] A.M. Qandil, Prodrugs of nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs), more
than meets the eye: a critical review, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 13 (12) (2012) 17244–17274.
[221] T. Mahmud, S.S. Raﬁ, D.L. Scott, J.M. Wrigglesworth, I. Bjarnason, Nonsteroidal
antiinﬂammatory drugs and uncoupling of mitochondrial oxidative phosphoryla-
tion, Arthritis Rheum. 39 (12) (1996) 1998–2003.
[222] D.T. Makhija, R.R. Somani, A.V. Chavan, Synthesis and pharmacological evalua-
tion of antiinﬂammatory mutual amide prodrugs, Indian J Pharm Sci 75 (3) (2013)
353–357.
[223] K. Shah, J.K. Gupta, N.S. Chauhan, N. Upmanyu, S.K. Shrivastava, P. Mishra,
Prodrugs of NSAIDs: A Review, Open Med. Chem. J. 11 (2017) 146–195.
[224] P.P. Rao, S.N. Kabir, T. Mohamed, Nonsteroidal Anti-Inﬂammatory Drugs
(NSAIDs): Progress in Small Molecule Drug Development, Pharmaceuticals (Basel)
3 (5) (2010) 1530–1549.
[225] S. Fiorucci, L. Santucci, Hydrogen sulﬁde-based therapies: focus on H2S releasing
NSAIDs, Inﬂamm. Allergy Drug Targets 10 (2) (2011) 133–140.
[226] J.L. Wallace, Nitric oxide in the gastrointestinal tract: opportunities for drug
development, Br. J. Pharmacol. 176 (2) (2019) 147–154.
[227] S. Fiorucci, L. Santucci, E. Distrutti, NSAIDs, coxibs, CINOD and H2S-releasing
NSAIDs: what lies beyond the horizon, Dig Liver Dis 39 (12) (2007) 1043–1051.
[228] J.L. Wallace, D. Vaughan, M. Dicay, W.K. MacNaughton, G. de Nucci, Hydrogen
Sulﬁde-Releasing Therapeutics: Translation to the Clinic, Antioxid. Redox Signal.
28 (16) (2018) 1533–1540.
[229] J.L. Wallace, P. Nagy, T.D. Feener, T. Allain, T. Ditroi, D.J. Vaughan,
M.N. Muscara, G. de Nucci, A.G. Buret, A proof-of-concept, Phase 2 clinical trial of
the gastrointestinal safety of a hydrogen sulﬁde-releasing anti-inﬂammatory drug,
Br. J. Pharmacol. 177 (4) (2020) 769–777.
[230] Y. Zheng, X. Ji, K. Ji, B. Wang, Hydrogen sulﬁde prodrugs-a review, Acta Pharm
Sin B 5 (5) (2015) 367–377.
[231] L.L. Pan, M. Qin, X.H. Liu, Y.Z. Zhu, The Role of Hydrogen Sulﬁde on
Cardiovascular Homeostasis: An Overview with Update on Immunomodulation,
Front. Pharmacol. 8 (2017) 686.
[232] I. Lobb, E. Sonke, G. Aboalsamh, A. Sener, Hydrogen sulphide and the kidney:
important roles in renal physiology and pathogenesis and treatment of kidney
injury and disease, Nitric Oxide 46 (2015) 55–65.
[233] A. Davis, J. Robson, The dangers of NSAIDs: look both ways, Br. J. Gen. Pract. 66
(645) (2016) 172–173.
S. Bindu, et al.
Biochemical Pharmacology 180 (2020) 114147
21