

----- Page 1 (native) -----
the bmj | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
1
open access
1Centre for Primary Care and 
Public Health, Queen Mary 
University of London, London, 
UK
2School of Health and Related 
Research, University of 
Sheffield, Sheffield, UK
3Centre of Academic Primary 
Care, University of Aberdeen, 
Aberdeen, Scotland, UK
4Nuffield Department of 
Orthopaedics, Rheumatology 
and Musculoskeletal Sciences, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
5Clinical Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, Ontario, 
Canada
6Department of Mathematics 
and Statistics, Lancaster 
University, Lancaster, UK
Correspondence to: S M 
Eldridge s.eldridge@qmul.ac.uk
Additional material is published 
online only. To view please visit 
the journal online.
Cite this as: BMJ 2016;355:i5239
­http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.
i5239
Accepted: 18 September 2016
CONSORT 2010 statement: extension to randomised pilot and 
feasibility trials
Sandra M Eldridge,1 Claire L Chan,1 Michael J Campbell,2 Christine M Bond,3 Sally Hopewell,4 
Lehana Thabane,5 Gillian A Lancaster6 on behalf of the PAFS consensus group
The Consolidated Standards of 
Reporting Trials (CONSORT) statement 
is a guideline designed to improve the 
transparency and quality of the 
reporting of randomised controlled 
trials (RCTs). In this article we present 
an extension to that statement for 
randomised pilot and feasibility trials 
conducted in advance of a future 
definitive RCT. The checklist applies to 
any randomised study in which a future 
definitive RCT, or part of it, is conducted 
on a smaller scale, regardless of its 
design (eg, cluster, factorial, crossover) 
or the terms used by authors to 
describe the study (eg, pilot, feasibility, 
trial, study). The extension does not 
directly apply to internal pilot studies 
built into the design of a main trial, 
non-randomised pilot and feasibility 
studies, or phase II studies, but these 
studies all have some similarities to 
randomised pilot and feasibility studies 
and so many of the principles might 
also apply.
The development of the extension was 
motivated by the growing number of 
studies described as feasibility or pilot 
studies and by research that has 
identified weaknesses in their reporting 
and conduct. We followed 
recommended good practice to 
develop the extension, including 
carrying out a Delphi survey, holding a 
consensus meeting and research team 
meetings, and piloting the checklist.
The aims and objectives of pilot and 
feasibility randomised studies differ 
from those of other randomised trials. 
Consequently, although much of the 
information to be reported in these 
trials is similar to those in randomised 
controlled trials (RCTs) assessing 
effectiveness and efficacy, there are 
some key differences in the type of 
information and in the appropriate 
interpretation of standard CONSORT 
reporting items. We have retained 
some of the original CONSORT 
statement items, but most have been 
adapted, some removed, and new 
items added. The new items cover how 
participants were identified and 
consent obtained; if applicable, the 
prespecified criteria used to judge 
whether or how to proceed with a 
future definitive RCT; if relevant, other 
important unintended consequences; 
implications for progression from pilot 
to future definitive RCT, including any 
proposed amendments; and ethical 
approval or approval by a research 
review committee confirmed with a 
reference number.
This article includes the 26 item 
checklist, a separate checklist for the 
abstract, a template for a CONSORT 
flowchart for these studies, and an 
explanation of the changes made and 
supporting examples. We believe that 
routine use of this proposed extension 
to the CONSORT statement will result in 
improvements in the reporting of pilot 
trials.
Editor’s note: In order to encourage its 
wide dissemination this article is freely 
accessible on the BMJ and Pilot and 
Feasibility Studies journal websites.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 2 (native) -----
doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239 | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | the bmj
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
2
The Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CON-
SORT) statement (www.consort-statement.org) is a 
guideline designed to improve the transparency and 
quality of the reporting of randomised trials. It was first 
published in 1996, revised in 2001, last updated in 
2010,1 2 and published simultaneously in 10 leading 
medical journals, including the Lancet, JAMA, BMJ, 
Annals of Internal Medicine, and PLoS Medicine. The 
CONSORT statement comprises a checklist of the mini-
mum essential items that should be included in reports 
of randomised trials and a diagram documenting the 
flow of participants through the trial.
The development of CONSORT guidelines has 
received considerable international recognition. The 
CONSORT statement has been cited more than 8000 
times and has received support from the World Associ-
ation of Medical Editors, Council of Science Editors, 
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors, 
and more than 600 journals worldwide. Several studies 
have examined the impact of the statement on the 
reporting quality of published randomised trials and 
found that adoption of the statement leads to an 
increase in reporting quality.3
In addition to the CONSORT statement, extensions to 
the CONSORT checklist for reporting trials with non-in-
feriority, equivalence, and cluster or pragmatic designs 
have been published,4–6  as have extension checklists 
for reporting harms,7  different types of interventions 
(non-drug treatments8  and herbal interventions9 ), and 
patient reported outcomes.10 The main CONSORT state-
ment and all of the current extensions focus on trials for 
which the research question centres on the effective-
ness or efficacy of an intervention. However, some ran-
domised trials, that we refer to as pilot and feasibility 
trials, do not have effectiveness or efficacy as their pri-
mary focus. Rather, they are designed to support the 
development of a future definitive RCT. By “definitive” 
in this context we mean an appropriately powered 
study focusing on effectiveness or efficacy. The need for 
high standards in conduct and reporting applies just as 
much to pilot and feasibility trials as it does to definitive 
trials.
Scope of this paper
In this article we present an extension to the CONSORT 
statement for randomised pilot and feasibility trials con-
ducted in advance of a future definitive RCT. In keeping 
with the broad scope of CONSORT, the future definitive 
RCT might evaluate either the efficacy or the effective-
ness of an intervention. The primary aim of the ran-
domised pilot or feasibility trial, however, is to assess 
feasibility of conducting the future definitive RCT.
We make no distinction in this extension between 
pilot and feasibility randomised trials. Although in 
practice we recognise that different researchers might 
have preferences for different terms, the lack of distinc-
tion is based on a framework developed by the authors, 
which defines such studies.11 In that framework, a feasi-
bility study for a future definitive RCT asks whether the 
future trial can be done, should be done, and, if so, 
how. Pilot studies are a subset of feasibility studies. 
They ask the same questions about feasibility (whether 
the future trial can be done, should be done, and, if so, 
how) but have a particular design feature: in a pilot 
study (that might or might not be randomised) the 
future definitive RCT, or part of it, is conducted on a 
smaller scale.
For brevity, we use the term “pilot trial” to refer to any 
randomised study in which a future definitive RCT, or a 
part of it, is conducted on a smaller scale. However, 
these studies might legitimately be referred to using any 
of the following terms: pilot RCT, randomised pilot trial, 
pilot trial, pilot study, randomised pilot study, feasibil-
ity RCT, randomised feasibility trial, feasibility trial, 
feasibility study, or randomised feasibility study. In 
fact, we have set no restrictions on the terminology 
used to describe pilot trials; rather we have specified 
only that they are randomised, conducted in advance of 
a future definitive RCT, and primarily aim to assess fea-
sibility.
The development of this extension was motivated by 
the growing number of studies described as feasibility 
or pilot studies12  and by research that has identified 
weaknesses in the reporting and conduct of these stud-
ies.12–15 We expect that improved reporting quality will 
lead to more high quality examples of pilot trials, 
enabling yet further improvements in the conduct of 
pilot trials and making it possible for readers to use the 
results of reported pilot studies in preparing future tri-
als in similar settings and with similar participants. 
Because the purpose of a pilot trial (to assess feasibility) 
is different from that of the future definitive RCT (to 
assess effectiveness or efficacy), the focus of the report-
ing should be different, and that difference is reflected 
in the extension.
The extension does not apply to internal pilot studies 
that are built into the design of a main trial, or to 
non-randomised pilot and feasibility studies. However, 
much of what is presented here might apply to, or be 
adapted to apply to, these types of pilot or feasibility 
studies or similar types of trial, such as “proof of con-
cept” or phase II trials done in the development of 
drugs.16 17  Proof of concept or phase II trials are small 
RCTs the main objective of which are to inform the 
sponsor whether or not to continue the development of 
a drug with larger trials. Similar to pilot trials, the focus 
is on assessing the feasibility of further development 
rather than assessing effectiveness or efficacy. However, 
to do this these trials tend to focus on aspects such as 
safety and potential effectiveness or efficacy. They 
might use accepted methods devised for phase II trials18  
to assess the outcome to be used in a future phase III 
trial (which could be meta-analysed if required)19  or use 
surrogate outcomes—that is, intermediate measures, 
often biochemical, which have less direct impact on a 
patient than, for example, cure or death, but which 
should be associated with these “hard” outcomes. 
Safety, and potential effectiveness or efficacy, are usu-
ally less important in pilot trials, where the focus is on 
the development of interventions and their evaluation 
and where issues related to feasibility might be differ-
ent. Nevertheless, pilot trials do sometimes assess 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 3 (native) -----
the bmj | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
3
potential effectiveness using surrogate outcomes. For 
example, oxygenation of the blood as a surrogate mea-
sure for improved lung function and survival20  or the 
number of steps walked each day as a surrogate for clin-
ical measures of heart disease.21
Here we present an extension to the standard CON-
SORT guidelines for reporting RCTs. Many investigators, 
however, use qualitative research alongside other meth-
ods to assess feasibility. The amount of qualitative work 
conducted at the pilot and feasibility stage, its relation 
with any pilot trial, and the way investigators want to 
report this work, varies. Stand-alone qualitative studies 
that are reported separately from the pilot trial, such as 
Hoddinott et al and Schoultz et al,22 23  should follow 
appropriate reporting guidelines24–26 and should pro-
vide link references to other pilot work carried out in 
preparation for the same definitive trial. When qualita-
tive work is reported within the primary report of a pilot 
trial,27  it is not always possible to put sufficient detail 
into the methods section of the report to comply with 
reporting guidelines for qualitative studies. If this is the 
case, we recommend an online supplement or appen-
dix to report the methods in detail. O’Cathain et al, Hod-
dinott et al, and Schoultz et al have provided guidelines 
and examples for conducting qualitative feasibility 
studies alongside pilot trials.22 23 26 28 29
Adapting the CONSORT statement for pilot trials
The development of this CONSORT extension for pilot 
trials is described briefly here and in detail elsewhere.30  
Before developing the checklist for this extension, the 
research team agreed on the definitions of pilot and fea-
sibility studies. This was done by initially considering 
pilot and feasibility studies to be discrete types of study 
and therefore in need of separate checklists. However, 
preliminary work concluded that pilot and feasibility 
studies could not be defined in a mutually exclusive 
way, compatible with current understanding and the 
use of these terms among the research community. 
We  therefore adopted an overarching definition of 
­feasibility studies, with pilot studies being a subset, 
and developed a single checklist for such studies that 
use a randomised approach, referred to as pilot trials in 
this paper. The process of agreeing on the definitions of 
feasibility and pilot studies and the underpinning con-
ceptual framework are reported separately.11  That work 
was done in parallel with the development of the check-
list (table 1). We used the principles in box 1 to guide the 
work.
In stage 1, the research team met and worked 
through each of the existing CONSORT checklist items, 
agreeing whether each was relevant and should be 
retained, not relevant and should be excluded, or 
needed rewording in the context of either a feasibility 
study or pilot study. This resulted in two checklists. We 
then applied the revised checklists to a sample of 30 
articles identified from previous work13 15 and our own 
personal collections.
In stage 2, we used a modified Delphi survey to seek 
consensus on the appropriateness of each of the check-
list items. Participants (n=93) were asked to rate each 
item on a scale of 1 to 9 (1=not at all appropriate to 
9=completely appropriate). They were also given the 
opportunity to comment on each item, definitions of 
pilot and feasibility studies, and the perceived useful-
ness of the checklist.11
In stage 3, participants in the Delphi survey were 
asked to review responses for items that 70% or more of 
participants had rated as 8 or 9 in round 1 of the survey 
and to make additional comments on these items. They 
were asked to review the remaining items and classify 
each using one of four options: discard, keep, unsure, 
or no opinion. They were also asked to add any items 
they believed had been missed. In total 93/120 (77.5%) 
responses were received for round 1 and 79/93 (84.9%) 
for round 2.
In stage 4, the research team met face to face to 
review the feedback from the Delphi survey and to 
revise the checklist. In stage 5, the revised checklist was 
then further reviewed in detail during a two day expert 
Table 1 | Stages of adapting CONSORT statement for pilot trials
Stage
Activity
Participants
Venue (or virtual meeting)
Date
1
Drafting of definitions and 
preliminary adaptation of 
CONSORT checklist items
Research team
London
Dec 2012
2
1st round of modified 
Delphi process using 
online administration
Invited experts from research 
community (trialists, 
methodologists, statisticians, 
funders, and journal editors)
Email distribution
Jul-Aug 2013
3
2nd round of modified 
Delphi process
As for round 1
Email distribution
Sept-Oct 2013
4
Review of results from 
Delphi process and 
redrafting checklist
Research team
London
Feb 2014
5
Consensus meeting
Invited experts (trialists, 
methodologists, statisticians, 
funders, journal editors, and 
members of CONSORT executive)
Oxford
Oct 2014
6
Review of consensus 
meeting feedback and 
drafting final checklist
Research team
Email consultation with consensus 
participants; and meetings in London
Dec 2014-Dec 2015; 
and Jan, Jun, Dec 
2015
7
Further review and piloting
Research team
Email consultation with consensus 
participants; and piloting by independent 
researchers writing up pilot studies
Mar 2016; and 
Jan-Mar 2016
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 4 (native) -----
doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239 | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | the bmj
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
4
consensus meeting. In stage 6, some checklist items 
were reworded to ensure clarity of meaning and pur-
pose, and the research team met face to face a further 
three times to agree on the final wording of the check-
list, identify examples of good reporting, and develop 
the explanation and elaboration section of this paper. A 
full draft of the paper was then sent to members of the 
consensus meeting to ensure it fully reflected the dis-
cussion of the meeting.
Table 2 presents the final checklist, laid out in accor-
dance with other CONSORT extensions. Items in the 
standard checklist column should be adhered to unless 
the extension column indicates a change in the item. 
Box 1 lists the methodological considerations and prin-
ciples that guided the process.
Extension of CONSORT 2010 to pilot trials
Title and abstract
- Item 1a
- Standard CONSORT item: identification as a ran-
domised trial in the title
- Extension for pilot trials: identification as a pilot or 
feasibility randomised trial in the title
- Example 1 (using the words pilot, randomised, and 
trial)
- “Bespoke smoking cessation for people with severe 
mental ill health (SCIMITAR): a pilot randomised con-
trolled trial”31
- Example 2 (using the words feasibility, randomised, 
and trial)
- “A cluster randomised feasibility trial evaluating 
nutritional interventions in the treatment of malnutri-
tion in care home adult residents”32
- Explanation
The primary focus of these guidelines is randomised 
pilot and feasibility trials. To ensure that these types of 
studies can be easily identified from specific search cri-
teria, a title containing the descriptors “pilot” or “feasi-
bility” as well as “randomised” provides a necessary, 
recognised terminology for selecting randomised pilot 
and feasibility trials.13  This would also enable these 
studies to be easily indexed in electronic databases, 
such as PubMed.33  Although the descriptors might 
appear in the title for many studies, they might not nec-
essarily occur together, as in: “Feasibility of a ran-
domised trial of a continuing medical education 
program in shared decision-making on the use of anti-
biotics for acute respiratory infections in primary care: 
the DECISION+ pilot trial.”34  Furthermore, in some 
cases authors might use the phrase “randomised pilot 
study” or “randomised feasibility study,” as in “‘Not 
just another walking program’: Everyday Activity Sup-
ports You (EASY) model—a randomized pilot study for a 
parallel randomized controlled trial.”21 Such papers 
could be identified in appropriate searches. However, in 
general we recommend the descriptors are given 
together in one phrase, and the word “trial” rather than 
“study” is used, as in “randomised pilot trial” or “ran-
domised feasibility trial.”
- Item 1b
- Standard CONSORT item: structured summary of 
trial design, methods, results, and conclusions (for spe-
cific guidance see CONSORT for abstracts)35 36
- Extension for pilot trials: structured summary of 
pilot trial design, methods, results, and conclusions 
(for specific guidance see CONSORT abstract extension 
for pilot trials) (table 3)
- Example
See figures 1 to 3 .21
- Explanation
Abstracts can follow different structures dependent 
on a journal’s style. They are typically around 300 
words. We outline what information should be reported 
in the abstract irrespective of style. This information 
may also be used for writing conference abstracts. The 
structure of the abstract does not differ in format from 
item 1b of the standard CONSORT 2010 guidelines. 
However, its content focuses on the aims and objectives 
of the pilot trial and not on the future definitive RCT.
It is important that the abstract contains pertinent 
information on the background, methods, results, and 
conclusions in relation to the feasibility objectives and 
outcomes, and that it states the study is a “randomised” 
pilot trial. This will aid researchers in understanding 
the nature of the paper and facilitates electronic search-
ing through the inclusion of specific key words. A state-
ment in the abstract that this study is in preparation for 
a future definitive RCT is recommended to place it in 
context. A description of the areas of uncertainty to be 
addressed and a statement of the feasibility aims and 
objectives should be included in the background, how 
these objectives have been addressed in the methods, 
and results for each objective in the results. If there are 
a limited number of pilot trial objectives then all should 
be listed and results for each reported. If there are many 
pilot trial objectives, then agreement should be reached 
a priori about which are the most important, to decide 
whether to proceed to a future definitive RCT, and only 
these objectives should be reported. An explicit state-
Box 1: Methodological considerations and principles that guided the development 
of the CONSORT extension to pilot trials
• The rationale of a pilot trial is to investigate areas of uncertainty about the future 
definitive RCT
• The primary aims and objectives of a pilot trial are therefore about feasibility, and 
this should guide the methodology used in the pilot trial
• Assessments or measurements to address each pilot trial objective should be the 
focus of data collection and analysis. This might include outcome measures likely 
to be used in the definitive trial but, equally, it might not
• Since the aim of a pilot trial is to assess the feasibility of proceeding to the future 
definitive RCT, a decision process about how to proceed needs to be built into the 
design of the pilot trial. This might involve formal progression criteria to decide 
whether to proceed, to proceed with amendments, or not to proceed
• Methods used to address each pilot trial objective can be qualitative or 
quantitative. A mixed methods approach could result in both types of data being 
reported within the same paper. Equally, a process evaluation or other qualitative 
study can be done alongside a pilot trial and reported separately in more detail
• The number of participants in a pilot study should be based on the feasibility 
objectives and some rationale should be given
• Formal hypothesis testing for effectiveness (or efficacy) is not recommended. The 
aim of a pilot trial is not to assess effectiveness (or efficacy) and it will usually be 
underpowered to do this
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 5 (native) -----
the bmj | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
5
Table 2 | CONSORT checklist of information to include when reporting a pilot trial
Section/topic and item No
Standard checklist item
Extension for pilot trials
Page No where item is reported
Title and abstract
  1a
Identification as a randomised trial in the title
Identification as a pilot or feasibility randomised trial in the 
title
  1b
Structured summary of trial design, methods, 
results, and conclusions (for specific guidance 
see CONSORT for abstracts)
Structured summary of pilot trial design, methods, results, 
and conclusions (for specific guidance see CONSORT 
abstract extension for pilot trials)
Introduction
Background and objectives:
  2a
Scientific background and explanation of 
rationale
Scientific background and explanation of rationale for 
future definitive trial, and reasons for randomised pilot trial
  2b
Specific objectives or hypotheses
Specific objectives or research questions for pilot trial
Methods
Trial design:
  3a
Description of trial design (such as parallel, 
factorial) including allocation ratio
Description of pilot trial design (such as parallel, factorial) 
including allocation ratio
  3b
Important changes to methods after trial 
commencement (such as eligibility criteria), 
with reasons
Important changes to methods after pilot trial 
commencement (such as eligibility criteria), with reasons
Participants:
  4a
Eligibility criteria for participants
  4b
Settings and locations where the data were 
collected
  4c
How participants were identified and consented
Interventions:
  5
The interventions for each group with sufficient 
details to allow replication, including how and 
when they were actually administered
Outcomes:
  6a
Completely defined prespecified primary and 
secondary outcome measures, including how 
and when they were assessed
Completely defined prespecified assessments or 
measurements to address each pilot trial objective 
specified in 2b, including how and when they were 
assessed
  6b
Any changes to trial outcomes after the trial 
commenced, with reasons
Any changes to pilot trial assessments or measurements 
after the pilot trial commenced, with reasons
  6c
If applicable, prespecified criteria used to judge whether, or 
how, to proceed with future definitive trial
Sample size:
  7a
How sample size was determined
Rationale for numbers in the pilot trial
  7b
When applicable, explanation of any interim 
analyses and stopping guidelines
Randomisation:
Sequence generation:
  8a
Method used to generate the random 
allocation sequence
  8b
Type of randomisation; details of any 
restriction (such as blocking and block size)
Type of randomisation(s); details of any restriction (such as 
blocking and block size)
Allocation concealment 
mechanism:
  9
Mechanism used to implement the random 
allocation sequence (such as sequentially 
numbered containers), describing any steps 
taken to conceal the sequence until 
interventions were assigned
 Implementation:
  10
Who generated the random allocation 
sequence, enrolled participants, and assigned 
participants to interventions
Blinding:
  11a
If done, who was blinded after assignment to 
interventions (eg, participants, care providers, 
those assessing outcomes) and how
  11b
If relevant, description of the similarity of 
interventions
Analytical methods:
  12a
Statistical methods used to compare groups 
for primary and secondary outcomes
Methods used to address each pilot trial objective whether 
qualitative or quantitative
  12b
Methods for additional analyses, such as 
subgroup analyses and adjusted analyses
Not applicable
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 6 (native) -----
doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239 | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | the bmj
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
6
Table 2 | CONSORT checklist of information to include when reporting a pilot trial
Section/topic and item No
Standard checklist item
Extension for pilot trials
Page No where item is reported
Results
Participant flow (a diagram 
is strongly recommended):
  13a
For each group, the numbers of participants 
who were randomly assigned, received 
intended treatment, and were analysed for the 
primary outcome
For each group, the numbers of participants who were 
approached and/or assessed for eligibility, randomly 
assigned, received intended treatment, and were assessed 
for each objective
  13b
For each group, losses and exclusions after 
randomisation, together with reasons
 
Recruitment:
  14a
Dates defining the periods of recruitment and 
follow-up
  14b
Why the trial ended or was stopped
Why the pilot trial ended or was stopped
Baseline data:
  15
A table showing baseline demographic and 
clinical characteristics for each group
Numbers analysed:
  16
For each group, number of participants 
(denominator) included in each analysis and 
whether the analysis was by original assigned 
groups
For each objective, number of participants (denominator) 
included in each analysis. If relevant, these numbers 
should be by randomised group
Outcomes and estimation:
  17a
For each primary and secondary outcome, 
results for each group, and the estimated 
effect size and its precision (such as 95% 
confidence interval)
For each objective, results including expressions of 
uncertainty (such as 95% confidence interval) for any 
estimates. If relevant, these results should be by 
randomised group
  17b
For binary outcomes, presentation of both 
absolute and relative effect sizes is 
recommended
Not applicable
Ancillary analyses:
  18
Results of any other analyses performed, 
including subgroup analyses and adjusted 
analyses, distinguishing prespecified from 
exploratory
Results of any other analyses performed that could be 
used to inform the future definitive trial
Harms:
  19
All important harms or unintended effects in 
each group (for specific guidance see 
CONSORT for harms)
  19a
If relevant, other important unintended consequences
Discussion
Limitations:
  20
Trial limitations, addressing sources of 
potential bias, imprecision, and, if relevant, 
multiplicity of analyses
Pilot trial limitations, addressing sources of potential bias 
and remaining uncertainty about feasibility
Generalisability:
  21
Generalisability (external validity, 
applicability) of the trial findings
Generalisability (applicability) of pilot trial methods and 
findings to future definitive trial and other studies
Interpretation:
  22
Interpretation consistent with results, 
balancing benefits and harms, and considering 
other relevant evidence
Interpretation consistent with pilot trial objectives and 
findings, balancing potential benefits and harms, and 
considering other relevant evidence
  22a
Implications for progression from pilot to future definitive 
trial, including any proposed amendments
Other information
Registration:
  23
Registration number and name of trial registry
Registration number for pilot trial and name of trial registry
Protocol:
  24
Where the full trial protocol can be accessed, if 
available
Where the pilot trial protocol can be accessed, if available
Funding:
  25
Sources of funding and other support (such as 
supply of drugs), role of funders
  26
Ethical approval or approval by research review committee, 
confirmed with reference number
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 7 (native) -----
the bmj | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
7
ment relating to whether the future definitive RCT is 
likely to go ahead on the basis of the results of the pilot 
trial should also form part of the discussion and conclu-
sions.
Introduction
- Item 2a
- Standard CONSORT item: scientific background and 
explanation of rationale
- Extension for pilot trials: scientific background and 
explanation of rationale for future definitive trial, and 
reasons for randomised pilot trial
- Example
“Reduced fetal movements (RFM) is a frequently seen 
problem in maternity care with 6-15% of women report-
ing attending at least one occasion of RFM to health 
professionals in the third trimester of pregnancy. RFM, 
defined by maternal perception of significantly reduced 
or absent fetal activity, is associated with increased risk 
of stillbirth and fetal growth restriction (FGR) due to 
placental dysfunction. Despite this association there is 
a paucity of evidence to direct clinical management of 
women presenting with RFM. This has been recently 
highlighted by guidelines from the Royal College of 
Obstetrics and Gynaecology (RCOG) and a meta-analy-
sis . . . The absence of high-quality evidence has led to 
wide variation in management strategies for RFM in 
high-income settings . . . Although there are randomised 
controlled trials (RCT) of counting fetal movements by 
a formal structure (e.g. count to ten) there have been no 
published RCTs of patient management following pre-
sentation with RFM. To undertake an RCT of patient 
management raises important practical concerns 
including: maternal anxiety for fetal wellbeing, the 
need to make a decision regarding participation in a 
short period of time due to the acute nature of RFM and 
adherence to protocol. Thus, studies have adopted an 
approach of changing practice at the unit level in qual-
ity-improvement projects or stepwise cluster RCT 
(AFFIRM, NCT01777022). We performed this study to 
address whether an RCT of the management of RFM in 
individual patients was an appropriate trial design, and 
was feasible with regard to i) maternal recruitment and 
retention ii) patient acceptability, iii) adherence to pro-
tocol. In addition, we wished to confirm the prevalence 
of poor perinatal outcomes in the study population.”37
- Explanation
It is important that the scientific background sets the 
scene and gives the rationale and justification for the 
future definitive RCT and why the pilot trial is needed, 
because under the principles of the Helsinki declara-
tion it is unethical to expose people unnecessarily to 
the risks of research.38 The background and rationale 
are nicely illustrated in the example. Other related pub-
lications, or preliminary work such as systematic 
reviews, qualitative studies, or additional feasibility 
work, or absence of such work because no one has 
looked at this topic before, should also be mentioned. 
The rationale for the randomised pilot trial should be 
clearly outlined, including the areas of uncertainty that 
need to be addressed before the future definitive RCT 
can take place and why such a trial is needed before 
proceeding to the future definitive RCT. This rationale is 
usually reported in the final paragraph of the introduc-
tion or background section to provide a justification for 
the pilot trial.
Table 3 | Extension of CONSORT for abstracts for reporting pilot trials
Item
Standard checklist item
Extension for pilot trials
Title
Identification of study as randomised
Identification of study as randomised pilot or feasibility trial
Trial design
Description of the trial design (eg, parallel, cluster, 
non-inferiority)
Description of pilot trial design (eg, parallel, cluster)
Methods:
  Participants
Eligibility criteria for participants and the settings where the data 
were collected
Eligibility criteria for participants and the settings where the pilot trial 
was conducted
  Interventions
Interventions intended for each group
  Objective
Specific objective or hypothesis
Specific objectives of the pilot trial
  Outcome
Clearly defined primary outcome for this report
Prespecified assessment or measurement to address the pilot trial 
objectives*
  Randomisation
How participants were allocated to interventions
  Blinding (masking)
Whether or not participants, caregivers, and those assessing the 
outcomes were blinded to group assignment
Results:
  Numbers randomised
Number of participants randomised to each group
Number of participants screened and randomised to each group for the 
pilot trial objectives*
  Recruitment
Trial status†
  Numbers analysed
Number of participants analysed in each group
Number of participants analysed in each group for the pilot objectives*
  Outcome
For the primary outcome, a result for each group and the 
estimated effect size and its precision
Results for the pilot objectives, including any expressions of 
uncertainty*
  Harms
Important adverse events or side effects
  Conclusions
General interpretation of the results
General interpretation of the results of pilot trial and their implications 
for the future definitive trial
  Trial registration
Registration number and name of trial register
Registration number for pilot trial and name of trial register
  Funding
Source of funding
Source of funding for pilot trial
*Space permitting, list all pilot trial objectives and give the results for each. Otherwise, report those that are a priori agreed as the most important to the decision to proceed with the future 
definitive RCT.
†For conference abstracts.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 8 (native) -----
doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239 | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | the bmj
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
8
Fig 1 | Example of abstract for report of pilot trial,21 shown alongside CONSORT for abstracts extension for pilot randomised trials
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 9 (native) -----
the bmj | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
9
Fig 2 | Revised version of example abstract for report of pilot trial,21 shown alongside CONSORT for abstracts extension for pilot randomised trials
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 10 (native) -----
doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239 | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | the bmj
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
10
- Item 2b
- Standard CONSORT item: specific objectives or 
hypotheses
- Extension for pilot trials: specific objectives or 
research questions for pilot trial
- Example 1 (listing objectives as primary and second-
ary)
“In this feasibility trial, the research aim was to 
explore trial design, staff and resident acceptability of 
the interventions and outcome measures and to provide 
data to estimate the parameters required to design a 
definitive RCT . . . The primary objectives of the trial 
were as follows:
1. To assess how many care homes accepted the invi-
tation to participate in research.
2. To determine whether the eligibility criteria for 
care home residents were too open or too restrictive by 
estimating feasible eligibility and recruitment rate.
3. To assess retention of care homes and residents by 
estimating 3 and 6-month follow-up rates.
4. To investigate the acceptability of nutritional sup-
port interventions to malnourished care home residents 
in terms of compliance and to care home staff in terms 
of adherence to the intervention schedule.
5. To assess the acceptability and feasibility (and fac-
tors influencing this) of the outcome measures as meth-
ods to measure efficacy of the interventions within a 
definitive trial.
The secondary objectives of the trial were as follows:
1. To investigate the completion of screening tools 
and questionnaires by care home staff.
2. To determine how many malnourished residents 
were able to participate in PROMs and to complete the 
questionnaires.
3. To pilot a Healthcare resource usage (HCRU) ques-
tionnaire.
4. To measure key outcome domains (for completion 
rates, missing data, estimates, variances and 95% con-
fidence intervals for the difference between the inter-
vention arms) for malnourished care home residents, 
including physical outcome measures and PROMs.
5. To collect and synthesise data, from which the 
Intracluster Correlation Coefficient (ICC) and sample 
size of a definitive cluster RCT (CRCT) could be esti-
mated.”32
- Example 2 (objectives leading to a mixed methods 
study)
“The main aim of the study is to assess the feasibility 
of conducting a definitive trial in terms of recruitment, 
use and acceptability of the intervention, follow-up at 3 
and 6 months, and data collection methods. In addi-
tion, the study aims to establish suitable procedures for 
delivering the intervention and conducting assess-
ments and procedures for ensuring recruitment and 
retention in the study. Finally, the study aims to dis-
cover whether using a structured, individualized 
approach to lifestyle assessment and referral will 
improve uptake and participation in lifestyle- and 
behaviour-change interventions.
The study will also examine, qualitatively, the accept-
ability of the assessment tool to patients in an acute 
Fig 3 | Track changes version of example abstract for report of pilot trial,21  showing changes between figures 1 and 2
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 11 (native) -----
the bmj | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
11
cardiology setting as well as patients’ experiences of 
making lifestyle changes in order to develop effective 
recruitment and retention strategies.
The study will have a number of quantitative objec-
tives:
1. To determine how many patients accept referral to 
a formal lifestyle programme;
2. To determine how many patients participate in a 
lifestyle-change intervention or initiate self-managed 
change;
3. To investigate the uptake of lifestyle intervention in 
relation to subsequent behaviour change and impact on 
health-related quality of life, mood and social satisfac-
tion;
4. To estimate feasible eligibility, recruitment and 
refusal rates, and 3- and 6-months follow-up rates;
5. To measure key outcome domains (that is, for com-
pletion rates, missing data, estimates, variances and 
95% confidence intervals for the difference between the 
control and intervention groups) for patients including 
clinical indicators and patient-reported measures of 
social satisfaction; health-related quality of life; and 
mood;
6. To synthesize data to inform the sample size of a 
definitive trial;
7. To determine the acceptability (and factors influ-
encing this) of financial incentives as a method to 
encourage behaviour change, their pricing and factors 
influencing this.”39
- Explanation
Although many aspects of feasibility may be related to 
each other, an articulation of specific objectives enables 
readers to understand the main areas of uncertainty to 
be addressed in the pilot trial and provides a working 
structure for presenting the methods and results in rela-
tion to these objectives. In addition, a comprehensive 
list of objectives enables other researchers to learn from 
and adopt similar approaches in their own studies.
It might be beneficial to separate the objectives into 
primary objectives (often those on which decisions 
about progressing to a future definitive RCT may be 
made) and secondary objectives, as in example 1, where 
feasibility objectives are primary and questions related 
to patient centred outcomes are treated as secondary. 
Because it is not always necessary to collect data on 
patient centred outcomes, it is important to give the 
rationale for collecting such data. For example, the pur-
pose may be to ensure that certain data can be col-
lected, including from specific patient groups (eg, 
elderly people, as in example 1), or to ensure that diffi-
cult-to-measure concepts such as lifestyle behaviour 
change can be assessed appropriately in the future 
definitive RCT (example 2). It might also be informative 
to state explicitly which objectives will be answered 
using quantitative methods and which using qualitative 
methods, as in example 2.
In example 2 the list of quantitative objectives are 
quite informative, but they are taken from the pub-
lished study protocol. In the published pilot trial the 
objectives contained far less detail: “The Healthy 
­Hospital Trial is a single-center, randomized con-
trolled, 2-arm, parallel-group, unblinded feasibility 
trial that was conducted on 2 cardiology wards at the 
Leeds Teaching Hospitals Trust. Its primary aim was to 
explore the feasibility of individualized lifestyle refer-
ral assessment, estimate the rate of recruitment, and 
explore the feasibility of collecting the data and fol-
low-up of participants to inform the sample size of a 
definitive trial. A secondary aim was to test the concept 
that an individually tailored assessment improves 
uptake of lifestyle change compared with usual assess-
ment. The trial protocol has been published else-
where.”40 We recommend putting detailed individual 
objectives into the pilot trial report itself so that readers 
can more easily judge the extent to which these have 
been fulfilled by the study.
Inclusion of an objective to test a hypothesis of effec-
tiveness (or efficacy) is not recommended (see box 1). 
However, other kinds of hypotheses may be tested, such 
as when using an interim or surrogate outcome to 
address potential effectiveness.41  (See also the section 
entitled Scope of this paper). However, a trial should 
always be adequately powered for any hypothesis test, 
and in a pilot trial it should be clearly stated that the 
objective is to assess potential effectiveness. If tests are 
carried out without adequate power (as they sometimes 
are in reality), they should certainly be viewed as sec-
ondary and a caveat included in the discussion.21
Methods
- Item 3a
- Standard CONSORT item: description of trial design 
(such as parallel, factorial) including allocation ratio
- Extension for pilot trials: description of pilot trial 
design (such as parallel, factorial) including allocation 
ratio
- Example
“We conducted a parallel-group randomised con-
trolled pilot trial… An unequal randomisation of 2:1 vs 
1:1 was chosen to provide experience delivering the 
hydration intervention to more patients.”42
- Explanation
The design of any study should be described, be it a 
definitive trial or a pilot trial. It is not uncommon for 
pilot trials to adopt ratios other than the usual 1:1 for 
randomisation. 1:1 randomisation provides the greatest 
power for testing effectiveness in, for example, a future 
definitive RCT. However, a pilot trial commonly involves 
new, not established, interventions and one of the aims 
might then be to gain experience in delivering the inter-
vention, in which case it is often better to have as many 
participants receiving the intervention as is feasible.
- Item 3b
- Standard CONSORT item: important changes to 
methods after trial commencement (such as eligibility 
criteria), with reasons
- Extension for pilot trials: important changes to meth-
ods after pilot trial commencement (such as eligibility 
criteria), with reasons
- Example
“After randomly assigning 11 patients (5 to standard 
care), we recognized that patients assigned to standard 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 12 (native) -----
doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239 | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | the bmj
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
12
care were receiving early surgery because, having 
achieved accelerated medical clearance, they were put 
on the operating room list. We therefore amended the 
protocol to randomly assign patients immediately on 
diagnosis; only those assigned to early surgery received 
an expedited medical assessment.”43
- Explanation
Pilot trials are exploratory and so those conducting 
them should be able to modify the methods if a potential 
problem becomes apparent. In the case of Buse et al,43 
the original protocol specified that patients had to have 
medical clearance for rapid surgery before randomisa-
tion, but this led to contamination of the control group 
as some patients in this group were put on the surgical 
list for rapid surgery (accelerated surgery was the inter-
vention) because it had been ascertained that they were 
suitable candidates. In the revised protocol participants 
were randomised first and then assessed for suitability 
to accelerated access. Thus the pilot potentially 
improved the design of the trial that was to follow. It is 
important to document all changes and give reasons for 
the changes. The example describes changes to the tim-
ing of randomisation, but there might also be changes to 
other aspects of the trial, such as the treatment regimen, 
eligibility criteria, or outcome variables.
- Item 4a
- Standard CONSORT item: eligibility criteria for par-
ticipants
- Example
“Thirty-one sequential eligible people with HD [Hun-
tington’s disease] were recruited from the specialist HD 
clinics in Cardiff, the United Kingdom, and Oxford, the 
United Kingdom, between March 2011 and November 
2011. Inclusion criteria were (1) diagnosis of HD, con-
firmed by genetic testing and neurological examina-
tion, (2) ability to walk independently as primary means 
of mobility, (3) willing to travel to the exercise center for 
the intervention, (4) capacity to give informed consent, 
(5) Unified Huntington’s Disease Rating Scale Total 
Motor Score (UHDRS-TMS) and Total Functional Capac-
ity (TFC) of at least 5/124 and 5/13, respectively, from last 
clinic visit, and (6) maintenance of a stable medical reg-
imen for 4 weeks prior to initiation of study and consid-
ered by the recruiting clinician as able to maintain a 
stable regimen for the course of the study. Participants 
were not eligible if they (1) had a history of additional 
prior major neurological condition such as stroke, 
(2) had an orthopedic condition that limited mobility, 
(3) demonstrated uncontrolled psychiatric symptoms, 
(4) were pregnant, (5) demonstrated any contraindica-
tion to exercise, or (6) were involved in any interven-
tional trial or within 3months of completing an 
interventional trial.”44
- Explanation
Readers might want to know how the results of the 
trial are likely to apply to the future definitive RCT and 
other future trials with similar participants in similar 
settings. A variety of participants (eg, patients, doctors, 
assessors, caregivers, managers) might provide data to 
address objectives. For example, in a study in nursing 
homes, residents were interviewed to seek views on 
acceptability of the intervention, whereas nurses par-
ticipated in focus groups to elicit views on randomisa-
tion or adherence to treatment protocol.32 Eligibility 
criteria should be specified for each set of participants 
included in a pilot trial. The details provided must be 
specific enough to identify the clinical population and 
any other populations and the setting from which they 
were recruited and to confirm that legal issues were 
complied with, such as having capacity to give informed 
consent. Details should be sufficient to allow other 
researchers to interpret, learn from, and use the infor-
mation provided.
- Item 4b
- Standard CONSORT item: settings and locations 
where the data were collected
- Example
“High-risk adolescents were recruited from three 
sources: (1) a sample of 205 offspring of BP parents 
between 12 and 18 years of age enrolled in the NIMH-
funded Bipolar Offspring Study at the University of 
Pittsburgh (BIOS, PI: Birmaher); (2) offspring of adults 
receiving treatment for BP at Western Psychiatric Insti-
tute and Clinic (WPIC); and (3) siblings of youth receiv-
ing treatment for BP at the Child and Adolescent Bipolar 
Services clinic (CABS) at WPIC.”45
- Explanation
The settings for recruiting patients and collecting data 
must be specified so that readers can judge the applica-
bility (generalisability) of the findings to other trials as 
well as to the future definitive RCT. Authors should also 
make clear whether any pilot sites have particular fea-
tures—for example, organisational features, characteris-
tics that predispose the site to early adoption of new 
schemes, or specific relationships with the authors that 
could affect recruitment, consent, and follow-up. This is 
because these features may not be replicable in other 
sites and hence in future trials. As with item 4a, details 
must be sufficient to allow other researchers to interpret, 
learn from, and use the information.
- Item 4c
- Extension for pilot trials: how participants were 
identified and consented
- Example
“Between May and October 2013, clinical staff at par-
ticipating gastroenterology outpatient clinics scanned 
and identified potential participants that met the study 
inclusion criteria. Then, either study invitation packs 
were sent to patients with researchers’ contact details or 
patients seen consecutively in clinics were approached 
with the study information. All study information was 
co-designed with patients from the patient-involvement 
group. Interested participants then registered their inter-
est with the researcher by telephone or email. This was 
followed up with a screening visit with the researcher 
and then informed written consent was obtained.”46
- Explanation
This is a new item. It is especially important to report 
details of identification and consent in a pilot trial to 
allow the feasibility of the recruitment methods to be 
assessed. The way participants are identified and 
approached should be described in detail (eg, by adver-
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 13 (native) -----
the bmj | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
13
tisement, or selection from medical records or another 
dataset) to enable readers to understand the generalis-
ability (applicability) of the results. This might be of 
particular importance for scaling-up for the future 
definitive RCT, as well as being informative for other 
future trials. In addition, it is important to know of any 
specific aspects that might not be easy to implement in 
the future definitive RCT. Furthermore, a view is some-
times held that pilot trials do not need to be as rigorous 
in their processes as other trials, so it might be particu-
larly important in these trials to show rigorous and eth-
ical identification and recruitment processes. If details 
of the way participants were identified and consent 
obtained are already published in a protocol, then this 
should be clearly referenced.
- Item 5
- Standard CONSORT item: the interventions for each 
group with sufficient details to allow replication, 
including how and when they were actually adminis-
tered
- Example
“Intervention (EXERcise or STRETCHing)
The amount of time required for participating in the 
exercise activities was the same for the EXER group and 
the STRETCH group. The only difference was the 
amount of energy expended during the activity. At the 
first session, the exercise trainer explained the proce-
dures for the respective intervention (EXER or 
STRETCH), showed them the equipment available for 
the exercise or stretch sessions, and the coordinator 
familiarized the participant with the Actical device. The 
first two weeks required a minimum of 3 sessions at CI 
[Cooper Institute] for the trainer to teach them how to 
use the equipment and complete the exercise or stretch 
routines. Following the first 2 weeks, participants began 
doing their exercise program at home or other location 
(gym, park, etc.), and only had to come to CI once a 
week for an exercise session. Each EXER/STRETCH ses-
sion averaged about 30-40 min.
EXERcise Intervention
Supervised exercise sessions at the Cooper Institute 
(CI) for the participants began by using the treadmills or 
stationary cycles. The CI trainers also taught patients 
how to complete home-based exercise sessions (e.g., 
choice of Wii Sports and Fit, jazzercise, jogging, weight 
training based on their preferred exercise) that were 
unsupervised workouts at the patient's home or in the 
community. The duration of each session generally was 
the time required to reach 1/3 or 1/4 of the total weekly 
caloric expenditure. There was a progression to the 
assigned exercise dose in the first few weeks that got 
them up to their minimum of 12 kilocalories/kilogram/
week (KKW) energy expenditure (e.g., 8 KKW first week, 
10 KKW second and 12 KKW by the third week). Partici-
pants exercised three times per week.
STRETCH Intervention
The stretch group spent approximately the same 
amount of time, but at energy expenditures of less than 
4 KKW per session. After two weeks of three sessions at 
CI they moved to once a week at CI and two home-based 
sessions. A 5-10 minute stretching warm-up period 
included stretches that exercise the major muscle 
groups of the body. The series included such traditional 
“warm-up” stretches as: stretches of the gluts, inner 
thigh, calves and ankles, Achilles tendon, hamstring 
stretches, shoulder rolls forward and back, shoulder 
shrugs, isometrics for the neck hugging knees into the 
chest, moving forehead to right knee, then to left, then 
to both, and use of the pelvic tilt. An additional 10-15 
minutes consisted of moving on to right and left calf 
stretches, quad stretches, and then to a series for the 
arms, hands, fingers, wrist, biceps/triceps, shoulders 
and back. All of the exercises were designed to be done 
slowly, emphasizing proper alignment, and rest periods 
to minimize overall physical exertion while obtaining 
general flexibility, and most importantly controlling for 
contact time with trainers and any social facilitation 
from participating in such activities. We had a different 
set of low level/low intensity routines for each of the 12 
weeks to minimize boredom with the routines.”47
- Explanation
If the pilot trial is to inform future research, the 
authors should report exact details of the treatment 
given to all study groups, and if one group receives 
treatment as usual this should also be described thor-
oughly. Details should include who administered the 
treatment, as well as what it comprised and how often 
and where it was delivered. The template for interven-
tion description and replication (TIDieR) guidelines 
should be followed and the checklist completed.48 If 
there are changes to the details of the treatments for any 
group, these must be reported (see item 3b).
- Item 6a
- Standard CONSORT item: completely defined pre-
specified primary and secondary outcome measures, 
including how and when they were assessed
- Extension for pilot trials: completely defined pre-
specified assessments or measurements to address each 
pilot trial objective specified in item 2b, including how 
and when they were assessed
- Example
“Acceptability and demand were assessed in terms of 
the usage and repeated usage of the intervention by the 
patients in the trial indicated by logged user statistics. 
The interventions’ practicability was considered as the 
ability to log in and occurrence of constraints in deliv-
ery and was assessed in terms of the percentage of users 
in adolescents and professionals, its bounce percentage 
(percentage of login-errors) and other login-problems. 
The bounce-percentage was logged and participants 
were asked to report login-errors. Integration was 
assessed in terms of the extent to which our web-based 
intervention promotes care that was consistent with 
recognized standards of diabetes care for adolescents 
including those published by the International Diabe-
tes Federation (IDF) in collaboration with the Interna-
tional Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes 
(ISPAD) and the American Diabetes Association (ADA; 
3, 33); see also Appendix 1.”49
- Explanation
In a definitive trial investigators are primarily inter-
ested in response variables or outcomes that enable 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 14 (native) -----
doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239 | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | the bmj
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
14
them to fulfil the primary objective (to assess the effect 
of an intervention or treatment), and a clear articula-
tion of prespecified outcomes is required to guard 
against bias in the assessment of this effect. In a pilot 
trial, however, objectives should relate to feasibility 
(see box 1 and item 2b) and any measurements or 
assessments should enable these objectives to be 
addressed. To ensure the pilot trial meets its objectives, 
measures or assessments should be defined to address 
each separate objective or research question. In the 
example, objectives were to assess acceptability, 
demand, practicability, and integration. The authors 
list the measures used for each of these.
Variables that might be considered primary and sec-
ondary outcomes for the future definitive RCT might be 
measured in a pilot trial to assess response, complete-
ness, or validity. The appropriate measures or assess-
ments would then be response rates, completion rates, 
or measures of validity. Sometimes investigators may 
want to measure surrogate outcomes (see example in 
item 7b), variables on the causal pathway of what 
might eventually be the primary outcome in the future 
definitive RCT, or outcomes at early time points, in 
order to assess the potential for the intervention to 
affect likely outcomes in the future definitive RCT (see 
item 2b).
- Item 6b
- Standard CONSORT item: any changes to trial out-
comes after the trial commenced, with reasons
- Extension for pilot trials: any changes to pilot trial 
assessments or measurements after the pilot trial com-
menced, with reasons
- Example 1 (change to assessment time period)
“Our outcome measures examined uptake and cessa-
tion because we hoped that our intervention would 
affect uptake by referring more people and the success 
rate of those referred by supporting adherence to treat-
ment…The intervention had two distinct phases so, 
although not planned in the protocol, we examined 
uptake of services and 4-week quit rates by trial arm, in 
these two periods.”50
- Example 2 (change to measurement instrument)
“We defined . . . initiation of change as participation 
in a formal program or a self-directed program that was 
intended to result in change either in diet, physical 
activity, smoking, or alcohol consumption at any time 
(binary) . . . In our published protocol, we had proposed 
4 categories of change, but we found it difficult to dis-
tinguish between “persisted” and “maintained” in the 
qualitative follow-up interviews; hence, we combined 
persistence and maintenance of change in 1 category.”40
- Explanation
An assessment or measure might change during a 
pilot trial because the change enables investigators to 
glean more information about the operation of the inter-
vention (as in example 1) or for reasons of acceptability 
or practicability (example 2). In example 2 it became 
impractical to use a measurement instrument with four 
categories when it was identified that researchers could 
not distinguish between two of the categories. In the 
interests of full reporting and because of the usefulness 
of such information to others working in the same spe-
cialty, all such changes should be reported.
- Item 6c
- Extension for pilot trials: if applicable, prespecified 
criteria used to judge whether, or how, to proceed with 
future definitive trial
- Example
“Feasibility (delivery) and acceptability (uptake) of 
the DECISION+ program were the main outcome mea-
sures of this pilot trial. Investigators had established a 
priori threshold for specific feasibility and acceptability 
criteria. These were the following: (a) the proportion of 
contacted FMGs [Family medicine groups] participating 
in the pilot study would be 50% or greater, (b) the pro-
portion of recruited family physicians participating in 
all three workshops would be 70% or greater, (c) the 
mean level of satisfaction from family physicians 
regarding the workshops would be 65% or greater, and 
(d) the proportion of missing data in each completed 
questionnaire would be less than 10%.”34
- Explanation
This is a new item. The purpose of a pilot trial is to 
assess the feasibility of proceeding to the next stage in 
the research process. To do this investigators need some 
criteria on which to base the decision about whether or 
not to proceed. The next stage in the research process 
will normally, although not always, be the future defin-
itive RCT.
The UK National Institute for Health Research 
requires that pilot or feasibility studies have clear crite-
ria for deciding whether or not to progress to the next 
stage: “We expect that when pilot or feasibility studies 
are proposed by applicants, or specified in commission-
ing briefs, a clear route of progression criteria to the 
substantive study will be described. Listing clear pro-
gression criteria will apply whether the brief or pro-
posal describes just the preliminary study or both 
together. Whether preliminary and main studies are 
funded together or separately may be decided on prac-
tical grounds.”51
In many pilot studies, however, such criteria may be 
best viewed as guidelines rather than strict thresholds 
that determine progression. In the example, the authors 
found that only 24% of the family medicine groups 
(FMGs) agreed to participate. They state “Not reaching 
the pre-established criteria does not necessarily indi-
cate unfeasibility of the trial but rather underlines 
changes to be made to the protocol”.34  Clearly it is 
important to discuss whether such changes to protocol 
are likely to be feasible, and this discussion might often 
benefit from input independent of the trial team—for 
example, from the trial steering committee. This would 
be a reason for having such a committee in place for a 
pilot trial. Bugge et al recently provided further guid-
ance on decision making after a pilot trial.52
In addition to the possibility of making changes to 
the trial protocol, investigators should also be aware 
that estimates of rates in pilot trials may be subject to 
considerable uncertainty, so that it is best to be cau-
tious about setting definitive thresholds that could be 
missed simply due to chance variation.41 In fact it is 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 15 (native) -----
the bmj | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
15
becoming increasingly common for investigators to use 
a traffic light system for criteria used to judge feasibility, 
whereby measures (eg, recruitment rates) below a lower 
threshold indicate that the trial is not feasible, above a 
higher threshold that it is feasible, and between the two 
that it might be feasible if appropriate changes can be 
made.
- Item 7a
- Standard CONSORT item: how sample size was 
determined
- Extension for pilot trials: rationale for numbers in 
the pilot trial
- Example 1 (rationale based on assessment of practi-
calities and estimating rates)
“Since this was a pilot study, a sample size calcula-
tion was not performed. The researchers aimed for 120 
participants because it was felt this would be a large 
enough sample to inform them about the practicalities 
of delivering several self- management courses led by 
patients with COPD, recruitment, uptake, and attri-
tion.”53
- Example 2 (rationale based on percentage of number 
required for future definitive RCT)
“As this is a feasibility study a formal sample size cal-
culation is not required, but we estimated the number 
of participants required as around 10% of the number 
required for the Phase 3 trial. The sample size calcula-
tion for the Phase 3 trial suggests we need to recruit 1665 
participants. Given the participant population, a high 
level of attrition may be anticipated. We therefore aim to 
recruit 200 participants to the feasibility trial to inform 
the design and sample size of the Phase 3 RCT.”54
- Explanation
The criterion of congruency between the objectives 
and the sample size holds as true for a pilot trial as for 
any study. Many pilot trials have key objectives related 
to estimating rates of acceptance, recruitment, reten-
tion, or uptake (see item 2b for examples). For these 
sorts of objectives, numbers required in the study 
should ideally be set to ensure a desired degree of pre-
cision around the estimated rate, although in practice it 
may be difficult to achieve these numbers. Additionally, 
for pilot trials where the key objective focuses on the 
acceptability or feasibility of introducing the interven-
tion, it might be useful to consider how many sites are 
needed, as the acceptability or feasibility of introduc-
tion can sometimes depend on the site. In example 1, 
the authors state their reason for choosing their 
required sample size in relation to estimating rates and 
to exploring practicalities of implementing the inter-
vention. They could, however, have provided stronger 
justification for their chosen number, such as likely 
recruitment or attrition rate and desired precision 
around these rates, so that the reader (and funder) has 
more grounds for believing the trial could achieve its 
objectives beyond a feeling.
Most methodological papers that focus on recom-
mendations about sample size requirements for pilot 
trials assume that the main aim of such a trial is to esti-
mate a quantitative measure such as the variance (or 
standard deviation) of an effect size to inform the sam-
ple size calculation for a future definitive RCT. Methods 
focus on the precision with which such estimates can 
be obtained. There are several relevant papers.55 56 57  
Among these, Whitehead et al suggests that the size of 
a pilot trial should be related to the size of the future 
definitive RCT.58 For such a trial designed with 90% 
power and two sided 5% significance, they recommend 
pilot trial sample sizes for each treatment arm of 75, 25, 
15, and 10 for standardised effect sizes that are extra 
small (0.1), small (0.2), medium (0.5), or large (0.8), 
respectively.
Example 2 illustrates another approach that uses a 
sample that is a certain percentage of the expected size 
of the future definitive RCT. The authors reference the 
paper by Cocks and Torgerson, which is based on using 
a sample size under which a one sided 80% confidence 
interval for the effect size will exclude the minimum 
clinically important difference if the null hypothesis is 
true.59 This is a similar calculation to that used in esti-
mating sample size needed for efficacy or effectiveness 
but allows for additional uncertainty in the resulting 
effect size estimate, thus effectively assessing potential 
effectiveness. If an objective is to assess potential effec-
tiveness using a surrogate or interim outcome, investi-
gators will need to use a standard sample size 
calculation to ensure there is adequate power. However, 
this type of objective is rare in pilot trials.
- Item 7b
- Standard CONSORT item: when applicable, explana-
tion of any interim analyses and stopping guidelines
- Example
“The board members were instructed to perform an 
interim analysis after 60 patients had been enrolled, at 
which point they could recommend stopping the trial if 
an overwhelming effect was detected on the basis of the 
critical significance level (P≤0.02), as adjusted for the 
Lan–DeMets alpha-spending function with Pocock 
boundary”20
- Explanation
As pilot trials are small, it is uncommon for them to 
define criteria for early stopping, but if they do, these 
should be reported. The example is a pilot trial testing a 
surrogate outcome. There was considerable uncertainty 
about the variability of this outcome measure, and so 
the authors calculated a conservative sample size but 
included an interim analysis after recruiting 60 
patients, in case their a priori estimates were too large 
and they had enough information at that stage to inform 
subsequent trials.
- Item 8a
- Standard CONSORT item: method used to generate 
the random allocation sequence
- Example
“Participants were randomly allocated to the inter-
vention ‘MBCT group’ or ‘wait-list control group’ . . . 
Random allocation was computer generated.”46
- Explanation
Randomisation induces unpredictability in the allo-
cation of each unit of randomisation. This is an import-
ant element of ensuring an unbiased treatment effect in 
RCTs evaluating effectiveness or efficacy because in the 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 16 (native) -----
doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239 | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | the bmj
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
16
long run it ensures balance in characteristics between 
intervention groups. In a pilot trial, the soundness of 
the randomisation method might not directly influence 
robustness of the pilot trial results, which are not 
focused on estimates of effectiveness or efficacy, but a 
clear description of the process of randomisation is still 
important for transparent reporting.
In addition, in some pilot trials one of the objectives 
might be to assess the feasibility of randomisation; it is 
also important, therefore, that details are reported. If 
assessing feasibility involves more than one method 
being used to generate a random allocation sequence, 
each method should be described adequately.
- Item 8b
- Standard CONSORT item: type of randomisation; 
details of any restriction (such as blocking and block 
size)
- Extension for pilot trials: type of randomisation(s); 
details of any restriction (such as blocking and block 
size)
- Example 1 (example with blocking)
“Participants were randomised in block sizes of 
three by computer-generated randomisation to the 
hydration group or the control group (2:1), stratified by 
gender.”42
- Example 2 (two different types of randomisation)
“In addition to random allocation to one of the three 
treatment arms, we used a 2 × 2 factorial design to dis-
tribute practices and participants across two trial 
design factors: cluster versus individual allocation and 
systematic versus opportunistic recruitment (see Fig 1). 
We randomly assigned 24 practices (8 practices in each 
of 3 geographical regions (Bristol, Devon and Coven-
try)) in a 3:1 ratio to cluster (practice) allocation or indi-
vidual allocation, and in a 1:1 ratio to opportunistic or 
systematic recruitment. The differential allocation ratio 
with regard to randomisation method was due to the 
need to ensure even numbers of practices and partici-
pants in each of the three arms across the cluster ran-
domised practices.”60
- Explanation
The type of randomisation, including whether simple 
or restricted, should be reported.
For practical reasons simple randomisation is some-
times used in pilot trials even when restricted randomi-
sation is expected to be used in the future definitive 
RCT, and if this is the case this needs to be described.
Restricted randomisation is particularly useful in 
small trials evaluating the effectiveness of an interven-
tion, to ensure balance in certain characteristics 
between intervention and control groups (see main 
CONSORT statement).2 61 In pilot trials, restricted rando-
misation might be used to mimic the type of randomis-
ation expected in the future definitive RCT or, if it is 
deemed important, to have balanced groups even if 
restricted randomisation is not expected to be used in 
the future definitive RCT. In example 1, stratified rando-
misation, employing blocking, was used.
One of the objectives of a pilot trial might be to assess 
the feasibility of randomisation; it is therefore possible 
that different types of randomisation could be tried, as 
in example 2 where cluster versus individual randomis-
ation was considered.60
- Item 9
- Standard CONSORT item: mechanism used to imple-
ment the random allocation sequence (such as sequen-
tially numbered containers), describing any steps taken 
to conceal the sequence until interventions were 
assigned
- Example
“Allocation . . . was implemented using an automated 
telephone randomization service provided by the 
­Bristol Randomized Trials Collaboration to ensure con-
cealment from clinical staff undertaking recruitment.”62
- Explanation
Ensuring allocation concealment is a cornerstone of a 
good randomised trial design. This mechanism performs 
a key function in minimising bias by preventing fore-
knowledge of treatment assignment, which could influ-
ence those who enrol participants. In a future definitive 
RCT a single mechanism will be used to conceal alloca-
tion. However, in a pilot trial the main purpose of using 
an allocation concealment mechanism is to establish the 
feasibility of the mechanism. If there is considerable 
uncertainty about the mechanism to be used, more than 
one mechanism may be tried in the pilot trial. We would 
expect this to be rare, but when it does occur the details 
of each mechanism tried should be fully described.
- Item 10
- Standard CONSORT item: who generated the ran-
dom allocation sequence, who enrolled participants, 
and who assigned participants to interventions
- Example 1 (who generated the random allocation 
sequence)
“An independent statistical consultant set up the 
web-based randomization process to assign eligible 
participants to intervention or control groups by remote 
allocation, using permuted blocks of sizes 2 and 4. No 
one directly involved in the project had access to alloca-
tion codes.”21
Example 2 (who enrolled participants, who assigned 
participants to interventions)
“Eligible children and their families were identified 
by the clinician conducting the assessment. If the child 
and his or her family were willing to find out more about 
the study a researcher contacted the family and 
arranged to visit them at a convenient location (usually 
at home) . . . Those willing to take part were randomized 
to receive either specialist medical care or to specialist 
medical care plus the Phil Parker Lightning Process 
(LP). Allocation . . . was implemented . . . by the Bristol 
Randomized Trials Collaboration . . . ”62
- Explanation
It is important that the pilot trial confirms that alloca-
tion concealment can be implemented in a way that 
could be replicated in the future definitive RCT. This 
involves knowing who generated the randomisation 
sequence and who enrolled and assigned participants.
- Item 11a
- Standard CONSORT item: if done, who was blinded 
after assignment to interventions (eg, participants, care 
providers, those assessing outcomes) and how
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 17 (native) -----
the bmj | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
17
- Example 1 (blinding of multiple people)
“Patients, families, ICU [intensive care unit] staff, 
ultrasound technologists, and research personnel were 
all blinded to drug allocation. The study pharmacist at 
each center was the only person who was not blinded.”63
- Example 2 (placebo controlled)
“A synbiotic formulation (Synbiotic 2000®) contain-
ing 4 strains of probiotic bacteria (1010 each) plus 4 non-
digestible, fermentable dietary fibers (2.5 g each) was 
provided each day, versus a fiber-only placebo formula-
tion.”64
- Explanation
In the future definitive RCT investigators will want to 
reduce the chance of a biased result as much as possi-
ble. Blinding is seen as one of the most effective ways of 
doing this, at least in trials where blinding is feasible 
(see main CONSORT statement for details). The main 
purpose of a pilot trial is to assess the feasibility of 
methods, including those to reduce bias. In some pilot 
trials it might be useful to report the method of blinding 
in detail, as in example 2, to help readers who might 
want to replicate the method in future RCTs.
It is tempting in a pilot trial to try and assess the suc-
cess of blinding by asking people whether they believed 
they were blinded or not. This was done, for example in 
Arnold et  al.65  This is not recommended, however, 
because evidence suggests that results of doing this 
largely reflects the effectiveness of the intervention 
rather than anything else.66
- Item 11b
- Standard CONSORT item: if relevant, description of 
the similarity of interventions
- Example
“Each study drug infusion was administered using a 
standard volume-based rate escalation protocol pre-
ceded by the administration of 100 mg of hydrocorti-
sone intravenously, 50 mg of diphenhydramine orally 
or intravenously, and 650 mg of acetaminophen orally 
to minimize infusion-related reactions and avoid 
unblinding.”65
- Explanation
If blinding is done by creating a placebo, it is import-
ant in trials assessing the effect of an intervention to 
detail what features of the placebo were made similar to 
the active intervention (usually a drug)—for example, 
appearance, taste, smell, method of being adminis-
tered. However, many of the interventions described in 
pilot trials are not drug interventions. Nevertheless, it 
remains important to describe what was done to try and 
ensure that the intervention and control arms received 
identical treatment aside from the active ingredient 
where this is possible. It is equally important to note 
that for complex interventions it might not be possible 
or feasible to blind certain people to allocation using 
these types of methods.
- Item 12a
- Standard CONSORT item: statistical methods used to 
compare groups for primary and secondary outcomes
- Extension for pilot trials: methods used to address 
each pilot trial objective whether qualitative or quanti-
tative
- Example 1 (descriptive and narrative reporting)
“The feasibility outcomes were reported descriptively 
and narratively. For the clinical endpoints, only descrip-
tive statistics, mean (standard deviation) for continu-
ous outcomes and raw count (%) for categorical 
outcomes, were reported.”67
- Example 2 (confidence intervals)
“For the primary outcomes, the feasibility criteria 
were the recruitment rate and duration, retention rate, 
safety, adverse events, compliance, acceptability of the 
interventions and fatigue . . . The recruitment rate, con-
sisting of the eligibility and consent rate, was calcu-
lated with 95% CI . . . Medians (range) were reported for 
ordinal data (fatigue), mean (95% confidence interval 
(CI)) were reported for continuous data (walking speed 
and walking distance) and raw count (number, %) was 
reported for nominal data. Due to the nature of this fea-
sibility study, it was decided not to conduct any efficacy 
statistical tests on the walking and fatigue data.”68
- Explanation
A range of methods can be used to address the objec-
tives in a pilot trial. These need not be statistical. Pro-
viding information about the methods used ensures 
that findings can be verified on the basis of the descrip-
tion of the analyses used. The primary focus is on meth-
ods for dealing with feasibility objectives. These 
methods are often based on descriptive statistics such 
as means and percentages but might also be narrative 
descriptions (example 1). Typically, any estimates of 
effect using participant outcomes as they are likely to be 
measured in the future definitive RCT would be reported 
as estimates with 95% confidence intervals without P 
values—because pilot trials are not powered for testing 
hypotheses about effectiveness.
- Item 12b
- Standard CONSORT item: methods for additional 
­analyses, such as subgroup analyses and adjusted 
­analyses
- Extension for pilot trials: not applicable
- Explanation
In a definitive trial, analyses of a difference in treat-
ment effect for subgroups or analysis of outcomes 
adjusted for baseline imbalance might provide useful 
information. However, such analyses in a pilot trial are 
not applicable because the primary focus is not on 
determining treatment effects or differences in effects 
between subgroups. Rather, the focus is on assessing 
feasibility or piloting procedures to inform the design of 
the future definitive RCT.
Results
- Item 13a
- Standard CONSORT item: for each group, the num-
bers of participants who were randomly assigned, 
received intended treatment, and were analysed for the 
primary outcome
- Extension for pilot trials: for each group, the num-
bers of participants who were approached and/or 
assessed for eligibility, randomly assigned, received 
intended treatment, and were assessed for each 
­objective
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 18 (native) -----
doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239 | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | the bmj
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
18
- Example
See figures 4 and 5 .2 69
- Explanation
As for other trials, we recommend a diagram for com-
municating the flow of participants in a pilot trial. A 
flow diagram is a key element of the CONSORT state-
ment and has been widely adopted.70  A review of RCTs 
published in five leading general and internal medicine 
journals found that reporting was considerably more 
thorough in articles that included a diagram of the flow 
of participants through a trial, as recommended by 
CONSORT.70 A complete CONSORT flow diagram also 
reduces the time for readers to find essential informa-
tion to assess the reliability of a trial. It is also likely to 
improve the availability of some information that other-
wise might not be reported.
Information required to complete a CONSORT flow 
diagram includes the number of participants evaluated 
for potential enrolment into the trial and the numbers 
of participants who were randomly assigned to each 
intervention group, received treatment as allocated, 
completed treatment as allocated, and were analysed 
for the primary outcome, with numbers and reasons for 
exclusions at each step.2 ­61
For pilot trials it might also be important to know the 
number of participants who were approached (or 
screened) before being assessed for eligibility for poten-
tial enrolment into the trial. This ensures that readers can 
assess external validity and how representative the trial 
participants are likely to be compared with all eligible 
participants.71  Additionally, for pilot trials it is important 
to know how many participants were approached before 
being evaluated for potential enrolment in the trial and 
how easy it was to recruit them, in order to assess the 
potential for enrolment for the future definitive RCT and 
other future trials. In some cases where these elements 
are a major focus of a pilot trial more information may be 
needed in the flow diagram (fig 4).
For pilot trials it is appropriate to report the number 
of participants assessed for each pilot trial objective, 
rather than the number analysed for the primary out-
come (as would be the case for the future definitive 
RCT). If there are a limited number of objectives in the 
pilot trial then all should be listed and results for each 
objective reported in the flow diagram. If there are mul-
tiple objectives, then agreement should be reached a 
priori about which are the most important to decide 
whether to proceed to a future definitive RCT, and only 
these objectives should be reported in the flow diagram. 
Figure 5 provides a template for a CONSORT flow dia-
gram for pilot trials, including presentation of results 
for different objectives. The exact form and content 
might, however, vary in relation to the specific features 
of the trial. Authors should ensure that their flow dia-
gram matches the key objectives as far as possible.
- Item 13b
- Standard CONSORT item: for each group, losses and 
exclusions after randomisation, together with reasons
- Example
“All 16 patients randomised to the Symptoms Clinic 
attended the first appointment and 11 completed either 
three or four appointments. Of the remainder, two were 
clearly improving at the time they were seen and agreed 
to early discharge; two found further attendance diffi-
cult after a second appointment and one declined any 
further contact after the first appointment. Several 
patients randomised to usual care expressed some dis-
appointment at the time of their allocation, although 
follow-up response rates were comparable between the 
two groups.”72
- Explanation
For some RCTs the flow of participants through each 
phase of the trial can be relatively straightforward to 
describe, particularly if there were no losses to fol-
low-up or exclusions. However, in more complex trials, 
it might be difficult for readers to identify whether and 
why some participants did not receive the treatment as 
allocated, were lost to follow-up, or were excluded.73  In 
a definitive trial this information is crucial for interpret-
ing generalisability, as participants who are excluded 
after allocation are unlikely to be representative of all 
participants in the study.74 In a pilot trial, this informa-
tion could be used to judge potential generalisability of 
the future definitive RCT but also to assess the accept-
ability of an intervention to participants and to aid 
planning of the future definitive RCT and other trials in 
similar settings.
- Item 14a
- Standard CONSORT item: dates defining the periods 
of recruitment and follow-up
- Example
“Patient enrolment started in August 2003 and was 
completed in October 2005.”75
- Explanation
It is important to report dates for all studies for trans-
parency. An added rationale for pilot trials is that fac-
tors such as disease definitions, treatment options, and 
reimbursement plans that could affect the future defin-
itive RCT might have changed between the date that the 
pilot trial was conducted and the date the future defini-
tive RCT starts. The availability of different treatments 
outside the trial can also change and might make a dif-
ference to people’s willingness to be randomised. Thus 
recruitment to a pilot trial could be easier, or more diffi-
cult, than recruitment to the future definitive RCT. In 
addition, knowing the length of time over which the 
study took place might be important for planning the 
future definitive, and other, RCTs.
- Item 14b
- Standard CONSORT item: why the trial ended or was 
stopped
- Extension for pilot trials: why the pilot trial ended or 
was stopped
- Example 1 (stopped without reaching intended 
recruitment but provided sufficient data)
“Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) is a major 
cause of travellers’ diarrhoea . . . We designed this 
phase II, double-blind, randomised placebo-controlled 
study to investigate the epidemiology of natural infec-
tion with ETEC in placebo recipients with a planned 
enrolment of 300 individuals, at a placebo-to-LT patch 
ratio of 2:1 . . . The study was halted when enrolment 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 19 (native) -----
the bmj | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
19
reached 201, because the planned interval for conduct 
had been exceeded, and it was thought that a placebo 
group greater than 100, although less powerful than the 
original 200, would be sufficient to assess the ETEC 
attack rate in placebo recipients . . . 24 (22%) of 111 pla-
cebo recipients had diarrhoea, of whom 11 (10%) had 
ETEC diarrhoea.”76
- Example 2 (stopped at end of recruitment but did not 
provide sufficient data)
“Recruitment rates were lower than expected which 
led to the study being expanded to further areas and 
opened to self-referral via advertisement. However, 
because of better management of hypertension due to 
changes in the UK Quality and Outcomes Framework 
Identiﬁed in computer search (n=4815)
Assessed for eligibility (n=3281)
Invited (n=1397)
Allocated to prescribing (n=70):
  Excluded (n=2)
  Received allocated intervention (n=53)
  Did not receive allocated intervention
    (n=15):
      Unable to contact (n=6)
      Cancelled appointment (n=1)
      Did not attend (n=1)
      Withdrawn (n=7)
Allocated to review (n=63):
  Received allocated intervention (n=61)
  Did not receive allocated intervention
    (n=2):
      Too late for trial (n=2)
Allocated to treatment as usual (n=63):
  Received allocated intervention (n=63)
* In the Grampian Health Board area, on the basis of response rates in the earlier feasibility study (241 screened patients resulted in 22
recruited) only a random sample of eligible participants were screened (15). In East Anglia all eligible patients were screened
Questionnaires sent (n=61)
Questionnaires received (n=53; 87%)
Lost to follow-up (did not respond) (n=7)
Withdrawn (n=1)
Withdrawn post 3 month follow-up (n=1)
Questionnaires sent (n=63)
Questionnaires received (n=53; 84%)
Lost to follow-up (did not respond) (n=8)
Withdrawn (n=2)
Questionnaires sent (n=63)
Questionnaires received (n=55; 87%)
Lost to follow-up (did not respond) (n=5)
Withdrawn (n=3)
Questionnaires sent (n=59)
Questionnaires received (n=50; 85%)
Lost to follow-up (did not respond) (n=8)
Withdrawn (n=0)
Questionnaires sent (n=60)
Questionnaires received (n=54; 90%)
Lost to follow-up (did not respond) (n=5)
Withdrawn (n=1)
Questionnaires sent (n=61)
Questionnaires received (n=48; 79%)
Lost to follow-up (did not respond) (n=11)
Withdrawn (n=1)
Withdrawn and excluded (n=1)
Grampian: eligible but not screened by GPs (n=1534)*
Not sent questionnaire (target recruitment number met) (n=67)
Excluded by GPs (n=392)
Eligible but not invited (n=1492)*
Sent baseline questionnaire (n=289)
Excluded as target recruitment met (n=19)
Training patients (n=36)
Randomised (n=232)
Returned baseline questionnaire (n=251)
Declined to participate (n=206)
Did not respond (n=835)
Excluded (n=38)
  Not meeting inclusion criteria (n=9)
  Did not respond (n=14)
  Withdrawn (n=15)
Consented (n=365)
Enrolment
Allocation
Allocation
3 month follow-up
3 month follow-up
Interim analysis
6 month follow-up
Interim analysis
6 month follow-up
Fig 4 | Flow diagram of a randomised pilot trial of pharmacist led management of chronic pain in primary care (reproduced 
from Bruhn et al69)
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 20 (native) -----
doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239 | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | the bmj
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
20
guidelines for blood pressure treatment, few eligible 
patients were identified and the study closed at the end 
of the recruitment period, with 13 participants consent-
ing, but 12 failing screening resulting in one recruited 
participant.”77
- Explanation
When pilot trials end or are stopped, it is important to 
state why as this might affect the feasibility of the future 
definitive RCT. In example 1 the investigators had run 
out of time and thought they would have sufficient par-
ticipants to estimate the rate of diarrhoea so as to 
inform future studies. It is not uncommon for changes 
in the clinical environment to occur, leading to fewer 
patients with unmanaged disease, and this can lead to 
major studies, not just pilot studies, failing to recruit. 
This illustrates a benefit of a pilot study to assess the 
likely accrual for a future definitive RCT. In example 2 
the reason for stopping was simply a failure to recruit, 
and the reasons for this are clearly stated. Other poten-
tial reasons for stopping include the intervention being 
impossible to implement, other studies indicating that 
the research has become irrelevant, and difficulties 
with funding. It is also helpful to know who made the 
decision to stop early. In definitive RCTs a data monitor-
ing committee often makes recommendations to stop 
the trial. It might not be necessary to have data monitor-
ing committees for all pilot trials, but investigators 
should give some thought as to how the decision to stop 
should be made.
- Item 15
- Standard CONSORT item: a table showing baseline 
demographic and clinical characteristics for each group
- Example
- Explanation
In an RCT evaluating the effect of an intervention, a 
table of baseline characteristics is important to indi-
cate any differences between intervention groups that 
could affect the face validity of the trial. In a pilot 
trial, the number of participants is likely to be smaller 
than in the future definitive RCT and baseline imbal-
ances might therefore be more likely. Similar to a 
definitive trial, imbalance does not suggest bias, and 
in any case bias is not a problem in the same way it is 
in a definitive trial because an assessment of the effect 
of an intervention is not the primary concern. Never-
theless, baseline data are important to aid interpreta-
tion of the results, including a consideration of 
generalisability, and a table is the best way of present-
ing this information.
- Item 16
Standard CONSORT item: for each group, number of 
participants (denominator) included in each analysis 
and whether the analysis was by original assigned 
groups
- Extension for pilot trials: for each objective, number 
of participants (denominator) included in each analy-
sis. If relevant, these numbers should be by randomised 
group
- Example 1 (number of sites contacted)
“A research assistant made 41 introductory phone 
calls to contact the medical directors of the 21 eligible 
FMGs [family medicine groups] over a four-week period. 
One director could not be contacted. Information leaf-
lets were faxed to the 20 contacted FMGs.”34
Allocated to intervention (n=):
  Received allocated intervention (n= )
  Did not receive allocated intervention
    (give reasons) (n= )
Allocated to intervention (n=):
  Received allocated intervention (n= )
  Did not receive allocated intervention
    (give reasons) (n= )
Screened prior to eligibility assessment (n= )
Assessed for eligibility (n= )
Randomised (n= )
Lost to follow-up (give reasons) (n= )
Discontinued intervention (give reasons) (n= )
Lost to follow-up (give reasons) (n= )
Discontinued intervention (give reasons) (n= )
Assessed for objective 1 (n= )
Assessed for objective 2 (n= )
Etc.
Assessed for objective 1 (n= )
Assessed for objective 2 (n= )
Etc.
Excluded (n= ):
  Reasons (n= )
Excluded (n= ):
  Not meeting inclusion criteria (n= )
  Declined to participate (n= )
  Other reasons (n= )
Screened
Enrolment
Allocation
Follow-up
Assessment
Fig 5 | Recommended flow diagram of progress through phases of a parallel randomised pilot trial of two groups—that is, 
screening, enrolment, intervention allocation, follow-up, and assessment for each pilot trial objective. Adapted from 
Moher et al2
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 21 (native) -----
the bmj | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
21
- Example 2 (number of practitioners taking part within 
sites)
“Out of the 52 eligible family physicians working in 
the five participating FMGs [family medicine groups], 
39 (75%) agreed to participate in the study.”34
- Explanation
In RCTs evaluating the effect of an intervention, out-
comes are usually measured on participants and there-
fore denominators are numbers of participants. 
However, because of the potential variety of objectives 
in a pilot trial, the denominators for measures that 
assess feasibility according to these objectives might be 
organisations, health practitioners, patients, or, in 
some cases, episodes or events. In the interests of sim-
plicity we have not changed the word “participants” in 
this item, but the item should be interpreted in the light 
of the particular objective and associated measure or 
assessment. The two examples are taken from the same 
trial. One objective was to assess the feasibility of 
recruitment. Participants for that objective are FMGs 
(example 1) and family physicians (example 2). The 
denominators of 21 (FMGs) and 52 (family physicians) 
indicate numbers approached and therefore the effort 
involved in recruiting. In this example providing num-
bers by randomised group is not relevant.
- Item 17a
- Standard CONSORT item: for each primary and sec-
ondary outcome, results for each group, and the esti-
mated effect size and its precision (such as 95% 
confidence interval)
- Extension for pilot trials: for each objective, results 
including expressions of uncertainty (such as 95% con-
fidence interval) for any estimates. If relevant, these 
results should be by randomised group
- Example 1 (feasibility outcome)
“The ABSORB [A bioabsorbable everolimus-eluting 
coronary stent system for patients with single de-novo 
coronary artery lesions] study aimed to assess the feasi-
bility and safety of the BVS [bioasorbable everolim-
us-eluting stent] stent in patients with single de-novo 
coronary artery lesions . . .Procedural success was 
100% (30/30 patients), and device success 94% (29/31 
attempts at implantation of the stent).”78
- Example 2 (proposed outcome in future definitive 
trial)
“Rates of initiation of lifestyle change also favoured 
the individualized assessment arm but less clearly. At 3 
months, 75% of the individualized assessment arm and 
68% of the usual assessment arm had initiated changes 
in their lifestyle (unadjusted odds ratio, 1.38 [95%CI, 
0.55 to 3.52]). At 6 months, the percentages were 85% 
and 75%, suggesting increased initiation of change over 
time in both arms, with the gap widening slightly 
(unadjusted odds ratio, 1.86 [95% CI, 0.64 to 5.77]) . . . 
Wide CIs again point to the degree of uncertainty 
around this conclusion”40
- Explanation
It is important that the reported results of a pilot trial 
reflect the objectives. Results might include, for exam-
ple, recruitment, retention or response rates, or other 
sorts of rates, as in example 1. Because the sample size 
in a pilot trial is likely to be small, estimates of these 
rates will be imprecise and this imprecision should be 
recognised, for example, by calculating a confidence 
interval around the estimate. Commonly, authors do 
not give such a confidence interval, but if the numerator 
and denominator are given the confidence interval can 
be calculated. In example 1 the Wilson 95% confidence 
interval for 100% (30/30) is 88.65% to 100% and for 
94% (29/31) is 79.78% to 98.21% (OpenEpi Seattle).78 If 
authors do report differences between trial arms (and 
this is not necessary if it is not consistent with the 
­objectives of the trial) then confidence intervals again 
provide readers with an assessment of precision (exam-
ple 2), which usually indicates considerable uncer-
tainty. If samples in the pilot trial and future definitive 
RCT are drawn from slightly different populations, con-
fidence intervals calculated from the pilot will not 
directly indicate the likely upper and lower bounds of 
the relevant measure in the future definitive RCT, but 
can nevertheless highlight the lack of precision effec-
tively.
- Item 17b
- Standard CONSORT item: for binary outcomes, pre-
sentation of both absolute and relative effect sizes is 
recommended
- Extension for pilot trials: not applicable
- Explanation
This item is included in the 2010 CONSORT state-
ment because when considering clinical implications, 
neither the relative nor the absolute measures of effect 
size for binary outcomes give a complete picture of the 
effect of an intervention. For example, relative risks are 
less affected by differences in baseline populations 
across studies than are absolute risks, although some-
times can be misinterpreted in terms of population 
benefit. In addition, different audiences (clinical, pol-
icy, patient) prefer to use one or the other measure. 
However, in pilot trials the situation is different. 
Because of the imprecision of estimates from these 
­trials and the fact that samples in these trials can be 
unrepresentative (see item 17a), we caution against any 
reliance on estimates of effect size from pilot trials for 
clinical implications (see also Introduction, Scope of 
this paper, and box 1). Information from outcome data, 
however, can be legitimately used for other purposes, 
such as estimating inputs for sample size for the future 
definitive RCT (see item 7a). Thus item 17b, which is 
underpinned by rationale around clinical implica-
tions, is not applicable.
- Item 18
- Standard CONSORT item: results of any other analy-
ses performed, including subgroup analyses and 
adjusted analyses, distinguishing prespecified from 
exploratory
- Extension for pilot trials: results of any other analy-
ses performed that could be used to inform the future 
definitive RCT
- Example
“Sensitivity analysis
At both six and 12 weeks, findings were insensitive to 
the exclusion of those catheterised throughout their 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 22 (native) -----
doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239 | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | the bmj
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
22
hospital stay (and also to the exclusion of those who 
were never incontinent following the removal of a cath-
eter). However, at both time points, odds ratios reduced 
when those with pre-stroke incontinence were 
excluded . . . ”79
- Explanation
It is possible that the results of analyses that were not 
initially planned might have important implications for 
the future definitive RCT. Such findings should be 
reported and discussed in relation to how they might 
inform the future definitive RCT. In the example, 
although numbers were small, the authors inferred 
from the unplanned sensitivity analyses that those with 
pre-stroke incontinence were at least as likely, or more 
likely, to benefit from the intervention than those conti-
nent pre-stroke, and concluded that this group of 
patients should be included in the full trial.
- Item 19
- Standard CONSORT item: all important harms or 
unintended effects in each group (for specific guidance 
see CONSORT for harms)7
- Example 1 (potential harm)
“Intervention and usual treatment groups were simi-
lar in terms of age, gender, and marital status, but those 
in the intervention group were more likely to be unem-
ployed (69% v. 59%), to use methods other than poison-
ing (23% v. 9%), to have a past history of self-harm (67% 
v. 53%) and to have had previous psychiatric treatment 
(64% v. 53%).
Online Table DS1 shows self-harm repetition and 
resource use in the two groups. The 12-month repeat rate 
for individuals in the intervention group was 34.4% v. 
12.5% for the usual treatment group (odds ratio (OR) 3.67, 
95% CI 1.0–13.1 . . . ) . . . Adjusting for baseline clinical 
factors (centre, method of harm (self-poisoning v. other), 
previous self-harm, previous psychiatric treatment), the 
odds ratio for repetition and incidence rate ratio for 
number of repeat episodes remained elevated . . . ”80
- Example 2 (unintended effect or potential harm)
“An unanticipated finding in this study was a 4-kg 
weight loss, on average, favouring the intervention 
group, although we recognized that there were some 
differences in weight between groups at study com-
mencement that may have had an effect on our results . 
. . Thus, there is a clear role for dietary considerations in 
any study that aims to positively influence body weight. 
Although we provided one educational session on 
nutrition during a tour of a local grocery store with a 
dietitian and modelled healthy food choices with the 
lunches provided, dietary behaviors and body weight 
were not the focus of the study.”21
- Explanation
It is crucial to report all important or potential harms 
or unintended effects on individual participants in each 
group to enable the study design for the future defini-
tive RCT to be changed either to avoid these effects or to 
put in place effective processes for monitoring potential 
harms. In example 1, it was not clear whether the unex-
pected increased risk of repeated self harm in the inter-
vention group was real or a consequence of baseline 
covariate imbalance, or peculiar to the particular 
­setting. This led to a proposal to change the design to 
use stratified randomisation in the future definitive 
RCT. In example 2, the unintended effect of weight loss 
in elderly participants led to the decision to include a 
dietary component in the intervention to avoid poten-
tial harm in the future definitive RCT. This information 
might also be useful to other researchers planning sim-
ilar studies.
- Item 19a
- Extension for pilot trials: if relevant, other important 
unintended consequences
- Example (unintended consequence)
“Twelve of the 13 active, and 11 of the 13 traditional 
practices recruited a total of 231 participants in the 12 
months from mid-April 1998. Active practices recruited 
165 (average practice recruitment rate of 1.71 per 1000 
registered patients, i.e., 141% of expected) while tradi-
tional practices recruited only 66 (0.57 per 1000 i.e. 54% 
of expected) (Fig 1). On average active practices 
recruited 12.7 participants (range 0-39), while tradi-
tional practices recruited only 5.1 participants (range 
0-18) (Table 2). Although both types of practices 
recruited similar percentages of those identified (13% in 
active; 16% in traditional), active identified 1257, far 
more than the 416 by traditional practices. The extreme 
difference in recruitment rates led to an investigation of 
baseline characteristics of participants in the two 
groups (Table 3). Participants recruited by active prac-
tices were more likely to be working full-time and to 
have had further education since leaving school. They 
were also suffering from milder back pain, less limited 
physically and less depressed.”81
- Explanation
This is a new item reflecting the importance of report-
ing unintended consequences that do not directly affect 
individual participants but might have implications for 
the validity of the future definitive RCT if not dealt with 
in the pilot trial. By unintended consequences we mean 
things that happened in the pilot trial that the investiga-
tors did not intend to look for but that would have such 
implications. In the example, the design of the pilot 
trial included practice level randomisation, with partic-
ipant recruitment after that randomisation. This had 
unintended consequences in the balance of recruited 
participants between arms, and in the main study the 
researchers abandoned randomisation at the practice 
level.
Discussion
- Item 20
- Standard CONSORT item: trial limitations, address-
ing sources of potential bias, imprecision, and, if rele-
vant, multiplicity of analyses
- Extension for pilot trials: pilot trial limitations, 
addressing sources of potential bias and remaining 
uncertainty about feasibility
- Example 1 (pilot trial limitations)
“In some cases, platelet mass was calculated on an 
MPV [mean platelet volume] that was up to 72 hours old 
based on our previous research on the relationship 
between platelet mass and IVH [intraventricular hemor-
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 23 (native) -----
the bmj | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
23
rhage]. We cannot rule out the possibility that during 
acute thrombocytopenia changes in MPV may be more 
acute. Because platelet counts were not confirmed by 
manual count, we cannot exclude the unlikely possibil-
ity that some infants may have had pseudothrombocy-
topenia.”82
- Example 2 (potential bias)
“Fourth, the house staff at the two academic centers 
in the study may have been a source of contamination. 
Additional house staff occasionally provided overnight 
coverage at the intervention group academic center. 
These additional house staff were not formally edu-
cated about the study, so they effectively functioned as 
if they were in the control group. Conversely, additional 
house staff who provided overnight coverage at the con-
trol group academic center may have been previously 
educated about our study while working at the inter-
vention group academic center. Thus, they effectively 
functioned as if they were in the intervention group.”83
- Example 3 (remaining uncertainty)
“The integration of a nested, internal pilot in the 
definitive trial should also be considered to allow con-
tinued monitoring of the feasibility, in particular, the 
assessment of using different inclusion criteria and 
the recommended changes to the data collection 
methods, particularly within the first year of recruit-
ment. The use of a qualitative element to assess the 
participants’ views on data collection methods would 
also be beneficial.”84
- Explanation
Identifying and discussing the limitations of a study 
helps to provide a better context for understanding the 
importance of its findings. In a pilot trial it might also be 
helpful to distinguish between limitations that can be 
overcome in a future definitive RCT, and those that can-
not. In example 1 the authors explain the limitation of a 
method of measurement although they do not say 
whether they think this could be overcome in a future 
definitive RCT.
In a future definitive RCT, investigators will want, as 
far as possible, to avoid sources of bias that might affect 
treatment effect estimates. In a pilot trial, investigators 
are not primarily interested in treatment effect, so these 
biases will not be of so much concern but it would still 
be useful to identify potential biases that could affect 
the treatment effect in the future definitive RCT so that 
investigators have a better chance of avoiding these. In 
example 2 a potential source of bias in the future defin-
itive RCT is identified.
If substantial areas of uncertainty about feasibility 
remain at the end of the pilot trial that prevent investi-
gators from proceeding with a future definitive RCT or 
warrant investigation in an internal pilot then, for clar-
ity, these should be reported, as in example 3.
Lastly, although we do not recommend this, if under-
powered tests are performed and reported then investi-
gators should always point out this limitation to avoid 
misinterpretation of results (see item 2b).
- Item 21
- Standard CONSORT item: generalisability (external 
validity, applicability) of the trial findings
- Extension for pilot trials: generalisability (applica-
bility) of pilot trial methods and findings to future 
definitive trial and other studies
- Example 1 (generalisability of findings)
“We accommodated variability in choice and dura-
tion of standard treatments to enhance generalizability 
of the results and had high rates of follow-up.”65
- Example 2 (generalisability to other pilot trials)
“Our data reflect the activities of only one pilot trial; 
however, we hope that the methods may serve as a tem-
plate for analyzing other pilot studies with different 
designs in other settings.”63
- Example 3 (generalisability concerns)
“Although safety issues must remain paramount in 
practice and clinical research, common overstringent 
exclusion criteria may increase perceived trial safety yet 
limit the generalizability of trial results and delay 
answers to important clinical questions. Reevaluation 
of the PROTECT Pilot exclusion criteria will . . . enhance 
the applicability of the larger PROTECT study . . . The 
PROTECT Pilot indicated the need for another pilot 
study (DIRECT) to determine the safety of dalteparin 
5000 IU SC OD among patients with severe renal insuf-
ficiency (creatinine clearance, b30 mL/min).”63
- Explanation
Generalisability (applicability) is the extent to which 
aspects of a study can be applied to other circum-
stances. Generalisability is not absolute and is a matter 
of judgment. In a definitive trial, readers are usually 
interested in the generalisability of findings to situa-
tions outside research settings—for example, routine 
clinical practice. However, in pilot trials this is not the 
case because the size of these studies does not allow 
this. Nevertheless, it might be important to consider 
generalisability at the pilot stage as this could be 
important for the generalisability of the future defini-
tive RCT (example 1), the findings and the methods 
might be applied in research settings other than the 
future definitive RCT (example 2), or there might be con-
cerns about the generalisability of results from a future 
definitive RCT conducted in an identical way to the pilot 
trial that might lead to changes in the design of the 
future definitive RCT or further piloting (example 3).
Table 3 | Example of baseline information for each group. From Seebacher et al68
Parameter
Group A
Group B
Group C
Music cued motor 
imagery
Metronome cued 
motor imagery
Control group
(n=10)
(n=10)
(n=10)
Females to males
10:0
7:3
5:5
Age (years)a
47.3 (38.4, 56.2)
41.8 (34.8, 48.8)
46.1 (39.8, 52.5)
EDSSb
3 (1.5, 4.5)
2.5 (1.5, 4.5)
2.5 (1.5, 4.0)
MFIS total scoreb
35 (3, 67)
32 (17, 50)
33.5 (0, 48)
Participants with fatigue 
(MFIS total score ≥38)
4/10
2/10
4/10
T25FW (s)a
6.1 (4.5, 7.6)
5.4 (4.5, 6.2)
5.2 (4.3, 6.1)
6MWT (m)a
453.1 (365.0, 541.1)
428.2 (352.8, 503.6)
484.7 (399.5, 569.8)
EDSS Expanded Disability Status Scale, MFIS Modified Fatigue Impact Scale, T25FW Timed 25-Foot Walk, s 
seconds, 6MWT 6-Minute Walk Test, m metres.
aMean (95% confidence interval).
bMedian (range).
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 24 (native) -----
doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239 | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | the bmj
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
24
- Item 22
- Standard CONSORT item: interpretation consistent 
with results, balancing benefits and harms, and consid-
ering other relevant evidence
- Extension for pilot trials: interpretation consistent 
with pilot trial objectives and findings, balancing 
potential benefits and harms, and considering other rel-
evant evidence
- Example 1 (consistency with objectives and findings)
“One of the goals of this pilot study was to investigate 
the feasibility of using platelet transfusion guidelines 
based on platelet mass. In five infants, MPV [mean 
platelet volume] was not available within 72 hours pre-
ceding the diagnosis of thrombocytopenia. A lack of 
immediately available MPV may limit the clinical utility 
and generalizability of this transfusion strategy at some 
institutions…In our study approximately half of the 
families at the Christiana Hospital site did not consent 
to the study. This information is important for planning 
future studies on platelet transfusion. Many families 
were unable to decide on enrollment at a time when 
their infant was thrombocytopenic and facing transfu-
sion. An alternative study design for platelet transfu-
sion study may involve enrolling a larger number of 
infants on admission, regardless of platelet count, with 
transfusion guidelines to apply only if they actually 
become thrombocytopenic. This approach may limit the 
stress on families of being approached about the need 
for transfusion and a transfusion related study 
­simultaneously.”82
- Example 2 (considering other relevant evidence)
“As far as we know, our participants were able to per-
form motor imagery. Our results seem to be in contrast 
to previous studies demonstrating a lower capacity for 
motor imagery in people with MS. However, these 
authors linked impaired motor imagery in this popula-
tion particularly to cognitive dysfunction and depres-
sion. Therefore, persons with cognitive impairment and 
depression were excluded from our study. Several 
­studies used patient-rated questionnaires, such as the 
­Kinaesthetic and Visual Imagery Questionnaire to 
assess the motor imagery ability in their participants. 
Our study could have used this patient-rated question-
naire, but our participants were called weekly to ask for 
any problems with kinaesthetic motor imagery, and 
they were supported accordingly. In addition, all motor 
imagery ability studies in people with MS were experi-
mental studies with no long-term training effects, in 
contrast to our 4 weeks duration study with 24 training 
sessions which might have enhanced the mental repre-
sentation.”68
- Example 3 (consistency with findings in relation to 
decision criteria)
“Moreover, the results of this trial support the feasi-
bility and acceptability of conducting a large clustered 
randomised trial involving dyads of family physicians 
and their patients in SDM regarding the optimal use of 
antibiotics for ARI. This conclusion is reached even if 
not all predetermined standards for our criteria were 
always fully met. Indeed, it has been established that 
not reaching the preestablished criteria does not neces-
sarily indicate unfeasibility of the trial but rather under-
lines changes to be made to the protocol . . . 24% of the 
eligible FMGs agreed to take part in the study, less than 
the 50% expected. We were probably too confident 
when targeting a 50% positive response rate from all 
identified FMGs.”34
- Explanation
Interpretation of findings helps increase understand-
ing of the importance of the results. In example 1, in 
addition to matching their interpretation to one of the 
goals of the study, the authors draw out the issue of 
redesign to reduce stress in families approached and so 
increase recruitment—and hopefully eventually a posi-
tive benefit for the children involved. This observation 
could be helpful to others planning similar studies. As 
for definitive trials, readers will want to know how the 
evidence presented in the report of a pilot trial relates to 
evidence from other sources (example 2). These sources 
might be other feasibility studies carried out by the 
authors or studies by different authors in the same or 
similar settings or with similar patients. If a priori deci-
sion criteria have been used (item 6c) then interpreta-
tion should be made with reference to these criteria 
(example 3).
- Item 22a
Extension for pilot trials: implications for progression 
from pilot to future definitive trial, including any pro-
posed amendments
- Example 1 (proposed amendments to improve 
­recruitment)
“The target of recruit to time was met but this did 
not translate to the expected number of eligible 
patients being recruited. Eligibility of the screened 
population was much lower than expected, indicating 
that the inclusion criteria may have been too stringent. 
The exclusion criteria of BMI ≤22 kg/m2 was based on 
published evidence that a BMI at the lower end of the 
normal range can increase mortality in the haemodial-
ysis population . . . However, body composition is 
thought to play a much greater role in the protective 
effects of a greater BMI, than the BMI itself . . . The use 
of BMI as a screening tool was a quick and easy mea-
sure but the level of ≤22 kg/m2 should be reassessed 
prior to a definitive trial. If the BMI was raised to ≤24 
kg/m2 then this would have increased potential 
recruitment by 10%.”84
- Example 2 (proposed amendments to improve coop-
eration)
“Six homes declined to actively participate before 
even beginning the intervention. To ensure cooperation 
by the entire team and avoid early withdrawal, a short 
presentation to the Professional Advisory Committee 
team could potentially boost recruitment/retention. 
Obtaining initial consent from both the medical director 
and director of care may also be beneficial. Further-
more, to overcome logistical challenges, particularly for 
homes in the far north, providing an opportunity to 
view modules on a Web site or participate remotely may 
improve participation.”85
- Example 3 (implications for progression to future 
definitive RCT)
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 25 (native) -----
the bmj | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
25
“Hospitals that were allocated to receive our multi-
component intervention comprising education, stan-
dardized paper-based physician orders, and group audit 
and feedback did not have a higher rate of hospitalized 
medical patients appropriately managed for thrombo-
prophylaxis within 24 hours of admission than did hos-
pitals that were not allocated to this strategy (63% vs. 
67%). This finding, coupled with the problems associ-
ated with ensuring preprinted orders were placed in all 
medical charts led us to conclude that this intervention 
should not be provided on a larger scale without major 
revision and testing. That is, it was not feasible.”83
- Explanation
This is a new item. To progress from a pilot trial to a 
future definitive RCT, it is important to understand how 
the implications of the findings in the pilot carry over to 
the future definitive RCT. To aid clarity, a simple state-
ment as to whether the future definitive RCT will be 
planned without any changes from the pilot trial, 
planned with changes from the pilot trial (examples 1 
and 2), or not planned because of major problems with 
feasibility (example 3), is sufficient. If it is proposed to 
plan the future definitive RCT with specific changes 
from the pilot trial, these should be stated.
Other information
- Item 23
- Standard CONSORT item: registration number and 
name of trial registry
- Extension for pilot trials: registration number for 
pilot trial and name of trial registry
- Example
“Trial registration number: Clinical Trials, protocol 
registration system: NCT01695070.”86
- Explanation
It is just as important for a pilot trial to be registered 
with a unique identifier as it is for a definitive trial. Regis-
tration ensures transparency and accountability and in 
the United Kingdom is now a requirement for all clinical 
trials before approval from UK ethics committees.87 88  It 
ensures all ongoing work is in the public domain, and 
subsequent publication (and therefore access to findings 
for the greater good) confirmed. The World Health Orga-
nization states that “the registration of all interventional 
trials is a scientific, ethical and moral responsibility.”89  
The International Committee of Medical Journal Editors 
requires all trials to be registered as a criterion for publi-
cation and lists suggested registries.90
- Item 24
- Standard CONSORT item: where the full trial proto-
col can be accessed, if available
- Extension for pilot trials: where the pilot trial proto-
col can be accessed, if available
- Example 1 (reference to published protocol)
“The Healthy Hospital Trial is a single-center, ran-
domized controlled, 2-arm, parallel-group, unblinded 
feasibility trial that was conducted on 2 cardiology 
wards at the Leeds Teaching Hospitals Trust. Its pri-
mary aim was to explore the feasibility of individual-
ized lifestyle referral assessment, estimate the rate of 
recruitment, and explore the feasibility of collecting the 
data and follow-up of participants to inform the sample 
size of a definitive trial. . . . The trial protocol has been 
published elsewhere.”40
- Example 2 (protocol as supporting information)
“The protocol for this trial and supporting TREND 
checklist are available as supporting information; see 
Checklist S1 and Protocol S1.”91
- Example 3 (protocol available from authors on 
request)
“Participants in the control arm (but not the other 
two arms) received a 16-page informational booklet rel-
evant to education, medical care, housing, employ-
ment, and community resources (protocol available 
from authors upon request).”92
- Explanation
Access to the full protocol for the pilot trial is import-
ant as it will prespecify all the main components of the 
trial. The SPIRIT (standard protocol items: recommen-
dations for interventional trials) statement defines an 
evidence based set of items that would be included.93 
Accessibility of the protocol allows subsequent output 
to be checked for completeness, and reduces the chance 
of selective reporting to suggest “better” results. The 
examples illustrate the different ways in which protocols 
may be made available, such as prior publication (exam-
ple 1), as an addendum to the report of the pilot trial 
(example 2), or on request from the authors (example 3). 
Options where the protocol is already in the ­public 
domain, such as prior publication, are to be preferred. 
Other methods that could be used to achieve this would 
include publication on a study website. Trial registries 
(see item 23) also include some core protocol items.
- Item 25
- Standard CONSORT item: sources of funding and 
other support (such as supply of drugs), role of funders
- Example
Funding: “This trial was funded through grants from 
Academic Health Science Centres Alternative Funding 
Plan Innovation Fund of Ontario and Octapharma Can-
ada. The trial funders had no role in the design of the 
study, the collection, analysis or interpretation of data, 
the writing of the report, or the decision to submit the 
article for publication.”94
- Explanation
Reporting the sources of all funding for a pilot trial 
(that is, the main research award and any other support, 
such as supply of equipment) allows readers to judge the 
potential influence of the funding body on the design, 
conduct, analysis, and reporting of the trial. If no specific 
funding was provided to support the pilot trial, this 
should also be stated. As reported in the main CONSORT 
statement, a systematic review has shown that research 
funded by the pharmaceutical industry is more likely to 
report findings in its favour, compared with reports of 
research funded by independent funding bodies.2 61 
Where funders have had no involvement in any aspect of 
trial conduct or reporting this should be explicitly stated.
- Item 26
- Extension for pilot trials: ethical approval/research 
review committee approval confirmed with reference 
number
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 26 (native) -----
doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239 | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | the bmj
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
26
- Example
“The Regional Ethical Review Board at the Karolinska 
Institute approved the study, no. 2007/1401-31/3.”95
- Explanation
This is a new item that has been added to the CON-
SORT checklist because of the need to emphasise that 
all research, including pilot trials, should only be con-
ducted within an ethical framework and with all ethi-
cal and other approvals in place before commencement. 
Of particular relevance to pilot trials is the need also to 
be aware of any restrictions imposed by the reviewing 
ethical committee, because these would have implica-
tions for the design and conduct of the future defini-
tive RCT.
Comment
Reports of RCTs need to include key information on the 
methods and results so that readers can accurately 
interpret the contents of the report. This is as true for 
pilot trials as it is for any other RCT. The CONSORT 2010 
statement provides the latest recommendations from 
the CONSORT Group on essential items to be included 
in the report of an RCT.2 61 However, pilot trials differ 
from other randomised trials in their aims and objec-
tives, focusing on assessing feasibility rather than effec-
tiveness or efficacy. Therefore, although much of the 
information to be reported in these trials is similar to 
that which needs to be reported in any other ran-
domised trial, there are some key differences in the type 
of information and in the appropriate interpretation of 
standard CONSORT reporting items.
In this article we introduce and explain these key dif-
ferences in an extension to the CONSORT checklist spe-
cific to pilot trials. In the section entitled “Scope of this 
paper” we discuss several other types of feasibility 
study, and “proof of concept” trials. Other researchers 
have begun to look at the transfer of ideas between 
these different types of study (eg, Wilson et al96). It is 
our expectation that some of the principles of reporting 
outlined in this extension can be adapted for other 
types of feasibility or proof of concept studies.
Use of the CONSORT statement for the reporting of 
two group parallel trials is associated with improved 
reporting quality.97  We believe that the routine use of 
this proposed extension to the CONSORT statement will 
result in similar improvements in reporting of pilot tri-
als. When reporting a pilot trial, authors should address 
each of the 26 items on the CONSORT extension check-
list using this document, referring to the main CON-
SORT guidelines as appropriate. Adherence to the 
CONSORT statement and extensions can also help 
researchers designing trials in the future and can guide 
peer reviewers and editors in their evaluation of manu-
scripts. Many journals recommend adherence to the 
CONSORT recommendations in their instructions to 
authors. We encourage them to direct authors to this 
and to other extensions of CONSORT for specific trial 
designs. A tool is currently being developed to support 
journals in doing this.98 The most up to date versions of 
all CONSORT recommendations are available at www.
consort-statement.org.
PAFS consensus group authors (listed alphabetically): Doug 
Altman (address 1), Frank Bretz (2), Marion Campbell (3), Erik Cobo 
(4), Peter Craig (5), Peter Davidson (6), Trish Groves (7), Freedom 
Gumedze (8), Jenny Hewison (9), Allison Hirst (10), Pat Hoddinott (11), 
Sarah E Lamb (12), Tom Lang (13), Elaine McColl (14), Alicia O’Cathain 
(15), Daniel R Shanahan (16), Chris Sutton (17), Peter Tugwell (18)
1 Centre for Statistics in Medicine, Nuffield Department of 
Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
2 Statistical Methodology and Consulting, Novartis Pharma AG, 
Basel, Switzerland, and Informatics and Intelligents Systems, 
Medical University of Vienna, Austria
3 Health Services Research Unit, University of Aberdeen, 
Foresterhill, Aberdeen, UK
4 Department of Statistics and Operations Research, UPC, 
Barcelona-Tech, Spain
5 MRC/CSO Social and Public Health Sciences Unit, University of 
Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
6 National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials, and 
Studies Coordinating Centre, University of Southampton, 
Southampton, UK
7 BMJ, BMA House, London, UK
8 Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Cape Town, 
Cape Town, South Africa
9 Leeds Institute of Health Sciences, University of Leeds, 
Leeds, UK
10 IDEAL Collaboration, Nuffield Department of Surgical Sciences, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
11 Nursing Midwifery and Allied Health Professionals Research 
Unit, Faculty of Health Sciences and Sport, University of Stirling, 
Scotland, UK
12 Oxford Clinical Trials Research Unit, Nuffield Department of 
Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
13 Tom Lang Communications and Training International, 
Kirkland, Washington, USA
14 Institute of Health and Society, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK
15 School of Health and Related Research, University of Sheffield, 
Sheffield, UK
16 BioMed Central, London, UK
17 College of Health and Wellbeing, University of Central 
Lancashire, Preston, UK
18 Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
During the development of this work we presented our thinking at 
workshops and open meetings and would like to thank all 
participants for their valuable input and views: Society for Clinical 
Trials May 2013 Boston; Clinical Trials Methodology Conference 
Edinburgh November 2013; Royal Statistical Society October 2013; UK 
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Research Design Service 
London and South East March 2014 London; UK NIHR statisticians 
April 2015 London; Society for Academic Primary Care Annual 
Scientific Meeting July 2015 Oxford; HSRPP Health Services Research 
and Pharmacy Practice Conference April 2016. We also thank Colin 
Begg for feedback on the proposed items to be included in the 
guidelines during the two day consensus meeting in Oxford.
Contributors: SME, MJC, CMB, SH, LT, and GAL conceived the study. 
SME led its development and execution. SME, CLC, MJC, CMB, SH, LT, 
and GAL contributed to various aspects of the empirical work, and the 
PAFS consensus group provided feedback on the proposed items to 
be included in the guidelines through a consensus meeting and by 
email. SME, CLC, MJC, CMB, SH, LT, and GAL drafted the manuscript 
and all authors reviewed it and approved the final version. SME is the 
guarantor.
Funding: We received grants from Queen Mary University of London 
(£7495), University of Sheffield (£8000), NIHR RDS London and South 
East (£2000), NIHR Statisticians Group (£2400), and Chief Scientist 
Office Scotland (£1000). CLC (nee Coleman) was funded by a National 
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) research methods fellowship. 
This article presents independent research partly funded by the NIHR. 
The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily 
those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health. Marion 
Campbell works at the Health Services Research Unit, University of 
Aberdeen, and the Unit receives core funding from the Scottish 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 27 (native) -----
the bmj | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
27
Government Health and Social Care Directorates; however, the 
opinions expressed are those of the authors alone. The funders had 
no role in this study.
Competing interests: All authors have completed the ICMJE 
disclosure form at http://www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf and 
declare support from the following organisations for the submitted 
work—Queen Mary University of London, University of Sheffield 
(ScHARR Research Committee Pump priming grant), NIHR Research 
Design Services London and South East, NIHR Statisticians Group, 
Chief Scientist Office Scotland. GAL is editor in chief of the new 
BioMed central journal Pilot and Feasibility Studies proposed by 
Daniel R Shanahan, which was created out of this work. Daniel R 
Shanahan is employed by BioMed Central, and Trish Groves is an 
editor of the BMJ. SME, CMB, MJC, and LT are on the editorial board of 
Pilot and Feasibility Studies and CLC is an associate editor. Frank Bretz 
works for Novartis. The authors declare no other competing interests. 
None of the listed people involved in either journal played any part in 
the peer review process or editorial decision making.
Ethical approval: The Delphi study was approved by the ScHARR 
research ethics committee at the University of Sheffield.
Data sharing: Owing to a requirement by the ethics committee that 
the authors specified when the data from the Delphi study will be 
destroyed, the authors are not able to give unlimited access to the 
Delphi study quantitative data. These anonymised data are available 
from SME on request to all interested researchers up until the end of 
2018. Qualitative data from the Delphi study are not available 
because these more sensitive data cannot be anonymised and there 
was no consent from participants to share potentially identifiable 
data.
Transparency: The lead author (SME) affirms that the manuscript is an 
honest, accurate, and transparent account of the study being reported; 
that no important aspects of the study have been omitted; and that 
any discrepancies from the study as planned (and, if relevant, 
registered) have been explained.
This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the terms 
of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 3.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for 
commercial use, provided the original work is properly cited. See: 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/.
1	
Schulz KF, Altman DG, Moher D. CONSORT Group. CONSORT 2010 
statement: updated guidelines for reporting parallel group 
randomized trials. Ann Intern Med 2010;152:726-32. 
doi:10.7326/0003-4819-152-11-201006010-00232. 
2	
Moher D, Hopewell S, Schulz KF, et al. CONSORT 2010 explanation 
and elaboration: updated guidelines for reporting parallel group 
randomised trials. BMJ 2010;340:c869. doi:10.1136/bmj.c869. 
3	
Turner L, Moher D, Shamseer L, et al. The influence of CONSORT on 
the quality of reporting of randomised controlled trials: an updated 
review. Trials 2011;12(Suppl 1):A47doi:10.1186/1745-6215-12-S1-A47.
4	
Piaggio G, Elbourne DR, Altman DG, Pocock SJ, Evans SJ. CONSORT 
Group. Reporting of noninferiority and equivalence randomized trials: 
an extension of the CONSORT statement. JAMA 2006;295:1152-60. 
doi:10.1001/jama.295.10.1152. 
5	
Campbell MK, Piaggio G, Elbourne DR, Altman DG. CONSORT Group. 
Consort 2010 statement: extension to cluster randomised trials. BMJ 
2012;345:e5661. doi:10.1136/bmj.e5661. 
6	
Zwarenstein M, Treweek S, Gagnier JJ, et al. CONSORT group Pragmatic 
Trials in Healthcare (Practihc) group. Improving the reporting of 
pragmatic trials: an extension of the CONSORT statement. BMJ 
2008;337:a2390. doi:10.1136/bmj.a2390. 
7	
Ioannidis JP, Evans SJ, Gøtzsche PC, et al. CONSORT Group. Better 
reporting of harms in randomized trials: an extension of the CONSORT 
statement. Ann Intern Med 2004;141:781-8. 
doi:10.7326/0003-4819-141-10-200411160-00009. 
8	
Boutron I, Moher D, Altman DG, Schulz KF, Ravaud P. CONSORT Group. 
Extending the CONSORT statement to randomized trials of 
nonpharmacologic treatment: explanation and elaboration. Ann 
Intern Med 2008;148:295-309. 
doi:10.7326/0003-4819-148-4-200802190-00008. 
9	
Gagnier JJ, Boon H, Rochon P, Moher D, Barnes J, Bombardier C. 
CONSORT Group. Reporting randomized, controlled trials of herbal 
interventions: an elaborated CONSORT statement. Ann Intern Med 
2006;144:364-7. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-144-5-200603070-00013. 
10	 Calvert M, Blazeby J, Altman DG, Revicki DA, Moher D, Brundage MD. 
CONSORT PRO Group. Reporting of patient-reported outcomes in 
randomized trials: the CONSORT PRO extension. JAMA 2013;309:814-
22. doi:10.1001/jama.2013.879. 
11	
Eldridge SM, Lancaster GA, Campbell MJ, et al. Defining feasibility and 
pilot studies in preparation for randomised controlled trials: 
development of a conceptual framework. PLoS One 
2016;11:e0150205. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0150205. 
12	
Shanyinde M, Pickering RM, Weatherall M. Questions asked and 
answered in pilot and feasibility randomized controlled trials. BMC 
Med Res Methodol 2011;11:117. doi:10.1186/1471-2288-11-117. 
13	
Lancaster GA, Dodd S, Williamson PR. Design and analysis of pilot 
studies: recommendations for good practice. J Eval Clin Pract 
2004;10:307-12. doi:10.1111/j.2002.384.doc.x. 
14	
Thabane L, Ma J, Chu R, et al. A tutorial on pilot studies: the what, why and 
how. BMC Med Res Methodol 2010;10:1. doi:10.1186/1471-2288-10-1. 
15	
Arain M, Campbell MJ, Cooper CL, Lancaster GA. What is a pilot or 
feasibility study? A review of current practice and editorial policy. BMC 
Med Res Methodol 2010;10:67. doi:10.1186/1471-2288-10-67. 
16	
Cartwright ME, Cohen S, Fleishaker JC, et al. Proof of concept: a 
PhRMA position paper with recommendations for best practice. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther 2010;87:278-85. doi:10.1038/clpt.2009.286. 
17	
Fisch R, Jones I, Jones J, Kerman J, Rosenkranz GK, Schmidli H. 
Bayesian design of proof-of-concept trials. Ther Innov Regul Sci 
2015;49:155-62. doi:10.1177/2168479014533970.
18	
Stallard N. Optimal sample sizes for phase II clinical trials and pilot 
studies. Stat Med 2012;31:1031-42. doi:10.1002/sim.4357. 
19	
Burke DL, Billingham LJ, Girling AJ, Riley RD. Meta-analysis of 
randomized phase II trials to inform subsequent phase III decisions. 
Trials 2014;15:346. doi:10.1186/1745-6215-15-346. 
20	 Talmor D, Sarge T, Malhotra A, et al. Mechanical ventilation guided by 
esophageal pressure in acute lung injury. N Engl J Med 
2008;359:2095-104. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa0708638. 
21	
Ashe MC, Winters M, Hoppmann CA, et al. “Not just another walking 
program”: Everyday Activity Supports You (EASY) model-a randomized 
pilot study for a parallel randomized controlled trial. Pilot Feasibility 
Stud 2015;1:1-12. doi:10.1186/2055-5784-1-4. 
22	 Hoddinott P, Craig L, Maclennan G, Boyers D, Vale L. NHS Grampian 
and the University of Aberdeen FEST project team. Process evaluation 
for the FEeding Support Team (FEST) randomised controlled feasibility 
trial of proactive and reactive telephone support for breastfeeding 
women living in disadvantaged areas. BMJ Open 2012;2:e001039. 
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2012-001039. 
23	 Schoultz M, Macaden L, Hubbard G. Participants’ perspectives on 
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for inflammatory bowel 
disease: a qualitative study nested within a pilot randomised 
controlled trial. Pilot Feasibility Stud 2016;2:3. doi:10.1186/
s40814-015-0041-z.
24	 O’Brien BC, Harris IB, Beckman TJ, Reed DA, Cook DA. Standards for 
reporting qualitative research: a synthesis of recommendations. Acad 
Med 2014;89:1245-51. doi:10.1097/ACM.0000000000000388. 
25	
Tong A, Sainsbury P, Craig J. Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative 
research (COREQ): a 32-item checklist for interviews and focus groups. 
Int J Qual Health Care 2007;19:349-57. doi:10.1093/intqhc/mzm042. 
26	 O’Cathain A, Hoddinott P, Lewin S, et al. Maximising the impact of 
qualitative research in feasibility studies for randomised controlled 
trials: guidance for researchers. Pilot Feasibility Stud 2015;1:32. 
doi:10.1186/s40814-015-0026-y.
27	
Stansfeld SA, Kerry S, Chandola T, et al. Pilot study of a cluster 
randomised trial of a guided e-learning health promotion intervention 
for managers based on management standards for the improvement of 
employee well-being and reduction of sickness absence: GEM Study. 
BMJ Open 2015;5:e007981. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-007981. 
28	 O’Cathain A, Thomas KJ, Drabble SJ, Rudolph A, Hewison J. What can 
qualitative research do for randomised controlled trials? A systematic 
mapping review. BMJ Open 2013;3:e002889. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2013-002889. 
29	 Hoddinott P, Craig L, Maclennan G, Boyers D, Vale L. NHS Grampian 
and the University of Aberdeen FEST Project Team. The FEeding 
Support Team (FEST) randomised, controlled feasibility trial of 
proactive and reactive telephone support for breastfeeding women 
living in disadvantaged areas. BMJ Open 2012;2:e000652. 
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2011-000652. 
30	 Thabane L, Hopewell S, Lancaster GA, et al. Methods and processes 
for development of a CONSORT extension for reporting pilot 
randomized controlled trials. Pilot Feasibility Stud 2016;2:25. 
doi:10.1186/s40814-016-0065-z
31	
Gilbody S, Peckham E, Man M-S, et al. Bespoke smoking cessation for 
people with severe mental ill health (SCIMITAR): a pilot randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet Psychiatry 2015;2:395-402. doi:10.1016/
S2215-0366(15)00091-7. 
32	 Stow R, Ives N, Smith C, Rick C, Rushton A. A cluster randomised 
feasibility trial evaluating nutritional interventions in the treatment of 
malnutrition in care home adult residents. Trials 2015;16:433. 
doi:10.1186/s13063-015-0952-2. 
33	 Dickersin K, Manheimer E, Wieland S, Robinson KA, Lefebvre C, 
McDonald S. Development of the Cochrane Collaboration’s CENTRAL 
Register of controlled clinical trials. Eval Health Prof 2002;25:38-64. 
doi:10.1177/0163278702025001004. 
34	 Leblanc A, Légaré F, Labrecque M, et al. Feasibility of a randomised 
trial of a continuing medical education program in shared 
decision-making on the use of antibiotics for acute respiratory 
infections in primary care: the DECISION+ pilot trial. Implement Sci 
2011;6:5. doi:10.1186/1748-5908-6-5. 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 28 (native) -----
doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5239 | BMJ 2016;355:i5239 | the bmj
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
28
35	 Hopewell S, Clarke M, Moher D, et al. CONSORT Group. CONSORT for 
reporting randomised trials in journal and conference abstracts. 
Lancet 2008;371:281-3. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61835-2. 
36	 Hopewell S, Clarke M, Moher D, et al. CONSORT Group. CONSORT for 
reporting randomized controlled trials in journal and conference 
abstracts: explanation and elaboration. PLoS Med 2008;5:e20. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0050020. 
37	
Heazell AE, Bernatavicius G, Roberts SA, et al. A randomised 
controlled trial comparing standard or intensive management of 
reduced fetal movements after 36 weeks gestation–a feasibility study. 
BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2013;13:95. 
doi:10.1186/1471-2393-13-95. 
38	 World Medical Association declaration of Helsinki. Recommendations 
guiding physicians in biomedical research involving human subjects. 
JAMA 1997;277:925-6. doi:10.1001/jama.1997.03540350075038. 
39	 Hill KM, Walwyn RE, Camidge DC, et al. Lifestyle referral assessment in 
an acute cardiology setting: study protocol for a randomized 
controlled feasibility trial. Trials 2013;14:212. 
doi:10.1186/1745-6215-14-212. 
40	 Hill K, Walwyn R, Camidge D, et al. A randomized feasibility trial of a 
new lifestyle referral assessment versus usual assessment in an acute 
cardiology setting. J Cardiovasc Nurs 2015. doi:10.1097/
JCN.0000000000000294. 
41	
Eldridge SM, Costelloe CE, Kahan BC, Lancaster GA, Kerry SM. How 
big should the pilot study for my cluster randomised trial be? Stat 
Methods Med Res 2016;25:1039-56. 
doi:10.1177/0962280215588242. 
42	 Clark WF, Sontrop JM, Huang S-H, et al. The chronic kidney disease 
Water Intake Trial (WIT): results from the pilot randomised controlled 
trial. BMJ Open 2013;3:e003666. ­doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2013-003666. 
43	 Buse GL, Bhandari M, Sancheti P, et al. Hip Fracture Accelerated 
Surgical Treatment and Care Track (HIP ATTACK) Investigators. 
Accelerated care versus standard care among patients with hip 
fracture: the HIP ATTACK pilot trial. CMAJ 2014;186:E52-60. 
doi:10.1503/cmaj.130901. 
44	 Busse M, Quinn L, Debono K, et al. Members of the COMMET-HD 
Management Group. A randomized feasibility study of a 12-week 
community-based exercise program for people with Huntington’s 
disease. J Neurol Phys Ther 2013;37:149-58. doi:10.1097/
NPT.0000000000000016. 
45	 Goldstein TR, Fersch-Podrat R, Axelson DA, et al. Early intervention 
for adolescents at high risk for the development of bipolar 
disorder: pilot study of Interpersonal and Social Rhythm Therapy 
(IPSRT). Psychotherapy (Chic) 2014;51:180-9. doi:10.1037/
a0034396. 
46	 Schoultz M, Atherton I, Watson A. Mindfulness-based cognitive 
therapy for inflammatory bowel disease patients: findings from an 
exploratory pilot randomised controlled trial. Trials 2015;16:379. 
doi:10.1186/s13063-015-0909-5. 
47	
Hughes CW, Barnes S, Barnes C, Defina LF, Nakonezny P, Emslie GJ. 
Depressed Adolescents Treated with Exercise (DATE): A pilot 
randomized controlled trial to test feasibility and establish preliminary 
effect sizes. Ment Health Phys Act 2013;6:119-31. doi:10.1016/j.
mhpa.2013.06.006. 
48	 Hoffmann TC, Glasziou PP, Boutron I, et al. Better reporting of 
interventions: template for intervention description and replication 
(TIDieR) checklist and guide. BMJ 2014;348:g1687. doi:10.1136/bmj.
g1687. 
49	 Boogerd EA, Noordam C, Kremer JA, Prins JB, Verhaak CM. Teaming 
up: feasibility of an online treatment environment for adolescents with 
type 1 diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes 2014;15:394-402. doi:10.1111/
pedi.12103. 
50	 Begh RA, Aveyard P, Upton P, et al. Promoting smoking cessation in 
Pakistani and Bangladeshi men in the UK: pilot cluster randomised 
controlled trial of trained community outreach workers. Trials 
2011;12:197. doi:10.1186/1745-6215-12-197. 
51	
National Institute for Health Research. Glossary | Pilot studies 2015 
[cited 2015 30 June]. www.nets.nihr.ac.uk/glossary?result_1655_​
result_page=P.
52	 Bugge C, Williams B, Hagen S, et al. A process for Decision-making 
after Pilot and feasibility Trials (ADePT): development following a 
feasibility study of a complex intervention for pelvic organ prolapse. 
Trials 2013;14:353. doi:10.1186/1745-6215-14-353. 
53	 Taylor SJ, Sohanpal R, Bremner SA, et al. Self-management support for 
moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a pilot 
randomised controlled trial. Br J Gen Pract 2012;62:e687-95. 
doi:10.3399/bjgp12X656829. 
54	 Hamilton FL, Hornby J, Sheringham J, et al. DIgital Alcohol 
Management ON Demand (DIAMOND) feasibility randomised 
controlled trial of a web-based intervention to reduce alcohol 
consumption in people with hazardous and harmful use versus a 
face-to-face intervention: protocol. Pilot Feasibility Stud 
2015;1:28doi:10.1186/s40814-015-0023-1.
55	
Julious SA. Sample size of 12 per group rule of thumb for a pilot study. 
Pharm Stat 2005;4:287-91. doi:10.1002/pst.185.
56	 Teare MD, Dimairo M, Shephard N, Hayman A, Whitehead A, Walters 
SJ. Sample size requirements to estimate key design parameters from 
external pilot randomised controlled trials: a simulation study. Trials 
2014;15:264. doi:10.1186/1745-6215-15-264. 
57	
Browne RH. On the use of a pilot sample for sample size determination. 
Stat Med 1995;14:1933-40. doi:10.1002/sim.4780141709. 
58	 Whitehead AL, Julious SA, Cooper CL, Campbell MJ. Estimating the 
sample size for a pilot randomised trial to minimise the overall trial 
sample size for the external pilot and main trial for a continuous 
outcome variable. Stat Methods Med Res 2016;25:1057-73. 
doi:10.1177/0962280215588241. 
59	 Cocks K, Torgerson DJ. Sample size calculations for pilot randomized 
trials: a confidence interval approach. J Clin Epidemiol 2013;66:197-
201. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2012.09.002. 
60	 Warren FC, Stych K, Thorogood M, et al. Evaluation of different 
recruitment and randomisation methods in a trial of general 
practitioner-led interventions to increase physical activity: a 
randomised controlled feasibility study with factorial design. Trials 
2014;15:134. doi:10.1186/1745-6215-15-134. 
61	
Moher D, Hopewell S, Schulz KF, et al. Consolidated Standards of 
Reporting Trials Group. CONSORT 2010 Explanation and Elaboration: 
Updated guidelines for reporting parallel group randomised trials. 
J Clin Epidemiol 2010;63:e1-37. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2010.03.004. 
62	 Crawley E, Mills N, Beasant L, et al. The feasibility and acceptability of 
conducting a trial of specialist medical care and the Lightning Process 
in children with chronic fatigue syndrome: feasibility randomized 
controlled trial (SMILE study). Trials 2013;14:415. 
doi:10.1186/1745-6215-14-415. 
63	 Cook DJ, Rocker G, Meade M, et al. PROTECT Investigators Canadian 
Critical Care Trials Group. Prophylaxis of Thromboembolism in Critical 
Care (PROTECT) Trial: a pilot study. J Crit Care 2005;20:364-72. 
doi:10.1016/j.jcrc.2005.09.010. 
64	 Schunter M, Chu H, Hayes TL, et al. Randomized pilot trial of a 
synbiotic dietary supplement in chronic HIV-1 infection. BMC 
Complement Altern Med 2012;12:84. doi:10.1186/1472-6882-12-84. 
65	 Arnold DM, Heddle NM, Carruthers J, et al. A pilot randomized trial of 
adjuvant rituximab or placebo for nonsplenectomized patients with 
immune thrombocytopenia. Blood 2012;119:1356-62. doi:10.1182/
blood-2011-08-374777. 
66	 Sackett DL. Commentary: Measuring the success of blinding in RCTs: 
don’t, must, can’t or needn’t? Int J Epidemiol 2007;36:664-5. 
doi:10.1093/ije/dym088. 
67	
Forero M, Heikkila A, Paul JE, Cheng J, Thabane L. Lumbar transversus 
abdominis plane block: the role of local anesthetic volume and 
concentration—a pilot, prospective, randomized, controlled trial. Pilot 
Feasibility Stud 2015;1:10. doi:10.1186/s40814-015-0002-6.
68	 Seebacher B, Kuisma R, Glynn A, Berger T. Rhythmic cued motor 
imagery and walking in people with multiple sclerosis: a randomised 
controlled feasibility study. Pilot Feasibility Stud 2015;1:25. 
doi:10.1186/s40814-015-0021-3.
69	 Bruhn H, Bond CM, Elliott AM, et al. Pharmacist-led management of 
chronic pain in primary care: results from a randomised controlled 
exploratory trial. BMJ Open 2013;3:e002361. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2012-002361. 
70	
Hopewell S, Hirst A, Collins GS, Mallett S, Yu LM, Altman DG. Reporting 
of participant flow diagrams in published reports of randomized trials. 
Trials 2011;12:253. doi:10.1186/1745-6215-12-253. 
71	
Van Spall HG, Toren A, Kiss A, Fowler RA. Eligibility criteria of 
randomized controlled trials published in high-impact general 
medical journals: a systematic sampling review. JAMA 2007;297:1233-
40. doi:10.1001/jama.297.11.1233. 
72	
Burton C, Weller D, Marsden W, Worth A, Sharpe M. A primary care 
Symptoms Clinic for patients with medically unexplained symptoms: 
pilot randomised trial. BMJ Open 2012;2:e000513. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2011-000513. 
73	
Egger M, Jüni P, Bartlett C. CONSORT Group (Consolidated Standards 
of Reporting of Trials). Value of flow diagrams in reports of 
randomized controlled trials. JAMA 2001;285:1996-9. doi:10.1001/
jama.285.15.1996. 
74	
Vist GE, Hagen KB, Devereaux PJ, Bryant D, Kristoffersen DT, Oxman 
AD. Systematic review to determine whether participation in a trial 
influences outcome. BMJ 2005;330:1175. doi:10.1136/
bmj.330.7501.1175. 
75	
Boysen G, Krarup L-H, Zeng X, et al. ExStroke Pilot Trial Group. ExStroke 
Pilot Trial of the effect of repeated instructions to improve physical 
activity after ischaemic stroke: a multinational randomised controlled 
clinical trial. BMJ 2009;339:b2810. doi:10.1136/bmj.b2810. 
76	
Frech SA, Dupont HL, Bourgeois AL, et al. Use of a patch containing 
heat-labile toxin from Escherichia coli against travellers’ diarrhoea: a 
phase II, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled field trial. 
Lancet 2008;371:2019-25. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60839-9. 
77	
Olsen K, Howel D, Barber R, et al. Lessons from a pilot and feasibility 
randomised trial in depression (Blood pressure Rapid Intensive 
Lowering And Normal Treatment for Mood and cognition in persistent 
depression (BRILiANT mood study)). Pilot Feasibility Stud 2015;1:44. 
doi:10.1186/s40814-015-0042-y.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 29 (native) -----
RESEARCH
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
78	
Ormiston JA, Serruys PW, Regar E, et al. A bioabsorbable everolimus-
eluting coronary stent system for patients with single de-novo 
coronary artery lesions (ABSORB): a prospective open-label trial. 
Lancet 2008;371:899-907. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60415-8. 
79	
Thomas LH, Watkins CL, Sutton CJ, et al. ICONS Project Team and the 
ICONS Patient, Public and Carer Involvement Groups. Identifying 
continence options after stroke (ICONS): a cluster randomised 
controlled feasibility trial. Trials 2014;15:509. 
doi:10.1186/1745-6215-15-509. 
80	 Kapur N, Gunnell D, Hawton K, et al. Messages from Manchester: pilot 
randomised controlled trial following self-harm. Br J Psychiatry 
2013;203:73-4. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.113.126425. 
81	
Farrin A, Russell I, Torgerson D, Underwood M. UK BEAM Trial Team. 
Differential recruitment in a cluster randomized trial in primary care: 
the experience of the UK back pain, exercise, active management and 
manipulation (UK BEAM) feasibility study. Clin Trials 2005;2:119-24. 
doi:10.1191/1740774505cn073oa. 
82	 Zisk JL, Mackley A, Clearly G, Chang E, Christensen RD, Paul DA. 
Transfusing neonates based on platelet count vs. platelet mass: a 
randomized feasibility-pilot study. Platelets 2014;25:513-6. 
doi:10.3109/09537104.2013.843072. 
83	 Pai M, Lloyd NS, Cheng J, et al. Strategies to enhance venous 
thromboprophylaxis in hospitalized medical patients (SENTRY): a 
pilot cluster randomized trial. Implement Sci 2013;8:1. 
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-8-1. 
84	 Jackson L, Cohen J, Sully B, Julious S. NOURISH, Nutritional OUtcomes 
from a Randomised Investigation of Intradialytic oral nutritional 
Supplements in patients receiving Haemodialysis: a pilot randomised 
controlled trial. Pilot Feasibility Stud 2015;1:11. doi:10.1186/
s40814-015-0007-1.
85	 Kennedy CC, Thabane L, Ioannidis G, Adachi JD, Papaioannou A. 
ViDOS Investigators. Implementing a knowledge translation 
intervention in long-term care: feasibility results from the Vitamin D 
and Osteoporosis Study (ViDOS). J Am Med Dir Assoc 2014;15:943-5. 
doi:10.1016/j.jamda.2014.05.007. 
86	 Alers NO, Jenkin G, Miller SL, Wallace EM. Antenatal melatonin as an 
antioxidant in human pregnancies complicated by fetal growth 
restriction--a phase I pilot clinical trial: study protocol. BMJ Open 
2013;3:e004141. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2013-004141. 
87	
Dyer C. UK clinical trials must be registered to win ethics committee 
approval. BMJ 2013;347:f5614. doi:10.1136/bmj.f5614. 
88	 Kmietowicz Z. NHS research authority links approval of trials to 
registration and publication of results. BMJ 2013;346:f3119. 
doi:10.1136/bmj.f3119. 
89	 World Health Organization. WHO | Welcome to the WHO ICTRP 2015 
[cited 2015 30 June]. www.who.int/ictrp/en/.
90	 International Committee of Medical Journal Editors. ICMJE | Clinical 
Trials Registration 2015 [cited 2015 30 June]. www.icmje.org/
about-icmje/faqs/clinical-trials-registration/.
91	
Hecksteden A, Grütters T, Meyer T. Associations between acute and 
chronic effects of exercise on indicators of metabolic health: a pilot 
training trial. PLoS One 2013;8:e81181. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0081181. 
92	 Yu X, Stewart SM, Chui JP, Ho JL, Li AC, Lam TH. A pilot randomized 
controlled trial to decrease adaptation difficulties in chinese new 
immigrants to Hong Kong. Behav Ther 2014;45:137-52. doi:10.1016/j.
beth.2013.10.003. 
93	 Items SP. Recommendation for Interventional Trials. SPIRIT | Welcome 
to the SPIRIT Statement website 2013 [cited 2015 30 June]. www.
spirit-statement.org/.
94	  Hip Fracture Accelerated Surgical Treatment and Care Track (HIP 
ATTACK) Investigators. Accelerated care versus standard care among 
patients with hip fracture: the HIP ATTACK pilot trial. CMAJ 
2014;186:E52-60. doi:10.1503/cmaj.130901. 
95	 Porserud A, Sherif A, Tollbäck A. The effects of a physical exercise 
programme after radical cystectomy for urinary bladder cancer. A pilot 
randomized controlled trial. Clin Rehabil 2014;28:451-9. 
doi:10.1177/0269215513506230. 
96	 Wilson DT, Walwyn RE, Brown J, Farrin AJ, Brown SR. Statistical 
challenges in assessing potential efficacy of complex interventions in 
pilot or feasibility studies. Stat Methods Med Res 2016;25:997-1009. 
doi:10.1177/0962280215589507. 
97	
Turner L, Shamseer L, Altman DG, Schulz KF, Moher D. Does use of the 
CONSORT Statement impact the completeness of reporting of 
randomised controlled trials published in medical journals? A 
Cochrane review. Syst Rev 2012;1:60. doi:10.1186/2046-4053-1-60. 
98	 Penelope 2016 [18 March 2016]. www.peneloperesearch.com.
© BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2016
Supplementary file: CONSORT checklist of 
information to include when reporting a pilot trial
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
24 October 2016. 
10.1136/bmj.i5239 on 
BMJ: first published as