

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Language Variation and Change, 1 (1989), 245-267. Printed in the U.S.A.
© 1990 Cambridge University Press 0954-3945/90 $5.00 + .00
The whole woman:
Sex and gender differences in variation
PENELOPE ECKERT
University of Illinois, Chicago
and
Institute for Research on Learning, Palo Alto
ABSTRACT
Speaker's sex has emerged as one of the most important social factors in the
quantitative study of phonological variation. However, sex does not have a uni-
form effect on variables or even on variables that represent sound change in
progress. This is because sex is not directly related to linguistic behavior but
reflects complex social practice. The correlations of sex with linguistic variables
are only a reflection of the effects on linguistic behavior of gender —the com-
plex social construction of sex—and it is in this construction that one must seek
explanations for such correlations. Sociolinguists generally treat sex in terms
of oppositional categories (male/female), and the effects of sex on variation
are generally sought in linguistic differences between male and female speakers.
However, because gender differences involve differences in orientation to other
social categories, the effects of gender on linguistic behavior can show up in
differences within sex groupings. Data on sound changes in progress (the North-
ern Cities Chain Shift) among Detroit area adolescents show that gender has
a variety of effects on variables and that the significance of gender in varia-
tion cannot be reduced to notions of male or female speech as "more or less
conservative."
The tradition of large-scale survey methodology in the study of variation has
left a gap between the linguistic data and the social practice that yields these
data. Since sociolinguistic surveys bring away little information about the
communities that produce their linguistic data, correlations of linguistic var-
iants with survey categories have been interpreted on the basis of general
knowledge of the social dynamics associated with those categories. The suc-
cess of this approach has depended on the quality of this general knowledge.
The examination of variation and socioeconomic class has benefited from
sociolinguists' attention to a vast literature on class and to critical analyses
of the indices by which class membership is commonly determined. The study
of gender and variation, on the other hand, has suffered from the fact that
This work was supported by the Spencer Foundation and the National Science Foundation (BNS
8023291). 1 owe a great debt of thanks to David Sankoff for his very generous and important
help with this article. The value of his suggestions for strengthening both the conception and
the presentation of these arguments is immeasurable.
245
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 2 (native) -----
246 
PENELOPE ECKERT
the amount of scientific attention given to gender over the years cannot be-
gin to be compared with that given to class. Many current beliefs about the
role of gender in variation, therefore, are a result of substituting popular (and
unpopular) belief for social theory in the interpretation of patterns of sex
correlations with variation.
Sociolinguists are acutely aware of the complex relation between the cat-
egories used in the socioeconomic classification of speakers and the social
practice that underlies these categories. Thus, we do not focus on the objec-
tivized indices used to measure class (such as salary, occupation, and edu-
cation) in analyzing correlations between linguistic and class differences, even
when class identification is based on these indices. Rather, we focus more and
more on the relation of language use to the everyday practice that constitutes
speakers' class-based social participation and identity in the community.
Thus, explanations take into consideration interacting dynamics such as so-
cial group and network membership (Labov, 1972b; Milroy, 1980), symbolic
capital and the linguistic marketplace (Bourdieu & Boltanski, 1975; Sankoff
& Laberge, 1978; Thibault, 1983), and local identity (Labov, 1972c, 1980).
The same can be said to some extent of work on ethnicity and variation,
where researchers have interpreted data on ethnic differences in variation in
terms of complex interactions between ethnicity, group history, and social
identity (Horvath & Sankoff, 1987; Labov, 1972b; Laferriere, 1979). The
study of the sociolinguistic construction of the biological categories of age
and sex, on the other hand, has so far received less sophisticated attention
(Eckert, Edwards, & Robins, 1985). The age continuum is commonly divided
into equal chunks with no particular attention to the relation between these
chunks and the life stages that make age socially significant. Rather, when
the full age span is considered in community studies, the age continuum is
generally interpreted as representing continuous apparent time. At some
point, the individual's progress through normative life stages (e.g., school,
work, marriage, childrearing, retirement) might be considered rather than,
or in addition to, chronological age. Some work has explored the notion of
life stage. The very apparent lead of preadolescents and adolescents in sound
change has led some researchers to separate those groups in community stud-
ies (Macaulay, 1977; Wolfram, 1969), and some attention has been focused
on the significance of these life stages in variation (Eckert, 1988; Labov,
1972b). There has also been some speculation about changes of speakers' re-
lation to the linguistic marketplace in aging (Eckert, 1984; Labov, 1972a;
Thibault, 1983). Most interestingly, there have been examinations of the re-
lation of age groups to historical periods of social change in the community
(Clermont & Cedergren, 1978; Laferriere, 1979). But taken together, these
studies are bare beginnings and do not constitute a reasoned and coherent
approach to the sociolinguistic significance of biological age.
Like age, sex is a biological category that serves as a fundamental basis
for the differentiation of roles, norms, and expectations in all societies. It
is. these roles, norms, and expectations that constitute gender, the social con-
struction of sex. Although differences in patterns of variation between men
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 3 (native) -----
SEX AND GENDER DIFFERENCES IN VARIATION 
247
and women are a function of gender and only indirectly a function of sex
(and, indeed, such gender-based variation occurs within, as well as between,
sex groups), we have been examining the interaction between gender and vari-
ation by correlating variables with sex rather than gender differences. This
has been done because although an individual's gender-related place in so-
ciety is a multidimensional complex that can only be characterized through
careful analysis, his or her sex is generally a readily observable binary vari-
able, and inasmuch as sex can be said to be a rough statistical indication of
gender, it has been reasonable to substitute the biological category for the
social in sampling. However, because information about the individual's sex
is easily accessible, data can be gathered without any inquiry into the con-
struction of gender in that community. As a result, since researchers have not
had to struggle to find the categories in question, they tend to fall back on
unanalyzed notions about gender to interpret whatever sex correlations
emerge in the data and not to consider gender where there are no sex
correlations.
Gender differences are exceedingly complex, particularly in a society and
era where women have been moving self-consciously into the marketplace
and calling traditional gender roles into question. Gender roles and ideolo-
gies create different ways for men and women to experience life, culture, and
society. Taking this as a basic approach to the data on sex differences in var-
iation, there are a few assumptions one might start with. First, and perhaps
most important, there is no apparent reason to believe that there is a sim-
ple, constant relation between gender and variation. Despite increasingly
complex data on sex differences in variation, there remains a tendency to seek
a single social construction of sex that will explain all of its correlations with
variation. This is reflected in the use of a single coefficient for sex effects in
variable rule or regression analyses of variation. This perspective limits the
kind of results that can be obtained, since it is restricted to confirming the
implicit hypothesis of a single type of sex effect or, worse, to indicating that
there is no effect at all. Second, we must carefully separate our interpreta-
tion of sex differences in variation from artifacts of survey categories. I
would argue that sociolinguists tend to think of age and class as continua and
gender as an opposition, primarily because of the ways in which they are de-
termined in survey research. But just as the class effect on variation may be
thought of in terms of the binary bourgeois-working class opposition (Rick-
ford, 1986), and just as there is reason to believe that the age continuum is
interrupted by discontinuities in the effects of different life stages on peo-
ple's relation to society and, hence, on language, variation based on gender
may not always be adequately accounted for in terms of a binary opposition.
INTERPRETATIONS OF SEX DIFFERENCES IN VARIATION
There is a general misconception among writers who do not deal directly with
variation that women's speech is more conservative than men's. Indeed,
women do tend to be more conservative than men in their use of those ver-
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 4 (native) -----
248 
PENELOPE ECKERT
nacular forms that represent stable social variables. On the other hand, the
very earliest evidence on variation (Gauchat, 1905) showed women leading
in sound change, a finding that has been repeated in Labov's work in New
York City (1966) and Philadelphia (1984), in Cedergren's work in Panama
(1973), and in my own work in the Detroit suburbs. If these trends were
universal, the coefficient of the sex variable (1 = female, 0 = male) in a vari-
able rule or regression analysis of variation would always have positive sign
for changes in progress and negative sign for stable variables.
But the picture is not quite as simple as this generalization suggests. First
of all, men do lead in some sound changes. Trudgill found men leading in
most changes in Norwich (1972a), and Labov (1972c) found men leading in
some changes in Martha's Vineyard (1972) and Philadelphia (1984). Thus,
there is every reason to assume that sex differences may vary from one vari-
able to another. As Labov argued (1984), one might expect different sex
correlations with old or new changes, for instance. This could still all be rep-
resented by a single sex effect in a statistical analysis, but the sign of the ef-
fect would depend on the particular variable. Second, sex does not have the
same effect on language use everywhere in the population. Women's over-
all lead in the population could hide a variety of complex patterns among
other social parameters, the simplest of which would be a sexual crossover
along the socioeconomic hierarchy. Labov found just such a pattern in Phil-
adelphia, for several vowels, with women leading at the lower end of the so-
cioeconomic hierarchy and lagging at the upper end. Statistical analyses in
these contexts require more than a single sex effect; either an interaction
should be included or separate analyses done for women and men. Not only
is it a mistake to claim that women are more or less innovative than men,
but at this point in our research it is a mistake to claim any kind of constant
constraint associated with gender. It is, above all, this mistake that charac-
terizes much current work on sex differences in variation. It is commonplace
for sociolinguists to allow the gender categories that they use to classify
speakers (i.e., male vs. female) to guide their thinking about the effects of
gender in variation. In particular, men and women are perceived as categor-
ically different, indeed opposite and opposed, in their use of linguistic
variables.
HIERARCHY
Labov's (1966) original findings in New York City clearly lined up socioeco-
nomic class, style, sound change, prestige, and evaluation on a single axis.
The hierarchical socioeconomic continuum is also a continuum of linguistic
change, wherein extent of historical change correlates inversely with socioeco-
nomic status. At any place along this continuum, speech style reproduces this
continuum, with each speaker's stylistic continuum from more casual to more
careful speech reflecting a segment of the socioeconomic continuum. A
causal connection between the two is based on the assumption that speakers
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 5 (native) -----
SEX AND GENDER DIFFERENCES IN VARIATION 
249
look upward in the socioeconomic hierarchy for standards of correctness and
feel constrained in their formal interactions to "accommodate" upward.
Thus, there is a folk connection between old and new, formal and informal,
better and worse, correct and incorrect. The notion of conservatism in lan-
guage, then, takes on a simultaneously historical and social meaning. Finally,
responses to matched guise tests confirm that members of the community as-
sociate the use of linguistic variables with individuals' worth in the market-
place. With this overwhelming stratificational emphasis in the study of
variation, sex differences in behavior placed along this continuum are seen
in relation to it; hence, when men and women differ in their use of sound
change, this tends to be explained in terms of their different orientation to
class.
Labov and Trudgill have both emphasized a greater orientation to com-
munity prestige norms as the main driving force in women's, as opposed to
men's, linguistic behavior. Trudgill's findings in Norwich led him to see
women as overwhelmingly conservative, as they showed men leading in most
change. Furthermore, women in his sample tended to overreport their use of
prestige forms and men tended to underreport theirs. He therefore argued
that women and men respond to opposed sets of norms: women to overt,
standard-language prestige norms and men to covert, vernacular prestige
norms. Overt prestige attaches to refined qualities, as associated with the cos-
mopolitan marketplace and its standard language, whereas covert prestige at-
taches to masculine, "rough and tough" qualities. Trudgill (1972b: 182-183)
speculated that women's overt prestige orientation was a result of their
powerless position in society. He argued that inasmuch as society does not
allow women to advance their power or status through action in the market-
place, they are thrown upon their symbolic resources, including language, to
enhance their social position. This is certainly a reasonable hypothesis, par-
ticularly since it was arrived at to explain data in which women's speech was
overwhelmingly conservative. However, what it assumes more specifically is
that women respond to their powerlessness by developing linguistic strate-
gies for upward mobility, that is, that the socioeconomic hierarchy is the fo-
cus of social strategies. There are alternative views of exactly what social
strategies are reflected in women's conservatism. An analysis that emphasizes
the power relations implicit in the stratificational model was put forth by
Deuchar (1988), who argued that women's conservative linguistic behavior
is a function of basic power relations in society. Equating standard speech
with politeness, she built on Brown's (1980) and Brown and Levinson's (1987)
analyses of politeness as a face-saving strategy, arguing that the use of stan-
dard language is a mechanism for maintaining face in interactions in which
the woman is powerless.
I would argue that elements of these hypotheses are correct but that they
are limited by the fact that they are designed to account for one aspect of
women's linguistic behavior only: those circumstances under which women's
language is more conservative than men's. Based on the multiple patterns of
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 6 (native) -----
250 
PENELOPE ECKERT
sex, class, and age difference that he found in Philadelphia sound changes
in progress, Labov (1984) sought to explain why women are more conserva-
tive in their use of stable variables but less conservative in their use of changes
in progress and why women lead men in some changes and not in others. Al-
though his data do not show women being particularly conservative, he based
his analysis on the assumption that women's linguistic choices are driven by
prestige. What he sought to explain, therefore, are cases where women's be-
havior is not conservative. Based on his Philadelphia data, Labov argued that
women lag in the use of variants that are stigmatized within the larger com-
munity, that is, stable sociolinguistic variables and changes in progress that
are sufficiently old and visible as to be stigmatized within the larger commu-
nity. Women's behavior in these cases, then, is driven by global prestige
norms. At the same time, women lead in changes that are still sufficiently
limited to the neighborhood and local community to carry local prestige with-
out having attracted a stigma in the larger Philadelphia community. In this
case, Labov argued, women's behavior is driven by local prestige norms. If
this explanation accounts for the Philadelphia data, it does not cover the New
York City cases of (aeh) and (oh) (Labov, 1966), where women led in sound
changes that had grown old and stigmatized. But more important, I can see
no independent reason to seek explanations for women's behavior in prestige.
It is important to note at this point that three kinds of prestige have been
put forth so far: (a) global prestige, based on norms imposed in the standard
language marketplace; (b) covert prestige, based on opposition to those
norms; and (c) local prestige, based on membership in the local community.
Although the notion of covert prestige has come under attack, and conflated
by some with local prestige, I have argued that all three of these forces play
a role in variation (Eckert, 1989b). Later in this article, I suggest that not
prestige but power is the most appropriate underlying sociological concept
for the analysis of gender-based linguistic variation.
SEX DIFFERENCES AS OPPOSITION
If the focus on class as a continuum has led to the interpretation of sex dif-
ferences in speech as differences in orientation to the class hierarchy, the
focus on sex as a two-way opposition has led also to interpreting sex differ-
ences as sex markers. Brown and Levinson (1979) argued against the treat-
ment of sociolinguistic variables as markers, pointing out that the
correlations may well be masking intervening variables. Although much work
on phonological variation does not explicitly refer to variables as markers,
the view of variables as markers is implicit when linguists attribute individ-
uals' use or nonuse of a variable to a desire to stress or deny membership in
the category with which it is being correlated at the moment. Related to the
view of sex differences as markers is the oppositional view of gender differ-
ences in variation—a reification of a particular view of gender deriving from
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 7 (native) -----
SEX AND GENDER DIFFERENCES IN VARIATION 
251
the ease of identifying individuals' sex category membership and reflecting
the common expression "the opposite sex." Two instances can serve as ex-
amples in relation to gender.
Hindle (1979) examined one female speaker's use of variables in three sit-
uations: at work, at the dinner table with her husband and a friend (Arvilla
Payne, the fieldworker), and in a weekly all-women's card game. Based on
an assumption that speakers will implement vernacular sound changes more
in egalitarian situations than in hierarchical ones, Hindle's initial hypothe-
sis was that the speaker would show more extreme (vernacular) forms at the
dinner table with her husband and a friend, because he believed social rela-
tions in that setting to be less hierarchical than in the other settings. As it
turned out, she showed more advanced change in the card game. One might
argue that this does not disprove Hindle's underlying assumption, that
speakers show more vernacular variants in more egalitarian situations, since
there is reason to believe that relations among a group of women playing
cards on a weekly basis are less hierarchical than those between a husband
and wife —perhaps particularly in the presence of a third person. However,
he chose to attribute the use of extreme variants in a change, in which women
lead community-wide, to accommodation to the group of women.
The theory of accommodation depends on the notion of marker, and this
explanation essentially asserts that the speaker's use of the change among
women was an attempt to mark herself as a fellow woman. One might con-
sider, however, that her enhanced use of this phonological change at the card
game is related to an affirmation of—indeed, perhaps a competition among
equals for —some aspect of social identity that has nothing at all to do with
gender. In other words, that these women are together in a particular set of
social relationships that happen among women encourages them to empha-
size some aspect of their social identities.
Whereas Hindle has attributed this woman's extreme use of a sound
change to accommodation to women, others have attributed similar behav-
ior to differentiation from men. Tony Kroch has argued that the curvilinear
pattern frequently found in the socioeconomic stratification of linguistic vari-
ables is due to male speech only. Specifically, he speculated that if the sexes
are examined separately, women's speech will show a linear pattern, reflect-
ing the regular spread of sound change upward from the lowest socioeco-
nomic group. The curvilinear pattern, then, is the result of a sudden drop
in the use of extreme variables by men in the lowest socioeconomic group in
relation to the adjacent higher group. This drop, according to Kroch, is the
result of an avoidance on the part of men in this socioeconomic group of
what they perceive as a female speech pattern. Labov (1984) found the pat-
tern that Kroch predicted for the raising of the nucleus in Philadelphia (aw)
(Figure 1), and Guy, Horvath, Vonwiller, Daisley, and Rogers (1986) found
it for the Australian Question Intonation (Figure 2).
If one were prepared to accept this argument, Guy et al.'s data are more
convincing than Labov's. However, in both cases, one could argue that it is
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 8 (native) -----
252
PENELOPE ECKERT
F2(AW)
2100
2000
1900
1000
1700
1600
11,..««""
WOMEN
MEN
1H-62J-
' • »••
UNSKILLED 
SKILLED 
CLERICAL 
MANAGERIAL 
PROFESSl
SIGNIFICANCE (vs. urakilltdl: • JO5 " . 0 1 • • • JJO1
FIGURE 1. Occupation coefficients for F2 of (aw) for men and women in Phil-
adelphia neighborhoods (from Labov, 1984).
.80
.70
Proba-
bility
of
A Q I U M
.60
.90
.40
.30
.20
Middle
working
Social data
FIGURE 2. Probability of Australian Question Intonation use by class and sex
(from Guy et al., 1986:37).
only the lower working-class men's divergence from a linear pattern that cre-
ates enough of a woman's lead for it to acquire significance. In the case of
Philadelphia (aw), aside from the working-class men's sudden downturn in
use, the men lead the women in change in all socioeconomic groups. In the
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 9 (native) -----
SEX AND GENDER DIFFERENCES IN VARIATION 
253
case of Australian Question Intonation, although the women lead in the mid-
dle class, there is virtually no sex difference in the upper working class. The
lower working-class men's perception of the pattern, then, would have to be
based on the speech of women at a considerable social remove — a remove
that itself could be as salient as the sex difference. I venture to believe that
if the pattern had been the other way around, with the lower working-class
women showing the downturn, the typical explanation would have attributed
their conservatism to prestige factors and upward mobility. I seriously doubt
that these men's motivation for conservatism is upward mobility, just as I
doubt upward mobility as an explanation for women's conservatism. But
above all, it is problematic to seek the explanation of their behavior in sim-
ple differentiation from the "opposite" sex group.
I do not mean to argue that speakers never associate specific variables with
gender, nor would I argue that there are no cases in which men or women
avoid variables that they perceive as inappropriately gender marked. I would
not even argue against the claim that men are more likely to avoid such vari-
ables than women, since there are greater constraints on men to be gender-
appropriate in certain symbolic realms. However, I believe that variables that
function as something like gender markers must have some iconic value. The
Arabic palatalization discussed by Haeri (1989) is a candidate for such a vari-
able, although that case also points to intervening variables (Haeri, personal
communication). But, as Brown and Levinson (1979) pointed out, a corre-
lation with a particular social category may mask some other attribute that
is also associated with that category. One that comes easily to mind in rela-
tion to gender is power. This could clearly apply in the case of Australian
Question Intonation. Guy et al. (1986) described this intonation pattern as
a confirmation-seeking strategy, which one can assume is associated with
subordination regardless of sex (Baroni & d'Urso, 1984).
What I will argue is that gender does not have a uniform effect on linguis-
tic behavior for the community as a whole, across variables, or for that mat-
ter for any individual. Gender, like ethnicity and class and indeed age, is a
social construction and may enter into any of a variety of interactions with
other social phenomena. And although sociolinguists have had some success
in perceiving the social practice that constitutes class, they have yet to think
of gender in terms of social practice.
There is one important way in which gender is not equivalent to catego-
ries like class or ethnicity. Gender and gender roles are normatively recipro-
cal, and although men and women are supposed to be different from each
other, this difference is expected to be a source of attraction. Whereas the
power relations between men and women are similar to those between dom-
inant and subordinate classes and ethnic groups, the day-to-day context in
which these power relations are played out is quite different. It is not a cul-
tural norm for each working-class individual to be paired up for life with a
member of the middle class or for every black person to be so paired up with
a white person. However, our traditional gender ideology dictates just this
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 10 (native) -----
254 
PENELOPE ECKERT
kind of relationship between men and women. If one were to think of vari-
ables as social markers, then, one might expect gender markers to behave
quite differently from markers of class or ethnicity. Whereas the aggressive
use of ethnic markers (i.e., frequent use of the most extreme variants) is gen-
erally seen as maintaining boundaries—as preventing closeness — between eth-
nic groups, the aggressive use of gender markers is not. By the same token,
the aggressive use of gender markers is not generally seen as a device for
creating or maintaining solidarity within the category. To the extent that mas-
culine or feminine behavior marks gender, its use by males and females re-
spectively is more a device for competing with others in the same category
and creating solidarity with those in the other category, and aggressive cross-
sex behavior is seen as designed to compete with members of the other sex
for the attention of members of the same sex.
Two other things follow from the specialization of gender roles, which
may apply also to other kinds of differences such as ethnicity.
1. To the extent that male and female roles are not only different but recipro-
cal, members of either sex category are unlikely to compete with (i.e., eval-
uate their status in relation to) members of the other. Rather, by and large,
men perceive their social status in relation to other men, whereas women
largely perceive their social status in relation to other women.1 Thus, dif-
ferentiation on the basis of gender might well be sought within, rather than
between, sex groups.
2. Men and women compete to establish their social status in different ways,
as dictated by the constraints placed on their sex for achieving status. This
is particularly clear where gender roles are separate, and in fact when peo-
ple do compete in the role domain of the other sex, it is specifically their
gender identity that gets called into question.
POWER, STATUS, AND OTHER THINGS
All of the currently leading hypotheses about the effects of gender on vari-
ation recognize, however implicitly, that linguistic differences are a result of
men's and women's place in society at a particular time and place. What
differs in these hypotheses is the specificity and the depth of the causes in
society and, hence, their changeability over time and from community to
community.
Milroy (1980) traced sex differences in the use of vernacular variables to
differences in the nature of men's and women's social networks —differences
that are themselves a result of material factors. Based on the understanding
that dense, multiplex, locally based social networks enforce the use of ver-
nacular variables, Milroy argued that where economic circumstances allow
women to form such networks, their speech takes on the characteristics of
men's speech under the same conditions. In this case, then, the explanation
for se-\ differences in variation does not lie in differences between men's and
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 11 (native) -----
SEX AND GENDER DIFFERENCES IN VARIATION 
255
women's fundamental relations or orientation to society per se, but in the dif-
ferences in the circumstances in which they normally find themselves. Closely
related to the dynamics invoked by Milroy, particularly to the importance
of work patterns on the nature of social networks and to social forces be-
hind the use of vernacular or standard language, is the notion of market-
place. Nichols (1983) showed that differences between women as well as
between women and men can be a function of their access to jobs that de-
termine their participation in the standard language marketplace (Sankoff &
Laberge, 1978). Both Milroy's and Nichols' examples suggest that it is the
configuration of contact and interaction created by economic conditions that
ultimately determines individuals' linguistic patterns, and in both cases the
linguistic patterns may be as changeable as the economic conditions that un-
derlie them.
The purpose of these analyses is to show that gender differences in vari-
ation are attributable to social forces that attach to women by virtue of their
place in the economy. And whereas common sense supports this view, it is
also evident that although employment conditions may change, the under-
lying relations of power and status between men and women can remain quite
unchanging. So whereas economic explanations focus on the marketplace,
they attribute gender differences in language to social forces that could pre-
sumably continue to operate on the individual speaker regardless of his or
her personal relation to the economy. Since actual power relations between
men and women can be expected to lag behind (indeed perhaps be orthogo-
nal to) changes in relative positions in the marketplace, one can expect such
a dynamic in language to outlive any number of economic changes. One
might argue that the socioeconomic hierarchy, in this case, is the least of
women's problems, since their powerless position is brought home to them,
in a very real sense, in every interaction. Women's inequality is built into the
family, and it continues in the workplace, where women are constantly con-
fronted with a double bind, since neither stereotypic female nor stereotypic
male behavior is acceptable. Thus, one might expect that some gender dif-
ferences in language are more resistant to small-scale economic differences.
In particular, the common claim that women are more expressive with lan-
guage (Sattel, 1983) resides in deeper differences than the vagaries of the local
economy.
The domestication of female labor—according to Marx, one of the earliest
manifestations of the division of labor —involves a strict division of roles,
with men engaged in the public marketplace and women's activities restricted
to the private, domestic sphere (Elshtain, 1981; Sacks, 1974). The man com-
petes for goods and power in the marketplace in the name of the family and
controls these within the family. Thus, although the woman is solely respon-
sible for maintaining the domestic unit, she has no direct control over that
unit's capital. Although a man's personal worth is based on the accumula-
tion of goods, status, and power in the marketplace, a woman's worth is
based on her ability to maintain order in, and control over, her domestic
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 12 (native) -----
256 
PENELOPE ECKERT
realm. Deprived of power, women can only gain compliance through the
indirect use of a man's power or through the development of personal
influence.
Since to have personal influence without power requires moral authority,
women's influence depends primarily on the painstaking creation and elabo-
ration of an image of the whole self as worthy of authority. Thus, women
are thrown into the accumulation of symbolic capital. This is not to say that
men are not also dependent on the accumulation of symbolic capital, but that
symbolic capital is the only kind that women can accumulate with impunity.
And, indeed, it becomes part of their men's symbolic capital and hence part
of the household's economic capital. Whereas men can justify and define
their status on the basis of their accomplishments, possessions, or institu-
tional status, women must justify and define theirs on the basis of their over-
all character. This is why, in peasant communities as in working-class
neighborhoods, the women who are considered local leaders typically pro-
ject a strong personality and a strong, frequently humorous, image of know-
ing what is right and having things under control.
When social scientists say that women are more status conscious than
men, and when sociolinguists pick this up in explaining sex differences in
speech, they are stumbling on the fact that, deprived of power, women must
satisfy themselves with status. It would be more appropriate to say that
women are more status-bound than men. This emphasis on status conscious-
ness suggests that women only construe status as being hierarchical (be it
global or local hierarchy) and that they assert status only to gain upward mo-
bility. But status is not only defined hierarchically; an individual's status is
his or her place, however defined, in the group or society. It is this broader
status that women must assert by symbolic means, and this assertion will be
of hierarchical status when a hierarchy happens to be salient. An important
part of the explanation for women's innovative and conservative patterns lies,
therefore, in their need to assert their membership in all of the communities
in which they participate, since it is their authority, rather than their power
in that community, that assures their membership. Prestige, then, is far too
limited a concept to use for the dynamics at work in this context.
Above all, gender relations are about power and access to property and
services, and whatever symbolic means a society develops to elaborate gen-
der differences (such as romance and femininity) serve as obfuscation rather
than explanation. Whenever one sees sex differences in language, there is
nothing to suggest that it is not power that is at issue rather than gender per
se. The claim that working-class men's speech diverges from working-class
women's speech in an effort to avoid sounding like women reflects this am-
biguity, for it raises the issue of the interaction between gender and power.
Gender differentiation is greatest in those segments of society where power
is the scarcest —at the lower end of the socioeconomic hierarchy, where
women's access to power is the greatest threat to men. There is every reason
to believe that the lower working-class men's sudden downturn in the use of
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 13 (native) -----
SEX AND GENDER DIFFERENCES IN VARIATION 
257
Australian Question Intonation shown in Guy et al. (1986) is an avoidance
of the linguistic expression of subordination by men in the socioeconomic
group that can least afford to sound subordinate.
For similar reasons of power, it is common to confuse femininity and mas-
culinity with gender, and perhaps nowhere is the link between gender and
power clearer. Femininity is a culturally defined form of mitigation or denial
of power, whereas masculinity is the affirmation of power. In Western so-
ciety, this is perhaps most clearly illustrated in the greater emphasis on femi-
ninity in the south, where regional economic history has domesticized women
and denied them economic power to a greater degree than it has in the in-
dustrial north (Fox-Genovese, 1988). The commonest forms of femininity
and masculinity are related to actual physical power. Femininity is associated
with small size, clothing and adornment that inhibit and/or do not stand up
to rough activity, delicacy of movement, quiet and high pitched voice,
friendly demeanor, politeness. The relation between politeness and power-
lessness has already been emphasized (Brown, 1980) and surfaces in a good
deal of the literature on gender differences in language. Although all of these
kinds of behavior are eschewed by men at the lower end of the socioeconomic
hierarchy, they appear increasingly in male style as one moves up the so-
cioeconomic hierarchy until, in the upper class, what is called effeminacy
may be seen as the conscientious rejection of physical power by those who
exercise real global power (Veblen, 1931) by appropriating the physical power
of others.
The methodological consequences of these considerations is that we should
expect to see larger differences in indications of social category membership
among women than among men. If women are more constrained to display
their personal and social qualities and memberships, we would expect these
expressions to show up in their use of phonological variables. This necessi-
tates either a careful analysis of statistical interaction, or separate analysis
of the data from each gender group, before any comparison.
GENDER AND ADOLESCENT SOCIAL CATEGORIES
In this section, I discuss some evidence from adolescent phonological vari-
ation to illustrate the complexity of gender in the social scheme of things.
Adolescents are quite aware of the gender differences I have discussed,
particularly since they are at a life stage in which the issue of gender roles
becomes crucial. By the time they arrive in high school, adolescent girls (par-
ticularly those who have been tomboys) are getting over the early shock of
realizing that they do not have equal access to power. One girl told me of
the satisfaction it still gives her to think back to the time in elementary school
when she and her best friend beat up the biggest male bully in their class and
of the difficult adjustment it had been to finding less direct means of con-
trolling boys. In fact, she was very attractive and was aware but not partic-
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 14 (native) -----
258 
PENELOPE ECKERT
ularly pleased that her power in adolescence to snub troublesome males was
as great as her past power to beat them up.
Whether or not they wielded any direct power in their childhoods, adoles-
cent girls know full well that their only hope is through personal authority.
In secondary school, this authority is closely tied up with popularity (Eck-
ert, 1989a, 1990), and as a result, girls worry about and seek popularity more
than boys. And although boys are far from unconcerned about popularity,
they need it less to exert influence. For a boy can indeed gain power and sta-
tus through direct action, particularly through physical prowess. Thus, when
they reach high school, most girls and boys have already accepted to some
extent that they will have different routes to social status. In many impor-
tant ways, boys can acquire power and status through the simple perfor-
mance of tasks or display of skills. A star varsity athlete, for instance,
regardless of his character or appearance, can enjoy considerable status.
There is virtually nothing, however, that a girl lacking in social or physical
gifts can do that will accord her social status. In other words, whereas it is
enough for a boy to have accomplishments of the right sort, a girl must be
a certain sort of person. And just as the boy must show off his accomplish-
ments, the girl must display her persona. One result of this is that girls in high
school are more socially constrained than boys. Not only do they monitor
their own behavior and that of others more closely, but they maintain more
rigid social boundaries, since the threat of being associated with the wrong
kind of person is far greater to the individual whose status depends on who
she appears to be rather than what she does. This difference plays itself out
linguistically in the context of class-based social categories.
Two hegemonous social categories dominate adolescent social life in
American public high schools (Eckert, 1989a). These categories represent op-
posed class cultures and arise through a conflict of norms and aspirations
within the institution of the school. Those who participate in school activi-
ties and embrace the school as the locus of their social activities and identi-
ties constitute, in the high school, a middle-class culture. In the Detroit area,
where the research I report on was done, members of this category are called
"Jocks" whether or not they are athletes, and they identify themselves largely
in opposition to the "Burnouts." Burnouts, a working-class culture oriented
to the blue collar marketplace, do not accept the school as the locus of their
operations; rather, they rebel to some extent against school activities and the
authority they represent and orient themselves to the local, and the neigh-
boring urban, area. The Burnouts' hangouts are local parks, neighborhoods,
bowling alleys, and strips. They value adult experience and prerogatives and
pursue a direct relation with the adult community that surrounds them. The
school mediates this relation for the Jocks, on the other hand, who center
their social networks and activities in the school. The Jocks and the Burnouts
have very different means of acquiring and defining the autonomy that is so
central to adolescents. Whereas the Jocks seek autonomy in adult-like roles
in the corporate context provided by the school institution, the Burnouts seek
it in direct relations with the adult resources of the local area.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 15 (native) -----
SEX AND GENDER DIFFERENCES IN VARIATION 
259
Within each category, girls and boys follow very different routes to
achieve power and status. The notion of resorting to the manipulation of sta-
tus when power is unavailable is in fact consciously expressed in the adoles-
cent community. Girls complain that boys can do real things, whereas boys
complain that girls talk and scheme rather than doing real things. By "real"
things, they mean those things that reflect skills other than the purely social
and that reflect personal, and specifically physical, prowess. Boys are freer
in general. For example, Burnout boys can go to Detroit alone, whereas girls
must go under their protection; this seriously curtails a Burnout girl's abil-
ity to demonstrate urban autonomy. The Jock boys can also assert their per-
sonal autonomy through physical prowess. Although it is not "cool" for a
Jock boy to fight frequently, the public recognition that he could is an es-
sential part of his Jock image. In addition, Jock boys can gain public recog-
nition through varsity sports on a level that girls cannot. Thus, the girls in
each social category must devote a good deal of their activity to developing
and projecting a "whole person" image designed to gain them influence
within their own social category. The female Jocks must aggressively develop
a Jock image, which is essentially friendly, outgoing, active, clean-cut, all-
American. The female Burnouts must aggressively develop a Burnout image,
which is essentially tough, urban, "experienced." As a result, the symbolic
differences between Jocks and Burnouts are clearly more important for girls
than for boys. In fact, there is less contact between the two categories among
girls, and there is far greater attention to maintaining symbolic differences
on all levels —in clothing and other adornment, in demeanor, in publicly ac-
knowledged substance use and sexual activity. There is, therefore, every rea-
son to predict that girls also show greater differences than boys in their use
of any linguistic variable that is associated with social category membership
or its attributes.
I have shown elsewhere that the most extreme users of phonological vari-
ables in my adolescent data are those who have to do the greatest amount
of symbolic work to affirm their membership in groups or communities (Eck-
ert, 1989b). Those whose status is clearly based on "objective" criteria can
afford to eschew symbolization. It does not require much of a leap of rea-
soning to see that women's and men's ways of establishing their status would
lead to differences in the use of symbols. The constant competition over ex-
ternals, as discussed in Maltz and Borker (1982), would free males from the
use of symbols. Women, on the other hand, are constrained to exhibit con-
stantly who they are rather than what they can do, and who they are is de-
fined with respect primarily to other women.
PHONOLOGICAL VARIATION
The following data on phonological variation among Detroit suburban
adolescents provide some support for the discussion of the complexity of gen-
der constraints in variation. The data were gathered in individual sociolin-
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 16 (native) -----
260 
PENELOPE ECKERT
G 
_*. 
A 
• 
0
(e) 
(uh) 
(oh)
se 
^_ 
a
(ae) 
(a)
FIGURE 3. The Northern Cities Chain Shift.
guistic interviews during 2 years of participant observation in one high school
in a suburb of Detroit. During this time, I followed one graduating class
through its last 2 years of high school, tracing social networks and examin-
ing the nature of social identity in this adolescent community. The school
serves a community that is almost entirely white, and although the popula-
tion includes a variety of eastern and western European groups, ethnicity is
downplayed in the community and in the school and does not determine so-
cial groups. The community covers a socioeconomic span from lower work-
ing class through upper middle class, with the greatest representation in the
lower middle class.
The speakers in the Detroit area are involved in the Northern Cities Chain
Shift (Labov, Yaeger, & Steiner, 1972), a pattern of vowel shifting involv-
ing the fronting of low vowels and the backing and lowering of mid vowels
(Figure 3). The older changes in this shift are the fronting of (ae) and (a),
and the lowering and fronting of (oh). The newer ones are the backing of (e)
and (uh).
The following analysis is based on impressionistic phonetic transcription
of the vocalic variables from taped free-flowing interviews.2 A number of
variants were distinguished for each vowel in the shift. Both (e) and (uh) have
raised, backed, and lowered variants. Backing is the main direction of move-
ment of both (e) and (uh). In each case, two degrees of backing were
distinguished:
[e] > [£>] > [A]
[A] > [A>] > [o]
Both variables also show lowering: [ae] for (e) and [a] for (uh). There are
also some raised variants [e*] and [i] for (e) (the latter occurs particularly in
get) and [a] and [U] for (uh). The lowest value for (ae) is [as*]. The move-
ment of the nucleus of (ae) has clearly been toward peripherality (Labov, Yae-
ger, & Steiner, 1972), as the higher variants show fronting:
[33"] > [ev] > [e] > [£*=] > [e]
Two degrees of fronting were distinguished for (a):
[a] > [a] > [«>]
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 17 (native) -----
SEX AND GENDER DIFFERENCES IN VARIATION 
261
TABLE 1. Percentage of advanced tokens of the five vowels for each combination
of social category and sex (numbers of tokens in parentheses)
(ae)
(a)
(oh)
(e)
(uh)
Jocks
»' (£9
-(IS)
( 44 \
7.4 
—
\598/
26.2 
( ^ )
246 (i)
Boys
Burnouts
•» ©
/ 34 \
10.2 
—
\333/
33.2 (JHJ
353 ( i s )
Jocks
62.2 (™)
V392/
33-8 ( i | )
/134\
29.8 \450/
23.8 ( i ^ )
V433/
25.8 ( » )
Girls
Burnouts
62 (— j
38.2 (— J
/ 131 \
387 (iii)
30.9 ( — j
43 ( — j
(a) also showed some raising to [aA] and [A]. Finally, three degrees of front-
ing were distinguished for (oh):
[a] > [o<v] > [a] > [a]
(oh) also fronted occasionally to [A]. Extreme variants in the main direction
of change were chosen for each of the variables to represent rule application.
These extreme variants are:
(ae) nucleus = [e] or [e<], with or without offglide
(a) 
[ae] or [a<]
(oh) [a"1] or [a]
(uh) [a] or [o]
(e) 
[A] or [U]
The two common social correlations for phonological variables in these
data are with social category membership and sex. Sex and category affilia-
tion are not simply additive but manifest themselves in a variety of ways
among these changes. They interact in ways that are particularly revealing
when seen in the context of the overall pattern of linguistic change. Table 1
contains a cross-tabulation by social category and sex of the percentage of
advanced tokens for each vowel. Differences in the percentages shown in Ta-
ble 1 between boys and girls and between Jocks and Burnouts for each of
the changes are displayed in Figure 4: one line shows the lead of the girls over
boys, whereas the other shows the lead of the Burnouts over the Jocks, for
each of the changes in the Northern Cities Shift. As Figure 4 shows, the girls
have the clearest lead in the oldest changes in the Northern Cities Chain Shift
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 18 (native) -----
262
PENELOPE ECKERT
DIFFERENCE IN
PERCENTAGE
girls-boys
burnouts-jocks
(ae) 
(a)
OLDER CHANGES
(Oh)
(uh) 
(e)
NEWER CHANGES
FIGURE 4. Contrast between girls and boys and between Burnouts and Jocks
as differences in percentages when calculated for the combined data in Table 1.
TABLE 2. Significance (yes or no) of social constraints on the vowel
changes that constitute the Northern Cities Chain Shift (pl-values
of log-likelihood test calculated for each constraint separately
using variable rule program on data of Table 1)
Sex
Social Category
(ae)
(a)
(oh)a
(uh)
(e)
yes (p < .001)
yes (p < .001)
yes (p < .0001)
nob(p < .04)
no (p < .38)
no (p < .77)
no (p < .16)
yes (p < .001)
yes (p < .001)
yes (p < .004)
aBoth constraints remain significant for (oh) when the effects of the other are
taken into account.
bThe sex effect loses significance (p < .19) for (uh) when social category is
taken into account.
whereas social category differences take over in the later changes. Note that
each line dips into negative figures once-at each end of the shift. The boys
have a slight lead in the backing of (e) and the Jocks have a slight lead in the
raising of (ae). The statistical significance of each of the differences is given
in Table 2. A treatment of variation that views variables as markers would
call the fronting of (ae) and (a) "sex markers," the backing of (uh) and (e)
"social category markers," and the fronting of (oh) both.
In an earlier article, I expressed some puzzlement about the lack of sex
differences in the backing of (uh), having expected a simple relation between
sex and any sound change (Eckert, 1988). More careful examination of the
backing of (uh), however, shows that a simplistic view of the relation between
gender and sound change prevented me from exploring other ways in which
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 19 (native) -----
SEX AND GENDER DIFFERENCES IN VARIATION 
263
gender might be manifested in variation. In fact, gender plays a role in four
out of the five changes in the Northern Cities Chain Shift, although it corre-
lates only with three out of five of the changes, and the role it plays is not
the same for all changes.
As can be seen in Table 2 and Figure 4, the oldest change in the North-
ern Cities Chain Shift, the raising of (ae), shows no significant association
with category membership in the sample as a whole. The same is true within
each sex group taken separately (girls: p < .96; boys: p < .22). However, the
girls lead by far in this change. The second change in the Northern Cities
Shift, the fronting of (a), also shows only a sex difference, once again with
the girls leading. The lack of category effect holds true within each sex group
considered separately (girls: p < .19; boys: p < .76).
The lowering and fronting of (oh) shows a significant difference by both
sex and social category, and these effects appear to operate additively in a
variable rule analysis:
Overall tendency: 0.182
boys: 0.300 
girls: 0.700
Jocks: 0.452 Burnouts: 0.548
When the sexes are separated, however, it turns out that the category differ-
ence is only significant among the girls (p < .009) and not the boys (p <
.14).
In the backing of (uh), category membership correlates significantly with
backing for the population as a whole, with Burnouts leading, but sex does
not. When each sex is considered separately, however, it is clear that the cat-
egory difference is much greater among the girls. The backing of (e) shows
a significant category difference, with the Burnouts leading, but no signifi-
cant sex difference. In this case, when the two sexes are considered sepa-
rately, the category difference is the same among the girls and among the
boys.
Figure 5 compares the differences in the percentages in Table 1 between
the Jocks and Burnouts, within the girls' and boys' samples separately. None
of these differences is significant for (a) and for (ae). For (e) they are signifi-
cant and identical for the two sexes. For (oh) and (uh), however, there is a
clear tendency for there to be greater social category differentiation among
the girls than among the boys.
These results throw into question general statements that women lead in
sound change or that sex differences are indicative of sound change. In fact,
in my data, the greatest sex differences occur with the older—and probably
less vital—changes, involving (ae), (a), and (oh). I would venture the follow-
ing hypotheses about the relation of gender to the older and the newer
changes in these data. It appears that in both sets of changes, the girls are
using variation more than the boys. In the case of the newer ones, the girls'
patterns of variation show a greater difference between Jocks and Burnouts
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 20 (native) -----
264
PENELOPE ECKERT
ABSOLUTE DIFFERENCE
OF PERCENTAGE
(ae) 
(a)
OLDER CHANGES
(oh)
(uh) 
(e)
NEWER CHANGES
FIGURE 5. Absolute differences of percentages for Burnouts and Jocks, calcu-
lated separately for girls and boys (note that for (ae), Burnouts actually trail
Jocks).
than do the boys'. In the case of the older ones, all girls are making far
greater use than the boys of variables that are not associated with social cat-
egory affiliation. I have speculated elsewhere that the newer changes, which
are more advanced closer to the urban center, are ripe for association with
counteradult norms (Eckert, 1987). The older changes, on the other hand,
which have been around for some time and are quite advanced in the adult
community, are probably not very effective as carriers of counteradult
adolescent meaning, but they have a more generalized function associated
with expressiveness and perhaps general membership. In both cases —the
girls' greater differentiation of the newer changes and their greater use of
older changes —the girls' phonological behavior is consonant with their
greater need to use social symbols for self-presentation.
CONCLUSIONS
I would not, at this point, claim that the relation shown in these data between
new and old changes is necessary, particularly in view of the fact that Labov
(1984) found that women in Philadelphia led in new sound changes, whereas
sex differences tended to disappear in older changes. It is apparent, then, that
generalizations about the relation between sound change and gender are best
deferred until more communities have been examined.
The first clear conclusion from these data is that sex and social category
are not necessarily independent variables but that they can interact in a very
significant way. It is the nature of that interaction, which occurs here with
(oh) and (uh), that is of interest in this article. It is not the case with these
phonological variables that there are large sex differences in one category and
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 21 (native) -----
SEX AND GENDER DIFFERENCES IN VARIATION 
265
not in the other. In other words, sex is rarely more "salient" in one category
than the other. One certainly cannot say that the boys and/or girls are as-
serting their gender identities through language more in one category than
in the other. Rather, there are greater category differences in one sex group
than the other. In other words, category membership is more salient to mem-
bers of one sex than the other; girls are asserting their category identities
through language more than are the boys. This is consonant with the fact that
girls are more concerned with category membership than boys, as well as with
the fact that girls must rely more on symbolic manifestations of social mem-
bership than boys. And this is, in turn, the adolescent manifestation of the
broader generalization that women, deprived of access to real power, must
claim status through the use of symbols of social membership.
These data make it clear that the search for explanations of sex differences
in phonological variation should be redirected. All of the demographic cat-
egories that we correlate with phonological variation are more complex than
their labels would indicate. Indeed, they are more complex than many so-
ciolinguistic analyses give them credit for. Some analyses of sex differences
have suffered from lack of information about women. But it is more impor-
tant to consider that where most analyses have fallen short has been in the
confusion of social meaning with the analyst's demographic abstractions.
NOTES
1. This is an oversimplification. Gender inequality imposes a canonical comparison, whereby
higher and lower status accrue automatically to men and women, respectively. It is this inequality
itself that leads to the tendency for intrasex comparisons and for the different terms on which
men and women engage in these comparisons. Men tend to compare themselves with other men
because women don't count, whereas women tend to compare themselves with other women with
an eye to how that affects their relation to male-defined status. (My thanks to Jean Lave for
helping me work out this tangle.)
2. 
The transcription of these data was done by Alison Edwards, Rebecca Knack, and Larry
Diemer.
REFERENCES
Baroni, Maria Rosa, & d'Urso, Valentina. (1984). Some experimental findings about the ques-
tion of politeness and women's speech. Language in Society 13:67-72.
Bourdieu, Pierre, & Boltanski, Luc. (1975). Le tetichisme de la langue. Actes de la recherche
en sciences sociales 4:2-32.
Brown, Penelope. (1980). How and why women are more polite: Some evidence from a Mayan
community. In Sally McConnell-Ginet, Ruth A. Borker, & Nelly Furman (eds.), Women and
language in literature and society. New York: Praeger. 111-136.
Brown, Penelope, & Levinson, Steven. (1979). Social structure, groups and interaction. In Klaus
R. Scherer & Howard Giles (eds.), Social markers in speech. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. 291-341.
(1987). Politeness. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cedergren, Henrietta. (1973). The interplay of social and linguistic factors in Panama. Ph.D.
dissertation, Cornell University.
Clermont, Jean, & Cedergren, Henrietta. (1978). Les "R" de ma mere sont perdus dans l'air.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 22 (native) -----
266 
PENELOPE ECKERT
In Pierrette Thibault (ed.), Le frangais parle: etudes sociolinguistiques. Edmonton, Alberta:
Linguistic Research. 13-28.
Deuchar, Margaret. (1988). A pragmatic account of women's use of standard speech. In Jen-
nifer Coates & Deborah Cameron (eds.), Women in their speech communities. London: Long-
man. 27-32.
Eckert, Penelope. (1984). Age and linguistic change. In Jennie Keith & David I. Kertzer (eds.),
Age and anthropological theory. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 219-233.
(1987). The relative values of variables. In Keith Denning, Sharon Inkelas, Faye McNair-
Knox, & John Rickford (eds.), Variation in language: NWAV-XV. Stanford, Department of
Linguistics. 101-110.
. (1988). Adolescent social structure and the spread of linguistic change. Language in So-
ciety 17:183-207.
(1989a) Jocks and burnouts. New York: Teachers College Press.
. (1989b). Social membership and linguistic variation. Paper presented at NWAVE, Duke
University.
. (1990). Cooperative competition in adolescent "girl talk." Discourse Processes 13:91-122.
Eckert, Penelope, Edwards, Alison, & Robins, Lynne. (1985). Social and biological categories
in the study of linguistic variation. Paper presented at NWAVE IV, Washington, DC.
Elshtain, Jean Bethke. (1981). Public man, private woman. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Fox-Genovese, Elizabeth. (1988). Within the plantation household. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press.
Gauchat, L. (1905). L'unite phonetique dans le patois d'une commune. In Festshrift Heinrich
Morf. Halle: Max Niemeyer. 175-232.
Guy, G., Horvath, B., Vonwiller, J., Daisley, E., & Rogers, I. (1986). An intonational change
in progress in Australian English. Language in Society 15:23-52.
Haeri, Niloofar. (1989). Synchronic variation in Cairene Arabic: The case of palatalization. Paper
presented at Linguistic Society of America Annual Meeting, Washington, DC.
Hindle, Donald. (1979). The social and situational conditioning of phonetic variation. Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
Horvath, Barbara, & Sankoff, David. (1987). Delimiting the Sydney speech community. Lan-
guage in Society 16:179-204.
Labov, William. (1966). The social stratification of English in New York City. Washington, DC:
Center for Applied Linguistics.
(1972a). Hypercorrection by the lower middle class as a factor in linguistic change. In
William Labov (ed.), Sociolinguistic patterns. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
122-142.
. (1972b). The linguistic consequences of being a lame. In William Labov (ed.), Sociolin-
guistic patterns. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 255-292.
. (1972c). The social motivation of a sound change. In William Labov (ed.), Sociolinguistic
patterns. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 1-42.
. (1980). The social origins of sound change. In William Labov (ed.), Locating language
in time and space. New York: Academic. 251-265.
. (1984). The intersection of sex and social factors in the course of language change. Pa-
per presented at NWAVE, Philadelphia.
Labov, W., Yaeger, M., & Steiner, R. (1972). A quantitative study of sound change in prog-
ress. Report on NSF project No. 65-3287.
Laferriere, Martha. (1979). Ethnicity in phonological variation and change. Language
55:603-617.
Macaulay, R. K. S. (1977). Language, social class, and education. Edinburgh: University Press.
Maltz, Daniel, & Borker, Ruth. (1982). A cultural approach to male-female miscommunica-
tion. In John J. Gumperz (ed.), Language and social identity. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. 195-216.
Milroy, Lesley. (1980). Language and social networks. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Nichols, Patricia C. (1983). Linguistic options and choices for black women in the rural south.
In Barrie Thome, Cheris Kramarae, and Nancy Henley (eds.), Language, gender and soci-
ety. Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 54-68.
Rickford, John. (1986). The need for new approaches to class analysis in sociolinguistics. Lan-
guage and communication 6:215-221.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 23 (native) -----
SEX AND GENDER DIFFERENCES IN VARIATION 
267
Sacks, Karen. (1974). Engels revisited. In M. Rosaldo & L. Lamphere (eds.), Women, culture
and society. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 207-222.
Sankoff, David, & Laberge, Suzanne. (1978). The linguistic market and the statistical expla-
nation of variability. In David Sankoff (ed.), Linguistic variation: Models and methods. New
York: Academic. 239-250.
Sattel, Jack W. (1983). Men, inexpressiveness, and power. In Barrie Thorne, Cheris Kramarae,
& Nancy Henley (eds.), Language, gender and society. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
119-124.
Thibault, Pierrette. (1983). Equivalence et grammaticalisation. Ph.D. dissertation, University
de Montreal.
Trudgill, Peter. (1972a). Sex, covert prestige, and linguistic change in the urban British English
of Norwich. Language in Society 1:179-195.
(1972b). The social differentiation of English in Norwich. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Veblen, Thorstein. (1931). The theory of the leisure class. New York: Viking.
Wolfram, W. A. (1969). A sociolinguistic description of Detroit Negro speech. Washington, DC:
Center for Applied Linguistics.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095439450000017X Published online by Cambridge University Press