

----- Page 1 (native) -----
This is the author manuscript accepted for publication and has undergone full peer review but has not 
been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to 
differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi: 
10.1111/sipr.12033. 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
Do Social Network Sites Enhance or Undermine Subjective Well-Being:  
A Critical Review  
Philippe Verduyn1,2, Oscar Ybarra3, Maxime Résibois2, John Jonides3, Ethan Kross3 
 
Affiliations: 
 
1 Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience, Maastricht University, Netherlands 
 
2 Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, KU Leuven, Belgium 
 
3 Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. 
 
Correspondence to: philippe.verduyn@maastrichtuniversity.nl

----- Page 2 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
2
Abstract 
Social network sites are ubiquitous and now constitute a common tool people use to interact with one 
another in daily life. Here we review the consequences of interacting with social network sites for 
subjective well-being—i.e., how people feel moment-to-moment and how satisfied they are with their 
lives. We begin by clarifying the constructs that we focus on in this review: social network sites and 
subjective well-being. Next, we review the literature that explains how these constructs are related. 
This research reveals: (a) negative relationships between passively using social network sites and 
subjective well-being, and (b) positive relationships between actively using social network sites and 
subjective well-being, with the former relationship being more robust than the latter. Specifically, 
passively using social network sites provokes social comparisons and envy, which have negative 
downstream consequences for subjective well-being. In contrast, when active usage of social network 
sites predicts subjective well-being, it seems to do so by creating social capital and stimulating 
feelings of social connectedness. We conclude by discussing the policy implications of this work.

----- Page 3 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
3
Social media are rapidly changing the way people interact. A defining feature of these 
internet-based applications is that they allow for the creation and exchange of user-generated content 
(Kaplan & Haenlein, 2010). Typical examples of such content are blog posts, Wikipedia entries, 
Facebook messages and YouTube videos. These illustrations also reflect the fact that ―social media‖ 
is a broad term that encompasses a range of communication channels. 
Among the most widespread social media sites are so-called social network sites. These sites 
enable users to connect with others by creating personal information profiles and inviting others to 
have access to their profiles and messages. Examples of popular social network sites are Facebook, 
Twitter, Instagram and LinkedIn. Social network sites differ in the purposes they serve (e.g., LinkedIn 
and Facebook are mainly used for professional and leisure purposes, respectively) and their dominant 
mode of communication (e.g., Twitter and Instagram are centered around text-based and image-based 
messages, respectively). People spend a significant amount of time on these platforms. Mark 
Zuckerberg, Facebook‘s chief executive, recently revealed that users around the world spend on 
average 50 minutes using Facebook and Instagram combined each day (Stewart, 2016).    
The enormous amount of time that people invest in using these sites raises the question: What 
are the consequences of interacting with social network sites for people‘s subjective well-being—i.e., 
how people feel moment-to-moment and how satisfied they are with their lives? Many people around 
the world pursue happiness as a basic life goal (Tay, Kuykendall, & Diener, 2015), and subjective 
well-being predicts a range of consequential benefits, including enhanced health and longevity 
(Boehm, Peterson, & Kubzansky, 2011; Diener & Chan, 2011; Steptoe & Wardle, 2011). As such, 
identifying how frequent usage of social network sites impact subjective well-being represents a basic 
question for social scientists to address, the answer to which has potentially important policy 
implications.  
Here we address this issue by reviewing the current state of the literature surrounding how 
usage of social network sites influences subjective well-being. Our review is organized into five

----- Page 4 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
4
sections. First, we clarify the scope of our review, identifying the criteria we used to include and 
exclude studies. Next, we clarify the two concepts that constitute the focus of this paper—social 
network sites and subjective well-being. We then review research examining how social network sites 
affect subjective well-being and discuss the mechanisms underlying their influence. Finally, we end 
by discussing the policy implication of this work.  
Clarifying Scope 
Over the past decade a substantial amount of research has examined the role that Internet 
activity in general, and usage of social network sites in particular, plays in influencing a wide array of 
socio-emotional outcome variables. Thus, before proceeding we clarify the scope of our review by 
identifying the variables of interest.  
Social network sites. Studies examining the impact of overall internet usage on subjective 
well-being are not included here, as categorizing all internet activities (including social network 
usage) into one overarching category is considered suboptimal (Bessière, Kiesler, Kraut, & Boneva, 
2008; Burke, Kraut, & Marlow, 2011). Studies assessing the impact of specific social network site 
behaviors such as cyberbullying (e.g., Kwan & Skoric, 2013) or sexual solicitation and harassment 
(e.g., Ybarra & Mitchell, 2008) are likewise not included as each of these behaviors are governed by 
specific mechanisms and, hence, require separate treatments. As such, rather than adopting a macro 
(internet usage) or micro (very specific social network site behaviors) approach, we adopt a meso 
approach in this paper, focusing on studies that assess the impact of overall social network site usage 
and broad categories of social network usage patterns (e.g., passive- and active ways of using social 
network sites).  
Subjective well-being. Studies are included if the dependent variable can be directly subsumed 
under the construct of subjective well-being (Diener, 1984, 2009; Myers & Diener, 1995). Thus, our 
review will focus on studies assessing the impact of usage of social network sites on life satisfaction 
(i.e., the ―cognitive‖ component of subjective well-being) or how good or bad people feel (i.e., the

----- Page 5 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
5
―affective‖ component of subjective well-being) including symptoms of affective disorders in the 
subclinical domain. 
 
In this paper we will review studies assessing the relationship between social network site 
usage and subjective well-being in healthy participants. As such, the present review does not directly 
speak to the relationship between social network usage and the development or recovery from 
psychopathologies such as depression or other mental disorders (see e.g., Brusilovskiy, Townley, 
Snethen, & Salzer, 2016; Park et al., 2016). Neither will we review studies on pathological usage of 
social network sites such as social network site addiction (see e.g., Andreassen & Pallesen, 2014).  
Features of the Constructs 
Social Network Sites  
Social network sites are generally defined by three elements. First, users have a personal 
profile. On most contemporary social network sites, these profiles do not merely contain static self-
descriptive information but are continuously changing as a result of updated content provided by the 
user (e.g., status updates describing what one is currently doing or thinking about), by others (e.g., 
pictures of the user attending an event of another user), or by the system (e.g., activities on third-party 
sites). A second key feature is that publicly visible lists of connections are shown. These lists 
represent users‘ online social network, which refers to the collection of social relations of varying 
strengths and importance that a person maintains. Finally, rather than surfing from profile to profile to 
discover updated content, most social network sites are organized around a stream of frequently 
updated content (e.g., Facebook‘s News Feed), which is primarily populated by posts from one‘s 
connections (Ellison & Boyd, 2013).   
Use of social network sites has boomed during the last decade. According to the Pew Internet 
and American Life Project, which tracks Internet use trends over time, 65% of all American adults use 
social network sites as of 2015. This is nearly a tenfold jump compared to 10 years ago (Perrin, 2015).

----- Page 6 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
6
These numbers do not consist only of young adults. Posting messages on Facebook or Twitter has 
become part of everyday life for older adults as well. Indeed, whereas 90% of people between the 
ages of 18 and 29 currently use social network sites, those aged between 30 and 49 (77%) and 50 and 
64 (51%) are rapidly catching up. People aged 65 and older also are increasingly attracted to social 
network sites: In 2005, two percent of seniors used social network sites, compared with 35% today 
(Perrin, 2015).    
The social network landscape is inhabited by many different sites (e.g., Facebook, Instagram, 
Twitter, and LinkedIn), and each tries to attract as many users as possible. With 1.65 billion active 
monthly users, Facebook is currently the most popular social network site (Facebook, 2016b). 
However, several other social networks have a large number of members as well. For example, 400 
million people log in at least once a month to their Instagram accounts (Instagram, 2016), and Twitter 
and LinkedIn have 310 million (Twitter, 2016) and 106 million (LinkedIn, 2016) monthly active 
users, respectively.  
Users spend on average 50 minutes each day interacting on Facebook and Instagram 
combined (Stewart, 2016). This is more than the amount of time people spend engaging in sports (17 
minutes) or even socializing directly with others (e.g., visiting friends, attending or hosting events - 43 
minutes). It is only somewhat less compared to the amount of time people spend eating (64 minutes) 
(Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2014). 
What motivates people to spend so much time interacting on Facebook and similar platforms? 
Most people report that they do so in order to stay in touch with family and friends (Joinson, 2008). 
Other reasons people report include (a) connecting with old friends with whom one has lost contact, 
(b) connecting with others with shared hobbies or interests, (c) making new friends, (d) following 
celebrities and (e) finding romantic partners (Smith, 2011). Clearly, people have many reasons for 
using social network sites. However, does time spent interacting with these social network sites

----- Page 7 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
7
influence subjective well-being? Before addressing this question, it is important to clarify what we 
mean when we use this term.  
Subjective well-being  
Subjective well-being as a concept refers to how people evaluate their life (Diener, 2009). It 
entails both cognitive judgments of satisfaction (i.e., cognitive subjective well-being) and affective 
evaluations of ones‘ mood and emotions (i.e., affective subjective well-being) (Diener, 1984) with 
high levels of subjective well-being being characterized by frequent positive affect, infrequent 
negative affect, and a global sense of satisfaction with life (Myers & Diener, 1995). When reviewing 
studies on subjective well-being in this paper, we use the prefix ―affective‖ or ―cognitive‖ depending 
on how subjective well-being was measured.   
Subjective well-being is generally considered to be an important, if not the most important, 
goal that individuals seek throughout their lives (Tay et al., 2015).  For example, in a large study 
across 41 countries participants reported that subjective well-being is ―extraordinarily important and 
valuable‖ to them (Diener, Sapyta, & Suh, 1998). Consistent with these findings, results from other 
studies indicate that people view subjective well-being as more important in judging quality of life 
than either wealth or moral goodness (Diener, 2000; King & Napa, 1998). Overall, these studies 
demonstrate that experiencing high levels of subjective well-being is, for most people, an end in itself. 
It thus represents a potentially important policy issue given the goal of policy makers to create 
circumstances that allow people to fulfill their aims (Bartolini, Bilancini, Bruni, & Porta, 2016; 
Layard, 2006).  
In addition to having intrinsic value, subjective well-being is also beneficial to a wide range 
of valued outcomes including objective indicators of well-being (Tay et al., 2015). In particular, there 
is a large amount of evidence showing that subjective well-being leads to enhanced health and 
longevity (Boehm et al., 2011; Diener & Chan, 2011; Steptoe & Wardle, 2011). Moreover, subjective 
well-being improves social relationships; it promotes marital satisfaction, sociability, and prosocial

----- Page 8 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
8
behaviors, among others (Lyubomirsky, King, & Diener, 2005). Subjective well-being also has 
consequences for productivity and success, including future income levels (Diener, Nickerson, Lucas, 
& Sandvik, 2002). Thus, policy measures that target subjective well-being may have additional 
downstream implications for these other policy-relevant variables as well.  
Importantly, despite studies indicating that subjective well-being has a genetic basis, we now 
also know that it can be modified. In particular, whereas genetics account for 50% of variation among 
people in subjective well-being, life circumstances (10%) and intentional activities (40%) are 
responsible for the other half (Lyubomirsky, Sheldon, & Schkade, 2005). This suggests that there is 
ample room for policy makers to enhance people‘s subjective well-being.  
A growing number of people spend an increasing amount of time on social network sites. 
Therefore, policy makers have a unique opportunity to enhance subjective well-being by encouraging 
people towards adaptively interacting with these sites.  In the next section we review what is currently 
known about the relationship between use of social network sites and subjective well-being to inform 
potential policy.  
 
Social Network Sites and Subjective Well-Being:  
Charting the Relationship 
This section is divided into two parts. First, we discuss early empirical studies on overall 
social network usage and subjective well-being. This encompasses studies that assess time spent on 
social network sites without specifying how people interact with such sites when they are on them, as 
well as studies that calculate an overall social network usage index by aggregating across several 
ways that people use such sites (e.g., visiting profiles, posting messages or pictures). Second, we 
review more recent studies that examine the relationship between different forms of social network 
usage (i.e., active usage vs. passive usage) and subjective well-being, which presents a more granular 
approach.

----- Page 9 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
9
 
The predictor or independent variable in most of the reviewed studies is Facebook usage. This 
is due to Facebook being the most popular social network site worldwide. Whenever findings pertain 
to another social network site, this will be explicitly noted. The outcome or dependent variable of 
interest is subjective well-being.  
Overall usage of social network sites and subjective well-being 
In this section, we organize our discussion of these findings around the designs used to collect 
them—i.e., cross-sectional, longitudinal, or experimental designs. We describe work employing 
experimental and longitudinal frameworks in the most detail because they provide stronger designs 
than cross-sectional studies, which do not permit one to separate cause from effect (in contrast to 
experimental studies), or draw inferences about the short and long term consequences of social 
network usage (in contrast to longitudinal studies).  
Cross-sectional Designs. Several cross-sectional studies have revealed a positive relationship 
between subjective well-being and overall usage of Facebook (Valenzuela, Park, & Kee, 2009), 
Instagram (Pittman & Reich, 2016), and Tuenti, which is a Spanish social network site (Apaolaza, 
Hartmann, Medina, Barrutia, & Echebarria, 2013). However, a number of other cross-sectional 
studies show an opposite pattern of results (Farahani, Kazemi, Aghamohamadi, Bakhtiarvand, & 
Ansari, 2011; Labrague, 2014; Lin et al., 2016; Pantic et al., 2012; Sampasa-kanyinga & Lewis, 
2015). Other authors argue that the relationship between social network usage and subjective well-
being is more nuanced. For example, Rae and Lonborg (2015) found that Facebook usage was 
associated with high levels of subjective well-being among users who accessed Facebook to maintain 
existing relationship (e.g., keeping in touch with current friends) but was negatively associated with 
subjective well-being among those who accessed Facebook to create new relationships (e.g., making 
new friends). Valkenburg, Peter, and Schouten (2006) found in a study on CU2, a Dutch social 
network site, that the feedback one receives from their social connections moderates the relationship

----- Page 10 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
10
between these variables—adolescents who received predominantly positive (negative) feedback 
reported increases (decreases) in subjective well-being when using the social network site.  
Longitudinal Designs. To better understand cause and effect in  these  patterns of results, 
Kross and colleagues (Kross et al., 2013) asked people to report several times a day (for a two week 
period) how much they used Facebook and how they felt. They found that Facebook usage predicted 
decreases in affective subjective well-being over time such that participants felt 8% worse when they 
engaged Facebook usage ―a lot‖ during the time period between any two affect assessments compared 
to when they did not use Facebook at all. In contrast, affective subjective well-being did not predict 
subsequent changes in Facebook usage. This implies that usage of Facebook was more likely to 
influence subjective well-being rather than the other way around. Moreover, mean levels of Facebook 
usage during the two-week study period also predicted declines in cognitive subjective well-being 
across the study period. These relationships were not moderated by size of people‘s Facebook 
networks, their perceived supportiveness, motivation for using Facebook, gender, loneliness, self-
esteem, or depression. Compared to the cross-sectional studies reviewed above, this longitudinal study 
constituted a major step forward as it provided evidence on the likely causal sequence underlying the 
relationship between social network sites and subjective well-being. 
Experimental Designs. Sagioglou and Greitemeyer (2014) assigned participants to either a 
Facebook  use condition (i.e., spending 20 minutes on Facebook), an Internet use condition (i.e., 
spending 20 minutes browsing the internet without using social network sites), or a control condition 
(i.e., immediately completing the post-manipulation questionnaires). Participants in the Facebook use 
condition reported lower levels of affective subjective well-being compared to the other two 
conditions.  
Recently, in a large scale study (n = 1,095), researchers of the Happiness Research Institute in 
Denmark further tested whether Facebook use influences subjective well-being (Tromholt, Marie, 
Andsbjerg, & Wiking, 2015). After evaluating their lives on several dimensions, half of the

----- Page 11 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
11
participants were allocated to a treatment condition (i.e., do not use Facebook for an entire week), 
whereas the other half were allocated to a control condition (i.e., continue to use Facebook as usual). 
One week later participants evaluated their lives again. After one week without Facebook the 
treatment group reported significantly higher levels of affective and cognitive subjective well-being. 
Conclusions. Initial cross-sectional studies on the relationship between overall usage of social 
network sites and subjective well-being resulted in a mixed pattern of findings. The pattern has 
become clearer, however, when stronger research designs started to be used. In particular, Kross and 
colleagues (2013) were the first to study changes in both Facebook usage and subjective well-being 
over time and found that Facebook usage predicted declines in both affective and cognitive subjective 
well-being. Subsequent experimental studies confirmed that overall usage of social network sites 
negatively impacts subjective well-being. In the next section, we add nuance to this conclusion, 
however, by making a distinction between different types of social network site usage. 
Specific types of usage of social network sites and subjective well-being 
Most social network sites allow for a range of activities. These activities can be broadly 
classified into two categories: active and passive usage (Burke, Marlow, & Lento, 2010; Deters & 
Mehl, 2013; Krasnova, Wenninger, Widjaja, & Buxmann, 2013; Verduyn et al., 2015).  
Active usage refers to activities that facilitate direct exchanges with other(s). It encompasses 
both targeted one-on-one exchanges (i.e., directed communication, Burke, Kraut, & Marlow, 2011) as 
well as non-targeted exchanges (i.e., broadcasting, Burke, Kraut, & Marlow, 2011). During active 
usage of social network sites information is often produced, as when posting a status update, sharing 
links, or sending private messages on Facebook. The term can also be applied to other social network 
sites. For example, Tweeting (i.e., posting a short message) or uploading a picture could be 
considered active ways of using Twitter and Instagram, respectively.

----- Page 12 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
12
Passive usage refers to the monitoring of other people‘s lives without engaging in direct 
exchanges with others. During passive usage of social network sites, information is typically 
consumed without communicating with the owner of the content. Typical examples of passive usage 
on Facebook are scrolling through news feeds or looking at other users‘ profiles, pictures, and status 
updates. Again, the term can also be applied to other social network sites. For example, reading 
Tweets or looking at Instagram pictures represent passive ways of interacting on those platforms.  
Importantly, active and passive usage of social network sites are associated with different 
subjective well-being outcomes. Below we review relevant empirical studies, again making a 
distinction between cross-sectional, longitudinal and experimental studies. 
Cross-sectional Designs. Several cross-sectional studies have linked the passive usage of 
social network sites with reduced levels of subjective well-being (Krasnova et al., 2015, 2013; Shaw, 
Timpano, Tran, & Joormann, 2015; Tandoc, Ferrucci, & Duffy, 2015). In contrast, self-disclosure on 
Facebook (i.e., active Facebook usage) has been found to correlate positively with subjective well-
being (Kim & Lee, 2011; Kim, Chung, & Ahn, 2013; Lee, Lee, & Kwon, 2011; Wang, 2013). Two 
recent studies provided evidence for moderation by gender, with female Facebook users especially 
benefiting from active Facebook use possibly due to female users being more socially skilled and less 
involved in negative online interactions than their male counterparts (Frison & Eggermont, 2015; 
Simoncic, Kuhlman, Vargas, Houchins, & Lopez-duran, 2014). 
Longitudinal Studies. More recently, researchers have begun to use longitudinal designs to 
examine the impact of active and passive usage of social network sites on subjective well-being. In 
one diary study, active Facebook use was found to be positively related to life satisfaction, whereas 
the opposite was observed for passive Facebook use (Wenninger, Krasnova, & Buxmann, 2014). 
However, it should be noted that in this study only Facebook usage was repeatedly assessed. Thus 
these findings do not speak to whether different types of social network usage predicted changes in 
subjective well-being over time. In an experience sampling study (Verduyn et al., 2015), active

----- Page 13 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
13
Facebook usage was not found to be related to changes in affective or cognitive subjective well-being. 
In contrast, passive Facebook usage predicted declines in affective subjective well-being over time. 
As in prior work, this relationship was not moderated by participants‘ number of Facebook friends, 
their perceptions of Facebook network support, depressive symptoms, loneliness, gender, self-esteem, 
or their motivations for using Facebook. Specifically, participants felt 5% worse when they engaged 
in passive Facebook usage ―a lot‖ during the time period separating any two affect assessments 
compared to when they did not use Facebook passively at all. The reverse relationship (i.e., affective 
subjective well-being predicting changes in passive Facebook use over time) was not significant. 
Passive Facebook usage was not, however, related to changes in cognitive subjective well-being. 
Finally, in a two-wave panel study ( Frison & Eggermont, 2015), it was found that active (passive) 
Facebook usage was related to increases (decreases) in affective subjective well-being. 
Experimental Designs. Verduyn and colleagues (2015) used an experimental design to 
contrast the effects of active and passive Facebook usage on subjective well-being. Half of the 
participants were instructed to use Facebook actively in the lab for 10 minutes. The other half were 
told to use Facebook passively for 10 minutes. Immediately after the manipulation, no difference in 
affective subjective well-being between the two conditions was observed. However, at the end of the 
day, participants in the passive Facebook condition reported lower levels of affective subjective well-
being compared to how they felt immediately before and after the manipulation as well as compared 
to the active Facebook condition. The manipulation was not found to impact cognitive subjective 
well-being. In another experimental study, passive Facebook usage was contrasted with visiting a 
control website (Fardouly, Diedrichs, Vartanian, & Halliwell, 2015). Participants who were instructed 
to spend time on Facebook reported being in a more negative mood than those who spent time on the 
control website.  
Conclusion. Compared to research assessing overall levels of social network usage, studies on 
the relationship between types of social network usage and subjective well-being provide a clearer

----- Page 14 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
14
picture. One can conclude that passive usage is associated with low levels of subjective well-being 
even though more longitudinal and experimental studies are needed to determine the size of this 
effect. The relationship between active usage of social network sites and subjective well-being is more 
tenuous, with most but not all studies reporting a positive relationship. In this vein, it is important to 
note that passive usage of social network sites is more frequent than active usage, at least on 
Facebook (Constine, 2012; Pempek, Yermolayeva, & Calvert, 2009; Verduyn et al., 2015). For 
example, one study (Verduyn et al., 2015) found that participants used Facebook passively about 50% 
more than they used it actively. As such, passive Facebook usage may underlie the observed negative 
association between overall measures of time spent on Facebook and subjective well-being (Krasnova 
et al., 2015; Verduyn et al., 2015).  
Social network sites and subjective well-being: Explaining the relationship 
In this section, we review what is currently known about the mechanisms underlying the 
effects of social network usage on subjective well-being focusing specifically on the role that social 
capital and social comparisons play in mediating the above described effects. This does not imply that 
these are the only mechanisms that account for the relationship between social network sites and 
subjective well-being. Other mechanisms that have been proposed include the perception of having 
wasted time (Sagioglou & Greitemeyer, 2014), brooding or worrying (Shaw et al., 2015), and 
information overload (Koroleva, Krasnova, & Günther, 2010). However, in contrast to other possible 
mediators, specifically, social capital and social comparisons, these mechanisms have not been 
frequently studied and, consequently, their possible mediating role in the relationship between social 
network sites and subjective well-being is not yet equally well established.   
---------------- Insert Figure 1 around here ---------------- 
For each of the proposed mediators we first briefly describe the wide range of studies that 
confirm their significant effects on people‘s subjective well-being (see Figure 1, path B1 and B2 of 
the mediation model). Next, we discuss at a theoretical and empirical level how different ways of

----- Page 15 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
15
using social network sites influence these proposed mediators (see Figure 1, path A1 and A2 of the 
mediation model). The first set of these studies provide indirect evidence for the proposed mediation 
pathway because they do not formally test the proposed model, but they do provide evidence that each 
of the proposed mediators are central determinants of subjective well-being (i.e., path B of the 
mediation model is a given) (Spencer, Zanna, & Fong, 2005). Finally, we review empirical studies 
that provide direct evidence for the proposed mediation pathway.    
Positive Consequences of Active Usage of Social Network Sites: Social Capital and 
Connectedness 
Social capital and connectedness impact subjective well-being.  
Humans have a fundamental need to create and maintain interpersonal relationships 
(Baumeister & Leary, 1995). Therefore, it should come as no surprise that research reveals a robust 
reciprocal link between subjective well-being and positive social relationships (Myers, 2000). On the 
one hand, subjective well-being promotes marital satisfaction, sociability, and prosocial behaviors 
(Lyubomirsky, King, et al., 2005). On the other hand, having close friends and a network of social 
support has positive effects on subjective well-being too, and to such a degree that it has been 
suggested that social relationships could be the single most important source of subjective well-being 
(Reis & Gable, 2003). In this vein, a now classic study on happiness demonstrated that every 
participant who scored high on subjective well-being had excellent social relationships (Diener & 
Seligman, 2002).  
The benefits obtained from one‘s social relationships or social network are often referred to 
by the term ―social capital.‖ Formally, Bourdieu (1985) defined social capital as "the aggregate of the 
actual or potential resources which are linked to possession of a durable network of more or less 
institutionalized relationships of mutual acquaintance and recognition" (p. 51). The term social capital

----- Page 16 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
16
tends to be used primarily by sociologists and political scientists, whereas psychologists often refer to 
a related concept using the term ―social support‖ (Burke et al., 2011). 
Two types of social capital have been distinguished: bridging and bonding (Putnam, 2000). 
Bridging social capital refers to having access to new information, being exposed to diverse 
perspectives and feeling part of a broader community. This type of social capital is mainly provided 
by acquaintances or weak-ties. Bonding social capital refers to receiving emotional support, 
instrumental support and companionship. This type of social capital is largely derived from one‘s 
inner circle of connections (i.e., strong ties) such as close friends and family members. Both bridging 
and bonding social capital have been found to be positively related to subjective well-being 
(Ferlander, 2007; Helliwell & Putnam, 2004; Steinfield, Ellison, & Lampe, 2008).  
Active usage of social network sites affects social capital and connectedness. 
Social network sites are aimed at satisfying people‘s need to create and establish social 
relationships. For example, Facebook‘s mission is ―to give people the power to share and make the 
world more open and connected. People use Facebook to stay connected with friends and family, to 
discover what‘s going on in the world, and to share and express what matters to them‖ (Facebook, 
2016a). 
Compared to offline settings (e.g., face-to-face conversations), social network sites provide 
unique opportunities for users to increase their social capital (Ellison & Vitak, 2015). In particular, in 
offline settings people often do not have the time or energy to maintain a large number of weak ties. 
However, the cost of maintaining relationships on social network sites is comparatively low, and these 
sites may allow for a strong expansion of one‘s social network. This, in turn, may increase access to 
various resources including novel information and diverse perspectives (Donath & Boyd, 2004; 
Donath, 2008). Moreover, social network sites have the capacity to change latent ties (i.e., ties that are 
technically possible but are not yet activated; Haythornthwaite, 2005) into weak or even strong ties. 
Further, social network sites might help individuals maintain weak or strong ties that would otherwise

----- Page 17 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
17
become extinguished due to an absence of offline interactions (e.g., high school friends who stay in 
touch on Facebook despite living in different countries). In sum, social network sites seem to be well 
suited for increasing bridging social capital by allowing users to maintain large networks of 
connections and even possibly bonding social capital by allowing users to stay in touch with friends 
and providing a medium through which support can be sought and provided.  
Researchers have examined whether usage of these social network sites indeed increases 
levels of social capital. In initial studies using cross-sectional designs, positive associations were 
observed between overall usage of social network sites and social capital (e.g., Ellison, Steinfield, & 
Lampe, 2007; Steinfield et al., 2008). However, recent studies have revealed that the way people use 
online social networks matters, not unlike the case for the relationship between usage of social 
network sites and subjective well-being. These more recent studies are discussed below. 
Cross-sectional Designs. Active engagement on Facebook has been shown to be negatively 
related to loneliness (i.e., active usage promotes feeling connected), whereas the opposite holds for 
passive engagement (Matook, Cummings, & Bala, 2015; Ryan & Xenos, 2011). Similarly, when 
examining server logs of participants‘ activity on Facebook (Burke et al., 2010), active Facebook 
usage was found to be associated with greater feelings of bonding social capital and lower levels of 
loneliness. The opposite pattern of results was found for passive Facebook usage. Koroleva and 
colleagues (2011) examined a range of social capital benefits. Both active and passive Facebook 
usage increased levels of social capital, but the former was related to more social capital outcomes 
compared to the latter.  
Longitudinal Designs. Burke and colleagues (2011) showed that directed communication (i.e., 
active Facebook usage) predicted increases in bridging social capital. However, neither active nor 
passive Facebook usage was found to predict changes in bonding social capital. In contrast, in a more 
recent longitudinal study (Burke & Kraut, 2014) relationship closeness between friends (i.e., bonding

----- Page 18 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
18
social capital) was found to increase with one-on-one communication (i.e., active Facebook usage) as 
well as through reading friends‘ broadcasted content (i.e., passive Facebook usage).  
Experimental Designs. Deters and Mehl  (2013) tested the psychological effects of posting 
status updates on Facebook. For one week, participants in the experimental condition were asked to 
post more than they usually do. Participants in the control condition received no instructions. Results 
indicated that the experimentally induced increase in status updating activity increased feelings of 
social connectedness and reduced loneliness. In another experiment, participants were either 
instructed to use Facebook as they normally do (post-as-usual condition) or to refrain from using 
Facebook actively for 2 days (do-not-post condition). Participants in the do-not-post condition were 
found to report lower levels of belonging (Tobin, Vanman, Verreynne, & Saeri, 2014). 
 
In sum, whereas evidence for passive usage is mixed, studies reveal a positive relationship 
between active usage of social network sites and social capital. Given the effects that social 
relationships have on subjective well-being, the positive effect of active usage of social network sites 
on subjective well-being may be partially due to an increase in social capital and associated feelings 
of social connectedness.  
Direct Tests of the Meditation Model 
Recently, a number of studies have begun to provide direct evidence for the proposed 
mediating role of social capital and social connectedness. In a cross-sectional study (Frison & 
Eggermont, 2015) data were collected from a large sample of adolescents to explore the relationship 
between different types of Facebook use, perceived online social support and depressive symptoms. 
Using structural equation modeling, evidence was obtained that active Facebook use increases 
perceived online social support, which in turn predicted a decrease in depressive symptoms. It should 
be noted, however, that this relationship was only found for female participants.  
Similarly, Kim and Lee (Kim & Lee, 2011) also conducted a cross-sectional study among 
college students to explore the relationship between self-presentation (i.e. active usage of social

----- Page 19 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
19
network sites), perceived online support and subjective well-being. Self-presentation was found to 
have a positive effect on subjective well-being mediated by perceived social support but only when 
self-presentation was honest. A study by Frison and Eggermont (2015) established that active 
Facebook usage positively predicts perceived Facebook support, which in turn predicts a decrease in 
depressed symptoms at the next assessment.  
In sum, the available evidence suggests that the positive impact of active usage of social 
network sites on subjective well-being is due to an increase in social capital. However, future 
longitudinal and experimental research is needed to confirm the temporal location of each of the 
constructs in the proposed mediation model and the causal nature of the proposed relationships. 
The negative consequences of passive usage of social network sites: Social comparison and envy 
Social comparisons and envy impact subjective well-being.  
Aside from a fundamental need for relatedness, people also have a drive to evaluate their 
opinions and abilities (Festinger, 1954). This drive encompasses a desire to reduce uncertainty 
(Gibbons & Buunk, 1999) and establish one‘s standing (Brown, Ferris, Heller, & Keeping, 2007). In 
many circumstances objective bases for self-evaluation are not present: For example, is running 100 
meters in 14 seconds fast? In such cases self-evaluation depends upon how one compares oneself with 
other people, a process called ―social comparison‖ (Festinger, 1954).  
Formally, social 
comparisons are defined as ―comparative judgments of social stimuli on particular content 
dimensions‖ (Kruglanski & Mayseless, 1990, p. 196). A distinction is made between upward and 
downward comparisons (Buunk & Gibbons, 1997; Wills, 1981). In upward comparisons one 
perceives the other as better on a particular dimension whereas the opposite holds for downward 
comparisons.   
In the case of upward comparisons envy is frequently experienced. Envy is defined as ―an 
unpleasant and often painful blend of feelings characterized by inferiority, hostility, and resentment 
caused by a comparison with a person or group of persons who possess something we desire‖ (Smith

----- Page 20 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
20
& Kim, 2007, p. 49). Envy is not only an unpleasant experience in itself: a wide range of studies 
indicate that envy has negative consequences for subjective well-being (Cohen-Charash, 2009; Smith, 
Parrott, Diener, Hoyle, & Kim, 1999; Vecchio, 2000) 
Passive usage of social network sites elicits social comparison and feelings of envy 
To make social comparisons, information about others is needed. On social network sites, 
only a mouse click stands between the user and an enormous amount of information about others. 
Thus, social comparison can be carried out on an unprecedented scale. Moreover, compared to offline 
settings, most social network sites have a number of features that make the occurrence of upwards 
social comparisons and the feeling of envy especially likely. First, social network sites typically allow 
for asynchronous communication such that there is ample time to post a witty comment or a nice 
picture. This further allows people to portray themselves in overly flattering ways (Barash, 
Ducheneaut, Isaacs, & Bellotti, 2007; Kross et al., 2013; Mehdizadeh, 2010; Newman, Lauterbach, 
Munson, Resnick, & Morris, 2011) and may elicit upward social comparisons in the receiver of this 
information. Second, several social network sites provide functionalities to easily connect with and 
become informed of similar others who post information that is relevant for the perceiver – features 
that tend to increase the probability of experiencing envy (Hill & Buss, 2006; Salovey & Rodin, 
1991).  
 
Researchers have examined whether usage of social network sites indeed stimulates upward 
social comparison and envy. Initial studies found evidence for this relationship (Chou & Edge, 2012; 
Jang, Park, & Song, 2016; Lee, 2014; Muise, Christofides, & Desmarais, 2009; Steers & Wickham, 
2014). However, similar to research on the effect of social network sites on subjective well-being and 
social capital, it has become clear that only particular ways of using social network sites will lead to 
upward social comparisons and envy.  
 
Cross-sectional Designs. In several cross-sectional studies a positive relationship was found 
between passive usage of Facebook and envy, but no significant relationship was observed for active

----- Page 21 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
21
Facebook usage (Krasnova et al., 2015, 2013; Tandoc et al., 2015). It is notable that in a recent study, 
participants reported experiencing positive emotions more often than envy upon reading positive 
Facebook posts (Lin & Utz, 2015). However, this comparison between positive emotion and envy is 
not informative because people do not readily admit feeling envy. Using indirect assessments of envy 
frequency, Krasnova and colleagues concluded that envy is a common consequence of following 
information about others on Facebook, and even more common than the experience of positive 
emotions (Krasnova et al., 2015, 2013). 
 
Longitudinal Designs. Only one study that we are aware of has examined the longitudinal 
relationship between social network usage and envy. Specifically, in an experience sampling study on 
Facebook usage in young adults Verduyn and colleagues (2015) found that passive Facebook usage 
increases feelings of envy over time. 
 
Experimental Designs. Several experiments indicate that passively browsing Facebook has 
negative consequences for people who naturally tend to engage in social comparisons. This provides 
indirect evidence that passive usage of social network sites is a fertile ground for envy to occur. For 
example, compared to visiting a control website, female participants with a strong tendency to 
compare their attractiveness to others were less satisfied with their physical appearance upon 
browsing Facebook for 10 minutes (Fardouly et al., 2015). Similarly, compared to looking at one‘s 
own Facebook profile or visiting a control website, participants who tend to engage in social 
comparisons had poorer self-perceptions after looking at a friend‘s Facebook profile (Vogel, Rose, 
Okdie, Eckles, & Franz, 2015).   
In other experiments, the nature of the content that participants were exposed to on social 
network sites was manipulated. Participants either passively browsed Facebook pages of high (e.g., 
users who are attractive or have a successful career) or low comparison standards. Overall, 
participants reported lower levels of subjective well-being and higher levels of envy upon exposure to 
attractive or successful profiles (Appel, Crusius, & Gerlach, 2015; Haferkamp & Krämer, 2011;

----- Page 22 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
22
Vogel, Rose, Roberts, & Eckles, 2014). Finally, Verduyn and colleagues examined whether passive 
Facebook usage resulted in higher levels of social comparisons compared to active Facebook usage. 
Contrary to their hypothesis, the groups did not differ in the degree to which they perceived their own 
life as worse compared to that of others (Verduyn et al., 2015). However, Verduyn and colleagues 
speculated that the reason for the null effect in this study may have been a result of how they asked 
participants to rate their envy (for complete discussion see Verduyn et al., 2015), and follow-up data 
that they provided in a second longitudinal study was consistent with their argument.  
Direct Evidence for the Proposed Mediation Model 
A number of recent studies provide direct evidence for the role that upward social 
comparisons and envy play in mediating the links between passive usage of social network sites and 
declines in subjective well-being. Specifically, several cross-sectional studies have found that envy 
mediates the relationship between passive usage of social network sites and subjective well-being 
(Krasnova et al., 2015, 2013; Tandoc et al., 2015). Experimental and longitudinal work testing the full 
mediation pathway is scare. An exception, however, is a recent longitudinal study, which 
demonstrated that the negative effect of passive Facebook usage on subjective well-being is mediated 
by envy (Verduyn et al., 2015). In particular, using an experience sampling design, passive Facebook 
usage predicted increases in envy, which, in turn, predicted decreases in affective subjective well-
being at the next assessment. 
Finally, it is notable that beyond having an impact on subjective well-being, envy also 
triggers a number of potentially ineffective coping styles. One such style is engaging in self-
enhancement strategies (i.e., stressing one‘s strengths) to diminish the sense of inferiority triggered by 
envy (Brown & Gallagher, 1992; Salovey & Rodin, 1988). Even though this may be a suitable 
strategy to deal with envy, this behavior may ironically elicit envy in others resulting in a ―self-
enhancement envy spiral‖ (Krasnova et al., 2015). For example, being exposed to beautiful holiday

----- Page 23 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
23
pictures may lead one to upload similar pictures, which, in turn, causes others to experience envy and 
initiate similar self-enhancing behavior. 
 
From Data to Policy: Some Suggestions 
The popularity of social media has influenced policy at different levels. At the governmental 
level, guidelines have been formulated to limit recreational screen time to two hours per day for 
children, but these guidelines are not specific to use of social network sites (Tremblay et al., 2011). 
Moreover, recommendations have been offered to the general population  on how to protect their 
privacy when using social network sites (Federal Trade Commission, 2016; Information 
Commissioner‘s Office, 2016) and to social network site providers on how to enhance the safety of 
young people and children using their services (UK Council for Child Internet Safety, 2016). 
However, guidelines aimed at using social network sites to specifically foster subjective well-being at 
a societal level are, on the whole, lacking.    
At the organizational level many companies have implemented social media policies (e.g., 
adidas, 2011; Los Angeles Times, 2009). These policies typically include employee guidelines on 
how to interact on social network sites without damaging the interests of their employer. These 
policies usually instruct employees to: (a) not use social network sites excessively while working, (b) 
be respectful when communicating on social network sites, (c) not discuss confidential information, 
and (d) clearly mention when expressed views are one‘s own rather than their employer‘s. However, 
such guidelines are primarily formulated with the interests of the company in mind rather than the 
subjective well-being of the broader population. 
At the level of households, many parents have installed rules for their children regarding 
usage of social network sites. For example, 55% of parents limit the amount of time that their children 
can go online, 60% of parents check their children‘s social media profile and 78% of parents talk 
occasionally or even frequently about what constitutes appropriate online behavior (Anderson, 2016).

----- Page 24 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
24
The high levels of parental oversight that these percentages capture suggest that parents would likely 
welcome evidence-based recommendations for usage of social network sites that they could transfer 
to their children.   
Below, we formulate empirically-based recommendations for policy makers on how to: (a) 
educate the general population about the most productive ways of using social network sites to 
improve subjective well-being, (b) support researchers to deepen our understanding of adaptive usage 
of social network sites, and (c) stimulate social network site providers to adjust their platforms in 
order to nudge users to ways of using their sites that enhance subjective well-being. Note that the 
recommendations that follow are aimed primarily at policy makers at the governmental level, but we 
expect that their implementation could eventually impact lower levels as well (e.g., educating the 
population on proper usage of social networks can be expected to lead to changes in parental rules 
regarding social media usage).  The material below is organized around the potential targets of the 
policy recommendations. 
General Population. Policy makers should educate the public on how to use social networks 
to enhance subjective well-being. For this purpose, one could inform the larger public (e.g., through 
informational campaigns) or specific subgroups (e.g., through courses on social media literacy as part 
of school curricula) on what constitutes adaptive social network usage. Until recently this was an 
impossible task for policy makers simply because of a lack of empirical  evidence indicating how 
people can use social network sites in ways that specifically enhance subjective well-being. Indeed, in 
a 2008 article on policy recommendations regarding usage of social network sites, the authors 
concluded by stating: ―In writing this article, we have struggled to find sufficient empirical research 
on which to ground our claims‖ (Livingstone & Brake, 2010, p. 9).  
As we show in this article, the literature on this issue has since increased dramatically, 
providing the potential for evidence-based guidelines on what constitutes adaptive usage of social

----- Page 25 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
25
network sites. Below, we describe three key messages that should be stressed in any educational 
campaign on adaptive usage of social network sites:  
 (1) Excessive passive usage of social network sites should be avoided, as this type of usage is 
found to be negatively related to subjective well-being. The fact that social network sites are used 
passively, rather than actively, most of the time only underscores the importance of communicating 
this finding to the population (Constine, 2012; Pempek et al., 2009; Verduyn et al., 2015) in a way 
that is accessible and understandable.  
(2) Positive news is more often shared on social network sites than negative news (Kross et 
al., 2013; Verduyn et al., 2015) and people tend to portray themselves in overly flattering ways 
(Mehdizadeh, 2010; Newman et al., 2011). Informing people about this may lower the impact of 
being exposed to information about others when passively browsing social network sites as damaging 
social comparisons are less likely to take place. 
(3) Active usage of social network sites has no negative consequences for subjective well-
being and likely has positive consequences. To stimulate active usage of social network sites, one 
could stress that these sites provide a unique opportunity to connect to others, increase one‘s social 
capital and feelings of social connection. However, in order for these positive consequences to occur, 
social network sites have to be used actively rather than passively.   
Researchers. During the last decade social network sites partially moved the interactions 
people have with one another from offline (i.e., ―fact-to-face‖) to online contexts. This shift is likely 
to continue creating novel challenges for researchers to address. New social network sites enter the 
market at a fast pace and existing social network sites are continuously changing. As such, researchers 
need to continuously test the validity of their theories on social network sites; this includes researchers 
examining the consequences of usage of social network sites for subjective well-being. Thus, policy 
makers should consider expanding the scope of funding available to conduct this type of research.

----- Page 26 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
26
Such funding should be aimed at extending our current knowledge on the topic and avoiding the 
pitfalls of the past. Below, we suggest three elements for funding agencies to take into account:  
(1) Most studies on the relationship between social network sites and subjective well-being 
make use of cross-sectional designs. As we have attempted to clarify in this review, these studies 
sometimes create more confusion than clarity, further amplified by the media coverage that they have 
received. Currently, there is a need for more longitudinal and experimental research as these stronger 
research designs position researchers to more confidently draw inferences about cause and effect, as 
well as short and long term consequences.   
(2) Research on the relation between social network sites and subjective well-being has 
mainly relied on samples consisting of adolescents and young adults. Although young people 
represent a significant user base of social network sites, older adults are increasingly attracted to 
social network sites as well (Perrin, 2015). Moreover, a recent study (Hayes, van Stolk-cooke, & 
Muench, 2015), demonstrated that older adults use Facebook less actively than young adults. As such, 
more research using older participant samples should be supported.    
(3) Most studies on social network sites focus on Facebook. Arguably, this is due to Facebook 
still being the most often used social network site. However, many other social network sites boast a 
high number of users. As each social network site constitutes a partially unique context for 
interaction, research should be supported that focuses on identifying the contextual features that 
impact subjective well-being (which are possibly shared by several social network sites) rather than 
merely replicating findings across different social network sites (Mcfarland & Ployhart, 2015).    
Providers of social network sites. Providers of social network sites would only gain from 
having their technologies contribute to the subjective well-being of their users. Based on the current 
review, we offer two recommendations for policy makers on how to reach out to providers of social 
network site:

----- Page 27 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
27
(1) Encourage providers of social network sites to collaborate with researchers to identify the 
features of their social network sites that enhance rather than undermine subjective well-being. One 
way to do so is to convince providers to share anonymized data such that researchers can rely on 
objective assessments of social network usage. Currently, most researchers have to rely on self-report 
or time-consuming coding procedures (e.g., copying and manually coding Facebook wall data) to 
attain objective measures (Deters & Mehl, 2013; Park et al., 2016).   
(2) Encourage providers of social network sites to consider ways of integrating insights from 
basic research to enhance the benefits that their products provide to their users in terms of subjective 
well-being. For this purpose, providers could, for example, use these insights to develop interfaces 
that nudge users towards adaptive usage patterns.   
Concluding Thoughts 
Does usage of social network sites increase or decrease subjective well-being? Based on the 
literature available at this time, the answer is: It depends on how one uses them. Social network sites 
have the potential to increase our subjective well-being by allowing us to increase our social capital 
and feeling of connectedness due to active usage of these sites. However, they can also be a 
significant cause of distress, especially when they elicit social comparisons and envy due to passive 
usage of these sites.  
 
 
References 
adidas. (2011). Social Media Guidelines for adidas Group employees. Retrieved October 10, 2016, 
from blog.adidas-group.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/adidas-Group-Social-Media-
Guidelines.pdf 
Anderson, M. (2016). Parents, Teens and Digital Monitoring.

----- Page 28 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
28
Andreassen, C. S., & Pallesen, S. (2014). Social network site addiction—an overview. Current 
Pharmaceutical Design, 20(25), 4053–4061. 
Apaolaza, V., Hartmann, P., Medina, E., Barrutia, J. M., & Echebarria, C. (2013). The relationship 
between socializing on the Spanish online networking site Tuenti and teenagers ‘ subjective 
wellbeing : The roles of self-esteem and loneliness. Computers in Human Behavior, 29(4), 
1282–1289. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.01.002 
Appel, H., Crusius, J., & Gerlach, A. L. (2015). Social Comparison, Envy, and Depression on 
Facebook : A Study Looking at the Effects of High Comparison Standards on Depressed 
Individuals. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 34(4), 277–289. 
Barash, V., Ducheneaut, N., Isaacs, E., & Bellotti, V. (2007). Faceplant : Impression (Mis) 
management in Facebook Status Updates. In Proceedings of the Fourth International AAAI 
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (pp. 207–210). 
Bartolini, S., Bilancini, E., Bruni, L., & Porta, P. L. (2016). Policies for happiness. 
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: desire for interpersonal attachments as 
a fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117(3), 497–529. doi:10.1037/0033-
2909.117.3.497 
Bessière, K., Kiesler, S., Kraut, R., & Boneva, B. S. (2008). Effects of internet use and social 
resources on changes in depression. Information, Communication & Society, 11(1), 47–70. 
doi:10.1080/13691180701858851 
Boehm, J. K., Peterson, C., & Kubzansky, L. (2011). A Prospective Study of Positive Psychological 
Well-Being and Coronary Heart Disease. Health Psychology, 30(3), 259–267. 
doi:10.1037/a0023124

----- Page 29 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
29
Bourdieu, P. (1985). The forms of social capital. In J. G. Richardson (Ed.), Handbook of theory and 
research for the sociology of education (pp. 241–258). New York, NY: Greenwood. 
Brown, D. J., Ferris, D. L., Heller, D., & Keeping, L. M. (2007). Antecedents and consequences of the 
frequency of upward and downward social comparisons at work. Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes, 102, 59–75. doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2006.10.003 
Brown, J. D., & Gallagher, M. (1992). Coming to Terms with Failure : Private Self-Enhancement 
Public Self-Effacement. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 28, 3–22. 
Brusilovskiy, E., Townley, G., Snethen, G., & Salzer, M. S. (2016). Social media use, community 
participation and psychological well-being among individuals with serious mental illnesses. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 65, 232–240. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2016.08.036 
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2014). American Time Use Survey Summary. Retrieved from 
http://www.bls.gov/news.release/atus.nr0.htm 
Burke, M., & Kraut, R. (2014). Growing Closer on Facebook : Changes in Tie Strength Through 
Social Network Site Use. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (pp. 4187–4196). doi:10.1145/2556288.2557094 
Burke, M., Kraut, R., & Marlow, C. (2011). Social capital on Facebook: Differentiating uses and 
users. Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’11), 571–580. doi:10.1145/1978942.1979023 
Burke, M., Marlow, C., & Lento, T. (2010). Social Network Activity and Social Well-being. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1909–1912. 
doi:10.1145/1753326.1753613 
Buunk, B. P., & Gibbons, F. X. (Eds.). (1997). Health, coping, and well-being: Perspectives from

----- Page 30 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
30
social comparison theory. Mahwah, NJ, US: Erlbaum. 
Chou, H. G., & Edge, N. (2012). ―‗They Are Happier and Having Better Lives than I Am‘‖: The 
Impact of Using Facebook on Perceptions of Others ‘ Lives. Cyberpsychology, Behavior and 
Social Networking, 15(2), 117–121. doi:10.1089/cyber.2011.0324 
Cohen-Charash, Y. (2009). Episodic Envy. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 39(9), 2128–2173. 
Constine, J. (2012). 27% of Facebook browsing on news feed, just 10% on apps. Retrieved from 
http://www.adweek.com/socialtimes/most-facebook-browsing-on-news-feed/266098?red=if 
Deters, F. G., & Mehl, M. R. (2013). Does Posting Facebook Status Updates Increase or Decrease 
Loneliness? An Online Social Networking Experiment. Social Psychological and Personality 
Science, 4(5), 579–586. doi:10.1177/1948550612469233 
Diener, E. (1984). Subjective well-being. Psychological Bulletin, 95(3), 542–575. 
Diener, E. (2000). Subjective Well-Being. American Psychologist, 55(1), 34–43. doi:10.1037//0003-
066X.55.1.34 
Diener, E. (2009). Happiness. In M. R. Leary & R. H. Hoyle (Eds.), Handbook of individual 
differences in social behavior (pp. 147–160). New York: NY: Guilford. 
Diener, E., & Chan, M. Y. (2011). Happy People Live Longer : Subjective Well-Being. Applied 
Psychology: Health and Well-Being, 3(1), 1–43. doi:10.1111/j.1758-0854.2010.01045.x 
Diener, E. D., Nickerson, C., Lucas, R. E., & Sandvik, E. D. (2002). Dispositional affect and job 
outcomes. Social Indicators Research, 40, 229–259. 
Diener, E., Sapyta, J. J., & Suh, E. (1998). Subjective Well-Being Is Essential to Well-Being. 
Psychological Inquiry, 9(1), 33–37.

----- Page 31 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
31
Diener, E., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2002). Very happy people. Psychological Science, 13(1), 81–84. 
Donath, J. (2008). Signals in Social Supernets. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13, 
231–251. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00394.x 
Donath, J., & Boyd, D. (2004). Public displays of connection. BT Technology Journal, 22(4), 71–82. 
Ellison, N. B., & Boyd, D. (2013). Sociality through Social Network Sites. In W. H. Dutton (Ed.), The 
Oxford handbook of Internet studies (pp. 151–172). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Ellison, N. B., Steinfield, C., & Lampe, C. (2007). The benefits of facebook ―friends:‖ Social capital 
and college students‘ use of online social network sites. Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication, 12, 1143–1168. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00367.x 
Ellison, N. B., & Vitak, J. (2015). Social Network Site Affordances and their Relationship to Social 
Capital Processes. In S. Sundar (Ed.), The Handbook of the Psychology of Communication 
Technology. (pp. 205–227). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Facebook. (2016a). Facebook mission. Retrieved October 12, 2016, from 
https://www.facebook.com/facebook/info/ 
Facebook. (2016b). Facebook Newsroom Website. Retrieved May 7, 2016, from 
http://newsroom.fb.com/company-info/ 
Farahani, H. A., Kazemi, Z., Aghamohamadi, S., Bakhtiarvand, F., & Ansari, M. (2011). Examining 
mental health indices in students using Facebook in Iran. Procedia - Social and Behavioral 
Sciences, 28, 811–814. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2011.11.148 
Fardouly, J., Diedrichs, P. C., Vartanian, L. R., & Halliwell, E. (2015). Social comparisons on social 
media: The impact of Facebook on young women‘s body image concerns and mood. Body

----- Page 32 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
32
Image, 13, 38–45. doi:10.1016/j.bodyim.2014.12.002 
Federal Trade Commission. (2016). How to Keep Your Personal Information Secure. Retrieved 
October 6, 2016, from https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/articles/0272-how-keep-your-personal-
information-secure 
Ferlander, S. (2007). The Importance of Different Forms of Social Capital for Health. Acta 
Sociologica, 50(June), 115–128. doi:10.1177/0001699307077654 
Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations, 7, 117–140. 
doi:10.1177/001872675400700202 
Frison, E., & Eggermont, S. (2015a). Exploring the Relationships Between Different Types of 
Facebook Use, Perceived Online Social Support, and Adolescents‘ Depressed Mood. Social 
Science Computer Review, 45, 1–19. doi:10.1177/0894439314567449 
Frison, E., & Eggermont, S. (2015b). Toward an Integrated and Differential Approach to the 
Relationships Between Loneliness , Different Types of Facebook Use , and Adolescents ‘ 
Depressed Mood. Communication Research, 1–28. doi:10.1177/0093650215617506 
Gibbons, F. X., & Buunk, B. P. (1999). Individual differences in social comparison: Development of a 
scale of social comparison orientation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76(1), 
129–142. 
Haferkamp, N., & Krämer, N. C. (2011). Social Comparison 2 . 0 : Examining the Effects of Online 
Profiles on Social-Networking Sites. Cyberpsychology, Behavior and Social Networking, 14(5), 
309–314. doi:10.1089/cyber.2010.0120 
Hayes, M., van Stolk-cooke, K., & Muench, F. (2015). Understanding Facebook use and the 
psychological affects of use across generations. Computers in Human Behavior, 49, 507–511.

----- Page 33 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
33
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.03.040 
Haythornthwaite, C. (2005). Social networks and Internet connectivity effects. Information, 
Communication & Society, 8(2), 125–147. doi:10.1080/13691180500146185 
Helliwell, J. F., & Putnam, R. D. (2004). The social context of well-being. Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society., 359, 1435–1446. doi:10.1098/rstb.2004.1522 
Hill, S. E., & Buss, D. M. (2006). Envy and Positional Bias in the Evolutionary Psychology of 
Management. MANAGERIAL AND DECISION ECONOMICS, 27(2/3), 131–143. 
doi:10.1002/mde.l288 
Information Commissioner‘s Office. (2016). Online safety. Retrieved October 6, 2016, from 
https://ico.org.uk/for-the-public/online/social-networking/ 
Instagram. (2016). Instagram usage. Retrieved May 7, 2016, from https://www.instagram.com/press/ 
Jang, K., Park, N., & Song, H. (2016). Social comparison on Facebook : Its antecedents and 
psychological outcomes. Computers in Human Behavior, 62, 147–154. 
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2016.03.082 
Joinson, A. N. (2008). ―Looking at‖, ―Looking up‖ or ―Keeping up with‖ People ? Motives and Uses 
of Facebook. In D. Gilmore (Ed.), Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1027–1036). New York: NY:ACM Press. 
Kaplan, A. M., & Haenlein, M. (2010). Users of the world , unite ! The challenges and opportunities 
of Social Media. Business Horizons, 53, 59–68. doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2009.09.003 
Kim, J., & Lee, J. R. (2011). The Facebook Paths to Happiness : Effects of the Number of Facebook 
Friends and Self-Presentation. Cyberpsychology, Behavior and Social Networking, 14(6), 359–

----- Page 34 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
34
364. doi:10.1089/cyber.2010.0374 
Kim, J. Y., Chung, N., & Ahn, K. M. (2013). Why people use social networking services in Korea : 
The mediating role of self-disclosure on subjective well-being. Information Development, 1–12. 
doi:10.1177/0266666913489894 
King, L. A., & Napa, C. K. (1998). What Makes a Life Good ? Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 75(1), 156–165. 
Koroleva, K., Krasnova, H., & Günther, O. (2010). ―STOP SPAMMING ME!‖ - Exploring 
Information Overload on Facebook. In Americas Conference on Information Systems (pp. 1–9). 
Koroleva, K., Krasnova, H., Veltri, N., & Günther, O. (2011). It‘s all about networking! Empirical 
investigation of social capital formation on social network sites. In Thirty Second International 
Conference on Information Systems (pp. 1–20). Shanghai. 
Krasnova, H., Wenninger, H., Widjaja, T., & Buxmann, P. (2013). Envy on Facebook: A Hidden 
Threat to Users‘ Life Satisfaction? 11th International Conference on Wirtschaftsinformatik, 
(March), 1–16. 
Krasnova, H., Widjaja, T., Buxmann, P., Wenninger, H., Benbasat, I., Krasnova, H., … Wenninger, 
H. (2015). Research Note — Why Following Friends Can Hurt You : An Networking Sites 
among College-Age Users College-Age Users. Information Systems Research, 26(3), 585–605. 
doi:10.1287/isre.2015.0588 
Kross, E., Verduyn, P., Demiralp, E., Park, J., Lee, D. S., Lin, N., … Ybarra, O. (2013). Facebook 
Use Predicts Declines in Subjective Well-Being in Young Adults. PLoS ONE, 8(8), 1–6. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0069841 
Kruglanski, A. W., & Mayseless, O. (1990). Classic and Current Social Comparison Research :

----- Page 35 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
35
Expanding the Perspective. Psychological Bulletin, 108(2), 195–208. 
Labrague, L. J. (2014). Facebook use and adolescents‘ emotional states of depression, anxiety, and 
stress. Health Science Journal, 8(1), 80–89. 
Layard, R. (2006). Happiness and public policy : A challenge to the profession. The Economic 
Journal, 116(1998), 24–33. 
Lee, G., Lee, J., & Kwon, S. (2011). Use of social-networking sites and subjective well-being: A 
study in South Korea. Cyberpsychology, Behavior and Social Networking, 14(3), 151–155. 
doi:10.1089/cyber.2009.0382 
Lee, S. Y. (2014). How do people compare themselves with others on social network sites?: The case 
of Facebook. Computers in Human Behavior, 32, 253–260. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.12.009 
Lin, L. yi, Sidani, J. E., Shensa, A., Radovic, A., Miller, E., Colditz, J. B., … Primack, B. A. (2016). 
Association between social media use and depression among U.S. young adults. Depression and 
Anxiety, 33, 323–331. doi:10.1002/da.22466 
Lin, R., & Utz, S. (2015). The emotional responses of browsing Facebook: Happiness, envy, and the 
role of tie strength. Computers in Human Behavior, 52, 29–38. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.04.064 
LinkedIn. (2016). LindedIn usage. Retrieved May 7, 2016, from https://investors.linkedin.com/events-
and-news/corporate-press-releases/ 
Livingstone, S., & Brake, D. R. (2010). On the rapid rise of social networking sites : new findings and 
policy implications. Children and Society, 24(1), 75–83. doi:10.1111/j.1099-0860.2009.00243.x 
Los Angeles Times. (2009). Times updates social media guidelines [Blog Post]. Retrieved October 
10, 2016, from http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/readers/2009/11/updated-social-media-

----- Page 36 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
36
guidelines.html 
Lyubomirsky, S., King, L., & Diener, E. (2005). The Benefits of Frequent Positive Affect : Does 
Happiness Lead to Success ? Psychological Bulletin, 131(6), 803–855. doi:10.1037/0033-
2909.131.6.803 
Lyubomirsky, S., Sheldon, K. M., & Schkade, D. (2005). Pursuing happiness: The architecture of 
sustainable change. Review of General Psychology, 9(2), 111–131. doi:10.1037/1089-
2680.9.2.111 
Matook, S., Cummings, J., & Bala, H. (2015). Are you feeling lonely ? The impact of relationship 
characteristics and online social network features on loneliness. Journal of Management 
Information Systems, 31(4), 278–310. doi:10.1080/07421222.2014.1001282 
Mcfarland, L. A., & Ployhart, R. E. (2015). Social media : A contextual framework to guide research 
and practice. Journal of Applied Psychology, 100(6), 1653–1677. 
Mehdizadeh, S. (2010). Self-Presentation 2.0: Narcissism and Self-Esteem on Facebook. 
Cyberpsychology, Behavior and Social Networking, 13(4), 357–364. 
doi:10.1089/cyber.2009.0257 
Muise, A., Christofides, E., & Desmarais, S. (2009). More information than you ever wanted: does 
Facebook bring out the green-eyed monster of jealousy? Cyberpsychology & Behavior : The 
Impact of the Internet, Multimedia and Virtual Reality on Behavior and Society, 12(4), 441–444. 
doi:10.1089/cpb.2008.0263 
Myers, D. G. (2000). The Funds, Friends, and Faith of Happy People. American Psychologist, 55(1), 
56–67. doi:10.1037//0003-066X.55 
Myers, D. G., & Diener, E. (1995). Who is happy? Psychological Science, 6(1), 10–17.

----- Page 37 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
37
Newman, M. W., Lauterbach, D., Munson, S. A., Resnick, P., & Morris, M. E. (2011). ―It‘s not that I 
don't have problems , I'm just not putting them on Facebook‖: Challenges and Opportunities in 
using online social networks for health. In ACM 2011 conference on Computer supported 
cooperative work. 
Pantic, I., Damjanovic, A., Todorovic, J., Topalovic, D., Bojovic-Jovi, D., Ristic, S., & Pantic, S. 
(2012). Association between online social networking and depression in high school students: 
Behavioral physiology viewpoint. Psychiatria Danubina, 24(1), 90–93. 
Park, J., Lee, D. S., Shablack, H., Verduyn, P., Deldin, P., Ybarra, O., … Kross, E. (2016). When 
perceptions defy reality: The relationships between depression and actual and perceived 
Facebook social support. Journal of Affective Disorders. 
Pempek, T. A., Yermolayeva, Y. A., & Calvert, S. L. (2009). College students ‘ social networking 
experiences on Facebook. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 30(3), 227–238. 
doi:10.1016/j.appdev.2008.12.010 
Perrin, A. (2015). Social Networking Usage: 2005-2015. 
Pittman, M., & Reich, B. (2016). Social media and loneliness : Why an Instagram picture may be 
worth more than a thousand Twitter words. Computers in Human Behavior, 62, 155–167. 
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2016.03.084 
Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of American community. New York: 
Simon & Schuster. 
Rae, J. R., & Lonborg, S. D. (2015). Do motivations for using Facebook moderate the association 
between Facebook use and psychological. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1–9. 
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00771

----- Page 38 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
38
Reis, H. T., & Gable, S. L. (2003). Toward a positive psychology of relationships. In C. L. Keyes & J. 
Haidt (Eds.), Flourishing: The positive person and the good life (pp. 129–159). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association. 
Ryan, T., & Xenos, S. (2011). Who uses Facebook ? An investigation into the relationship between 
the Big Five, shyness, narcissism, loneliness, and Facebook usage. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 27(5), 1658–1664. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2011.02.004 
Sagioglou, C., & Greitemeyer, T. (2014). Facebook‘s emotional consequences: Why Facebook causes 
a decrease in mood and why people still use it. Computers in Human Behavior, 35, 359–363. 
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2014.03.003 
Salovey, P., & Rodin, J. (1988). Coping with envy and jealousy. Journal of Social and Clinical 
Psychology, 7(1), 15–33. 
Salovey, P., & Rodin, J. (1991). Provoking jealousy and envy: Domain relevance and self-esteem 
threat. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 10(4), 395–413. 
Sampasa-kanyinga, H., & Lewis, R. F. (2015). Frequent Use of Social Networking Sites Is Associated 
with Poor Psychological Functioning Among Children and Adolescents. Cyberpsychology, 
Behavior and Social Networking, 18(7), 380–385. doi:10.1089/cyber.2015.0055 
Shaw, A. M., Timpano, K. R., Tran, T. B., & Joormann, J. (2015). Correlates of Facebook usage 
patterns: The relationship between passive Facebook use, social anxiety symptoms, and 
brooding. Computers in Human Behavior, 48, 575–580. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.02.003 
Simoncic, T. E., Kuhlman, K. R., Vargas, I., Houchins, S., & Lopez-duran, N. L. (2014). Computers 
in Human Behavior Facebook use and depressive symptomatology : Investigating the role of 
neuroticism and extraversion in youth. Computers in Human Behavior, 40, 1–5.

----- Page 39 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
39
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2014.07.039 
Smith, A. (2011). Why Americans use social media friends. 
Smith, R. H., & Kim, S. H. (2007). Comprehending envy. Psychological Bulletin, 133(1), 46–64. 
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.133.1.46 
Smith, R. H., Parrott, W. G., Diener, E. F., Hoyle, R. H., & Kim, S. H. (1999). Dispositional Envy. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25(8), 1007–1020. 
Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., & Fong, G. T. (2005). Establishing a causal chain : Why experiments are 
often more effective than mediational analyses in examining psychological processes. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 89(6), 845–851. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.89.6.845 
Steers, M. N., & Wickham, R. E. (2014). Seeing everyone else‘s highlights reels: How Facebook 
usage is linked to depressive symptoms. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 33(8), 701–
731. 
Steinfield, C., Ellison, N. B., & Lampe, C. (2008). Social capital, self-esteem, and use of online social 
network sites: A longitudinal analysis. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 29, 434–
445. doi:10.1016/j.appdev.2008.07.002 
Steptoe, A., & Wardle, J. (2011). Positive affect measured using ecological momentary assessment 
and survival in older men and women. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 108(45), 18244–18248. doi:doi/10.1073/pnas.1110892108 
Stewart, J. B. (2016). Facebook Has 50 Minutes of Your Time Each Day. It Wants More. Retrieved 
from http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/06/business/facebook-bends-the-rules-of-audience-
engagement-to-its-advantage.html

----- Page 40 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
40
Tandoc, E. C., Ferrucci, P., & Duffy, M. (2015). Facebook use, envy, and depression among college 
students : Is facebooking depressing? Computers in Human Behavior, 43, 139–146. 
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2014.10.053 
Tay, L., Kuykendall, L., & Diener, E. (2015). Satisfaction and happiness - The bright side of quality 
of life. In W. Glatzer, L. Camfield, V. Moller, & M. Rojar (Eds.), Global Handbook of Quality 
of Life (pp. 839–853). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-94-017-9178-6 
Tobin, S. J., Vanman, E. J., Verreynne, M., & Saeri, A. K. (2014). Threats to belonging on Facebook : 
lurking and ostracism. Social Influence, 1–11. doi:10.1080/15534510.2014.893924 
Tremblay, M. S., Leblanc, A. G., Janssen, I., Kho, M. E., Hicks, A., Murumets, K., … Duggan, M. 
(2011). Canadian Sedentary Behaviour Guidelines for Children and Youth (Vol. 64). 
doi:10.1139/H11-012 
Tromholt, M., Marie, L., Andsbjerg, K., & Wiking, M. (2015). The Facebook experiment: Does 
social media affect the quality of our lives. 
Twitter. (2016). Twitter. Retrieved May 7, 2016, from https://about.twitter.com/company 
UK Council for Child Internet Safety. (2016). Good practice guidance for the providers of social 
networking and other user-interactive services. Retrieved October 10, 1BC, from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/487973/ukccis_g
uide-final__3_.pdf 
Valenzuela, S., Park, N., & Kee, K. F. (2009). Is There social capital in a social network site?: 
Facebook use and college student‘s life satisfaction, trust, and participation1. Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication, 14, 875–901. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2009.01474.x 
Valkenburg, P. M., Peter, J., & Schouten, A. P. (2006). Friend Networking Sites and Their

----- Page 41 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
41
Relationship to Adolescents‘ Well-Being and Social Self-Esteem. Cyberpsychology & Behavior, 
9(5), 584–590. 
Vecchio, R. P. (2000). Negative emotion in the workplace : Employee jealousy and envy. 
International Journal of Stress Management, 7(3), 161–179. 
Verduyn, P., Lee, D. S., Park, J., Shablack, H., Orvell, A., Bayer, J., … Kross, E. (2015). Passive 
Facebook Usage Undermines Affective Well-Being : Experimental and Longitudinal Evidence. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 144(2), 480–488. 
Vogel, E. A., Rose, J. P., Okdie, B. M., Eckles, K., & Franz, B. (2015). Who compares and despairs? 
The effect of social comparison orientation on social media use and its outcomes. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 86, 249–256. 
Vogel, E. A., Rose, J. P., Roberts, L. R., & Eckles, K. (2014). Social Comparison, Social Media, and 
Self-Esteem. Psychology of Popular Media Culture, 3(4), 206–222. 
Wang, S. S. (2013). ―I Share, Therefore I Am‖: Personality Traits, Life Satisfaction, and Facebook 
Check-Ins. Cyberpsychology, Behavior and Social Networking, 16(12), 870–877. 
doi:10.1089/cyber.2012.0395 
Wenninger, H., Krasnova, H., & Buxmann, P. (2014). Activity Matters: Investigating the Influence of 
Facebook on Life Satisfaction of Teenage Users. In Twenty Second European Conference on 
Information Systems (pp. 1–18). 
Wills, T. A. (1981). Downward Comparison Principles in Social Psychology. Psychological Bulletin, 
90(2), 245–271.

----- Page 42 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
42
 
Acknowledgments 
This research was supported by funds provided by the University of Michigan to Ethan Kross and a 
postdoctoral research fellowship to Philippe Verduyn from the Fund for Scientific Research-Flanders 
(FWO).  
 
 
 
 
Table 1. Overview of reviewed studies on the relationship between social network sites and 
subjective well-being 
Authors 
Yea
r 
Desig
n 
IV 
DV 
Relati
on 
IV-measure 
DV-measure 
Valenzuela, Park & Kee  
200
9 
CS 
O
U 
cSW
B 
+ 
intensity of  FB use 
SWL  
Pittmann & Reich 
201
6 
CS 
O
U 
aSW
B 
+ 
time spent on Instagram 
happiness  
201
6 
CS 
O
U 
cSW
B 
+ 
time spent on Instagram 
SWL  
Apaolaza et al. 
201
3 
CS 
O
U 
cSW
B 
+ 
time spent on Tuenti 
SWL  
Farahani et al. 
201
1 
CS 
O
U 
aSW
B 
- 
amount of FB use 
depression, anxiety and stress 
(r) 
Labrague 
201
4 
CS 
O
U 
aSW
B 
- 
time spent on FB 
depression, anxiety and stress 
(r) 
Lin et al. 
201
6 
CS 
O
U 
aSW
B 
- 
frequency and time spent on 
SNS 
symptoms of depression (r) 
Pantic et al. 
201
2 
CS 
O
U 
aSW
B 
- 
time spent on SNS 
symptoms of depression (r) 
Sampasa-Kanyinga & Lewis 
201
5 
CS 
O
U 
aSW
B 
- 
time spent on SNS 
symptoms of depression and 
anxiety (r) 
Rae & Lonborg 
201
5 
CS 
O
U 
SWB 
mod 
time spent on FB 
psychological well-being

----- Page 43 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
43
Valkenburg, Peter, & 
Schouten 
200
6 
CS 
O
U 
cSW
B 
mod 
frequency and time spent on 
CU2 
SWL  
Kross et al. 
201
3 
LT 
O
U 
aSW
B 
- 
amount of FB use 
bipolar emotional valence scale 
201
3 
LT 
O
U 
cSW
B 
- 
amount of FB use 
SWL  
Sagioglou and Greitemeyer  
201
4 
EXP 
O
U 
aSW
B 
- 
FB use vs. internet use vs. no 
activity 
positive and negative affect 
Tromholt et al. 
201
5 
EXP 
O
U 
cSW
B 
- 
FB use vs. no FB use 
SWL  
201
5 
EXP 
O
U 
aSW
B 
- 
FB use vs. no FB use 
positive and negative affect 
Krasnova et al. 
201
3 
CS 
P
U 
cSW
B 
- 
multi-item measure of PU on 
FB 
SWL  
Krasnova et al. 
201
5 
CS 
P
U 
cSW
B 
- 
multi-item measure of PU on 
FB 
SWL  
201
5 
CS 
P
U 
aSW
B 
- 
multi-item measure of PU on 
FB 
sadness (r) 
Shaw et al. 
201
5 
CS 
P
U 
aSW
B 
- 
multi-item measure of PU on 
FB 
social anxiety symptoms (r) 
Tandoc 
201
5 
CS 
P
U 
aSW
B 
- 
multi-item measure of PU on 
FB 
symptoms of depression (r) 
Kim & Lee 
201
1 
CS 
A
U 
aSW
B 
+ 
multi-item measure of AU on 
FB 
happiness 
Kim, Chung, & Ahn 
201
3 
CS 
A
U 
aSW
B 
+ 
multi-item measure of AU on 
SNS 
happiness 
Lee, Lee, & Kwon 
201
1 
CS 
A
U 
aSW
B 
+ 
multi-item measure of AU on 
SNS 
positive and negative affect 
201
1 
CS 
A
U 
cSW
B 
+ 
multi-item measure of AU on 
SNS 
SWL  
Wang  
201
3 
CS 
A
U 
cSW
B 
+ 
multi-item measure of AU on 
FB 
SWL  
Frison & Eggermont 
201
5 
CS 
A
U 
aSW
B 
mod 
multi-item measure of AU on 
FB 
symptoms of depression (r) 
Simoncic et al  
201
4 
CS 
A
U 
aSW
B 
mod 
multi-item measure of AU on 
FB 
symptoms of depression (r) 
Wenninger, Krasnova, & 
201
LT 
A
cSW
+ 
chatting and posting on FB 
SWL

----- Page 44 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
44
Buxmann 
4 
U 
B 
201
4 
LT 
P
U 
cSW
B 
- 
single-item measure of PU on 
FB 
SWL  
Verduyn et al. (study 2) 
201
5 
LT 
A
U 
aSW
B 
n.s. 
single-item measure of AU on 
FB 
bipolar emotional valence scale 
201
5 
LT 
A
U 
cSW
B 
n.s. 
single-item measure of AU on 
FB 
SWL  
201
5 
LT 
P
U 
aSW
B 
- 
single-item measure of AU on 
FB 
bipolar emotional valence scale 
201
5 
LT 
P
U 
cSW
B 
n.s. 
single-item measure of PU on 
FB 
SWL  
Frison & Eggermont 
201
5 
LT 
A
U 
aSW
B 
+ 
multi-item measure of AU on 
FB 
symptoms of depression (r) 
201
5 
LT 
P
U 
aSW
B 
- 
multi-item measure of PU on 
FB 
symptoms of depression (r) 
Verduyn et al. (study 1) 
201
5 
EXP 
P
U 
aSW
B 
- 
passive use vs. active use 
bipolar emotional valence scale 
201
5 
EXP 
P
U 
cSW
B 
n.s. 
passive use vs. active use 
SWL  
Fardouly et al. 
201
5 
EXP 
P
U 
aSW
B 
- 
browse FB vs. control website 
positive and negative affect 
Note. Explanation of abbreviations: CS = cross-sectional, LT = longitudinal, EXP = experimental, IV = independent variable, OU = overall 
usage, AU = active usage, PU = passive usage,  DV = dependent variable, cSWB = cognitive Subjective Well-Being, aSWB = affective 
Subjective Well-Being, mod = moderated, n.s. = not significant,  FB = Facebook, SNS = Social Network Sites, SWL = satisfaction with life, 
(r)=reversely related to subjective well-being 
 
 
 
Philippe Verduyn is an assistant professor at Maastricht University (Netherlands) and a postdoctoral 
research fellow of the Fund for Scientific Research – Flanders (FWO) at KU Leuven University 
(Belgium). He received his PhD in psychology from KU Leuven University in 2012. His main 
research topics are emotion dynamics, emotion regulation, well-being and social network sites.  In 
2015 he received the ―Rising Star‖ designation from the Association for Psychological Science (APS) 
as a recognition of his early-career contributions.   
 
Oscar Ybarra is Professor of Psychology at the University of Michigan, Professor of Management and 
Organizations (courtesy) at the Ross School of Business, and Faculty Associate at the Research

----- Page 45 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
45
Center for Group Dynamics at the Institute for Social Research. Oscar's research revolves around the 
social underpinnings of cognition, intelligence and wellbeing, how people navigate their web of 
relations with others, and how people balance connecting socially with the need to pursue and protect 
personally valued goals. 
 
Maxime Résibois is a PhD student at KU Leuven University (Belgium). He completed his bachelor‘s 
and master‘s degree in psychology at UC Louvain (Belgium). His main research topics are affective 
neuroscience, emotion dynamics, emotion regulation, well-being, and mood disorders. 
 
John Jonides is the Edward E. Smith Professor of Psychology and Neuroscience and the University of 
Michigan.  His research is concerned with basic and translational issues having to do with cognitive 
control and cognitive training in humans.  His research spans the use of behavioral, neuroimaging, 
and neurostimulation techniques and has been funded by the National Institutes of Health and the 
National Science Foundation among other agencies. 
 
Ethan Kross is a Professor in the Department of Psychology at the University of Michigan and the 
Director of the University of Michigan Emotion and Self-Control Laboratory. His research explores 
how people can control their emotions to improve our understanding of how self-control works, and 
to discover ways of enhancing self-control in daily life. He adopts an integrative approach to address 
these issues that draws on multiple disciplines within psychology including social, personality, 
clinical, developmental, and neuroscience. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The relation between social network sites and subjective well-being. Active usage of social 
network sites increases social capital and feelings of connectedness (path A1) which, in turn, 
positively impact subjective well-being (path B1). Passive usage of social network sites stimulates 
upward social comparisions and envy (path A2) which, in turn, negatively impact subjective well-
being (path B2).

----- Page 46 (native) -----
SOCIAL NETWORK SITES & SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
46