

----- Page 1 (native) -----
SSLA, 24, 143–188
DOI: 10.1017.S0272263102002024
FREQUENCY EFFECTS IN
LANGUAGE PROCESSING
A Review with Implications for
Theories of Implicit and Explicit
Language Acquisition
Nick C. Ellis
University of Wales, Bangor
This article shows how language processing is intimately tuned
to input frequency. Examples are given of frequency effects in the
processing of phonology, phonotactics, reading, spelling, lexis, mor-
phosyntax, formulaic language, language comprehension, grammat-
icality, sentence production, and syntax. The implications of these
effects for the representations and developmental sequence of SLA
are discussed. Usage-based theories hold that the acquisition of lan-
guage is exemplar based. It is the piecemeal learning of many thou-
sands of constructions and the frequency-biased abstraction of
regularities within them. Determinants of pattern productivity include
the power law of practice, cue competition and constraint satisfac-
tion, connectionist learning, and effects of type and token frequency.
The regularities of language emerge from experience as categories
and prototypical patterns. The typical route of emergence of con-
structions is from formula, through low-scope pattern, to construction.
Frequency plays a large part in explaining sociolinguistic variation
and language change. Learners’ sensitivity to frequency in all these
domains has implications for theories of implicit and explicit learning
and their interactions. The review concludes by considering the his-
tory of frequency as an explanatory concept in theoretical and ap-
plied linguistics, its 40 years of exile, and its necessary reinstatement
as a bridging variable that binds the different schools of language ac-
quisition research.
Address correspondence to: Nick C. Ellis, School of Psychology, University of Wales, Bangor,
Gwynedd LL57 2AS, United Kingdom; e-mail: n.ellis@bangor.ac.uk.
2002 Cambridge University Press 0272-2631/02 $9.50
143
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 2 (native) -----
144
Nick C. Ellis
“Perception is of definite and probable things” (James, 1890, p. 82).
There is a lot more to the perception of language than meets the eye or ear.
A percept is a complex state of consciousness in which antecedent sensation
is supplemented by consequent ideas that are closely combined to it by asso-
ciation. The cerebral conditions of the perception of things are thus the paths
of association irradiating from them. If a certain sensation is strongly associ-
ated with the attributes of a certain thing, that thing is almost sure to be per-
ceived when we get that sensation. Where the sensation is associated with
more than one reality, however, unconscious processes weigh the odds, and
we perceive the most probable thing: “all brain-processes are such as give rise
to what we may call FIGURED consciousness” (James, 1890, p. 82, emphasis in
original). Accurate and fluent language perception, then, rests on the compre-
hender having acquired the appropriately weighted range of associations for
each element of the language input.
Psycholinguistic and cognitive linguistic theories of language acquisition
hold that all linguistic units are abstracted from language use. In these usage-
based perspectives, the acquisition of grammar is the piecemeal learning of
many thousands of constructions and the frequency-biased abstraction of reg-
ularities within them. Language learning is the associative learning of repre-
sentations that reflect the probabilities of occurrence of form-function
mappings. Frequency is thus a key determinant of acquisition because “rules”
of language, at all levels of analysis (from phonology, through syntax, to dis-
course), are structural regularities that emerge from learners’ lifetime analysis
of the distributional characteristics of the language input. Learners have to
figure language out.
This review illustrates (a) how frequency underpins regularity effects in the
acquisition of orthographic, phonological, and morphological form, and (b)
that learning accords to the power law of practice. It shows, for example, that
there are effects of bigram frequency in visual word identification and of pho-
notactic knowledge in speech segmentation, effects of spelling-to-sound corre-
spondences in reading, and cohort effects in spoken-word recognition. There
are effects of neighbors and the proportion of friends (items that share sur-
face-pattern cues and have the same interpretation) to enemies (items that
share surface-pattern cues but have different interpretations) in reading and
spelling, morphology, and spoken-word recognition. At higher levels, it can be
shown that language comprehension is determined by the listeners’ vast
amount of statistical information about the behavior of lexical items in their
language and that, at least for English, verbs provide some of the strongest
constraints on the resolution of syntactic ambiguities. Comprehenders know
the relative frequencies with which individual verbs appear in different tenses,
in active versus passive structures and in intransitive versus transitive struc-
tures, the typical kinds of subjects and objects that a verb takes, and many
other such facts. Such information is acquired through experience with input
that exhibits these distributional properties. It is not some idiosyncratic fact
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
145
in the lexicon isolated from “core” grammatical information; rather, it is rele-
vant at all stages of lexical, syntactic, and discourse comprehension. Compre-
henders tend to perceive the most probable syntactic and semantic analyses
of a new utterance on the basis of frequencies of previously perceived utter-
ance analyses. Language users tend to produce the most probable utterance
for a given meaning on the basis of frequencies of utterance representations.
These accounts readily contribute to explanations of sociolinguistic variation.
The review discusses how these effects can be simulated using mathemati-
cal or computational models. The effects of frequency in input are modulated
by the need to simultaneously satisfy the constraints of all other construc-
tions that are represented in the learner’s system. The interactions of input
and existing representation can be described as Bayesian interactions in a
rich network of interacting associations and connections, some competing,
others mutually reinforcing as a result of the many redundancies of language
and representation. Recent work shows that in syntax, as in phonology, the
productivity of pattern depends on type frequency of the construction. The
implications for theories of SLA are described: a developmental sequence—
from formula, through low-scope pattern, to construction—is proposed as a
useful starting point to investigate the emergence of constructions and the
ways in which type and token frequency affect the productivity of patterns.
The review finishes with consideration of the consequences of exemplar
views of language for theories of implicit and explicit learning. To the extent
that language processing is based on frequency and probabilistic knowledge,
language learning is implicit learning. This does NOT deny the importance of
noticing (Schmidt, 1993) in the initial registration of a pattern-recognition unit.
NOR does it deny a role for explicit instruction. Language acquisition can be
speeded by explicit instruction. The last 20 years of empirical investigations
into the effectiveness of L2 instruction demonstrate that focused L2 instruc-
tion results in large target-oriented gains, that explicit types of instruction are
more effective than implicit types, and that the effectiveness of L2 instruction
is durable. An outline is given of the mechanisms by which explicit knowledge
affects implicit learning.
FREQUENCY LEARNING
Humans are sensitive to the frequencies of events in their experience. Ask
them to make explicit judgments from memory about the relative frequency
with which things happen and they are typically pretty good at it. College stu-
dents, for example, can accurately estimate the frequency with which words
occur in a list (Hasher & Chromiak, 1977) and can also estimate, with a high
correlation to actual counts, the frequency of English words (Shapiro, 1969),
of single letters (Attneave, 1953), and even of pairs of letters (Underwood,
1971). There are few individual differences in these abilities; children are just
about as good as young adults, and this ability remains robust in the face of
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 4 (native) -----
146
Nick C. Ellis
various neurological insults or terminal decline (Hasher & Zacks, 1984). As
Hasher and Chromiak state,
That we can rank order events with as seemingly little meaning as bigrams
suggests that the processing of frequency may fall into the domain of what
Posner & Snyder (1975) have called “automatic processes.” That is, of pro-
cesses which the organism runs off both without any awareness of the op-
eration, with no intention of doing so, and with little effort, in the sense
that the tagging of frequency has little impact on one’s ability to simultane-
ously attend to other aspects of a situation, such as the interpretation of
an ongoing conversation. (p. 173)
It does not seem like we spend our time counting the units of language. We are
instead conscious of communicating, and yet in the course of conversation we
naturally acquire knowledge of the frequencies of the elements of language
and their mappings. The mechanism underlying such unconscious counting is
to be found in the plasticity of synaptic connections rather than abacuses or
registers, but it constitutes counting nevertheless.
The experiments listed here all involve explicit judgments made on the
basis of prior implicit learning (i.e., acquisition of knowledge about the under-
lying structure of a complex stimulus environment by a process that takes
place naturally, simply, and without conscious operations [Ellis, 1994b]). It is
fair comment that, however natural the original learning, the outcome task is
as artificial a request as asking someone the number of days it rains in Sep-
tember or the weight of a bucket of water. It is more naturalistic simply to
observe their behavioral responses to environmental contingencies—for ex-
ample, to see how often they take their raincoats or how they prepare to heft.
When one observes language knowledge like this, as the psycholinguistic dem-
onstrations that I next review will attest, it is clear just how well listeners are
tuned to the frequencies of their language input at all levels. In contrast to
traditional psychology experiments or school tests that involve explicit mem-
ory (involving a conscious process of remembering a prior episodic experi-
ence or fact such as questions like What did you have for breakfast? or What is
the capital of Andorra?), the outcome measures in these studies involve im-
plicit memory (i.e., facilitation of the processing of a stimulus as a function of
encounters with an identical or related stimulus but where the subject at no
point has to consciously recall the prior event). Human excellence is often
evidenced as implicit memory. Consider, as examples, the sublime Olympic
gymnastic skills that result from lifetime practice and the ubiquitous but none-
theless equally impressive human abilities to categorize: We have never been
instructed in the defining features of birds, English words, cups, mugs, or
grammatical sentences, yet we are fast and accurate at the classification of
these elements of our world.
Indeed, it is human categorization ability that provides the most persuasive
testament to our incessant unconscious figuring. We know that natural catego-
ries are fuzzy rather than nomothetic. Wittgenstein’s (1953) consideration of
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 5 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
147
the concept “game” showed that no set of features covers all the things that
we call games, ranging from soccer, through chess, bridge, and poker, to soli-
taire. Instead, what organizes these exemplars into the game category is a set
of family resemblances among these members; son may be like mother, and
mother like sister, but in a very different way. We learn about these families,
like our own, from experience. Exemplars are similar if they have many fea-
tures in common and few distinctive attributes (features belonging to one but
not the other); the more similar two objects are on these quantitative
grounds, the faster people are at judging them to be similar (Tversky, 1977).
Prototypes, as exemplars that are most typical of a category, are similar to
many members of that category and not similar to members of other catego-
ries. Again, the operationalization of this criterion predicts the speed of hu-
man categorization performance; people more quickly classify as birds sparrows
(or other average sized, average colored, average beaked, average featured
specimens) than they do birds with less common features or feature combina-
tions like geese or albatrosses (Rosch & Mervis, 1975; Rosch, Mervis, Gray,
Johnson, & Boyes-Braem, 1976). Prototypes are judged faster and more accu-
rately, even if they themselves have never been seen before. For example,
someone who has never seen a sparrow, yet who has experienced the rest of
the run of the avian mill, will still be fast and accurate in judging it to be a
bird (Posner & Keele, 1970). Of course, frequency and dimensional central
tendency are not the only factors that determine activation of candidate sche-
mata; there are moderating effects of recency of use and of context (Ander-
son, 1980, chap. 5; Harnad, 1987). Even so, it is very clear that although people
do not go around consciously counting features, they nevertheless have very
accurate knowledge of the underlying frequency distributions and their cen-
tral tendencies. We are very good at this association learning—it is the raw
basis of human cognition.
The understanding of human categorization ability is one of the major re-
search enterprises within cognitive science. It is the subject of many different
investigations using computational simulations that count features and feature
combinations in different ways. These include connectionist, semantic net-
work, prototype, schema, and exemplar models. In these models, it is usual
that each learning event updates a statistical representation of a category in-
dependently of other learning events. Exemplar-based models have multiple
instances in memory, one for each exemplar. Prototype models count features
and derive statistical abstractions of the central tendencies. In connectionist
models, each repetition increases the strength of the connections between the
relevant feature units and the category unit. One long-standing question is
whether this counting increments in units of events or individuals, of tokens
or types. Traditional theories of perception and classification have it that to-
ken events constitute the basic unit of categorization and that as people cate-
gorize each token they store a memory of every such categorization event.
When assessing whether a subsequent entity belongs to the same category,
people retrieve these memories, assess their similarity to the new entity, and
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 6 (native) -----
148
Nick C. Ellis
admit the entity to the category if sufficiently similar. Such event-based ap-
proaches count tokens not types; they do not allow the cognitive system to
track the same individual across multiple events nor assume that the cogni-
tive system stores or uses information about individual types in classification
decisions. However, there is growing interest in different models of categoriza-
tion that are affected by type rather than by token frequency. In token-count-
ing models of face recognition, a perceiver’s prototype of the category of
human faces would be as affected by the n-thousandth glimpse of a friend as
it would the first of a stranger. In models that count types, however, renewed
sighting of the familiar friend would have little or no effect, whereas experi-
ence of a new individual type would sway the balance of the central tendency.
Recently, Barsalou, Huttenlocher, and Lamberts (1998) reported a series of ex-
periments demonstrating that human subjects track individuals across events,
establish representations of them, and use these representations in categori-
zation. They argued that these findings are consistent with “representational-
ism,” the view that an internal model of the world constitutes a physical level
of representation in the brain and that the brain does not simply capture the
statistical properties of events in an undifferentiated dynamic system. Thus,
human categorization may be more sensitive to type frequency than to simple
token frequency. This is a key issue for language acquisition, and a later sec-
tion of this paper is accordingly devoted to it.
Type or token units, exemplar, prototype, or connectionist mechanism,
these are importantly different variants of figuring, but it is all counting, one
way or another, and it is all unconscious. What of the language census?
PHONOLOGY AND PHONOTACTICS
Speakers do not try to learn phonotactics. First-year linguistics undergradu-
ates complain about the difficulty in explicitly analyzing the phonology of
one’s native language. Yet they are very good at judging whether nonwords
are nativelike or not, and young children are sensitive to these regularities
when trying to repeat nonwords (Treiman & Danis, 1988). Phonotactic compe-
tence simply emerges from using language, from the primary linguistic data of
the lexical patterns that a speaker knows. Frisch, Large, Zawaydeh, and Pisoni
(2001) asked native speakers to judge nonword stimuli, using a 7-point rating
scale, for whether they were more or less like English words. The nonwords
were created with relatively high or low probability licit phonotactic patterns
as determined by the logarithm of the product of probabilities of the onset
and rime constituents of the nonword. The mean wordlikeness judgments for
these nonword stimuli had an extremely strong relationship with expected
probability (r = .87). An emergentist account of phonotactic competence is
thus that any new nonword is compared to the exemplars that are in memory;
the closer it matches their characteristics, the more wordlike it is judged.
Frisch et al. explained individual differences in the same way: Participants
with relatively larger mental lexicons were more likely to judge low probabil-
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
149
ity nonwords as well formed, which suggests that well-formedness is deter-
mined by a lexicon-based probability cutoff such that the larger a speaker’s
lexicon, the more low-frequency words that have low-frequency phonotactic
patterns, and the more likely it is that the speaker knows an exemplar like the
nonword stimulus in some way. Well-formedness judgments for English show
that the probability of a novel word, given the frequency distribution of pho-
nological constituents in the listener’s lexicon, provides a foundation for pho-
notactic well-formedness.
It is no wonder that adults are sensitive to the sequential dependencies of
language: They have been tallying them since they were infants in order to
segment and recognize connected speech. The linguistic knowledge acquired
during the first year is largely the result of distributional analyses of the input,
including the vowel space, consonant categories, phonotactic rules, phonolog-
ical regularities, and frequent biphones of the native language (Jusczyk, 1997).
Infants automatically analyze simple distributional statistics in the language
they hear, to discover the word boundaries (Brent, 1999; Elman, 1990). Saffran,
Aslin, and Newport (1996) demonstrated that 8-month-old infants exposed for
only 2 minutes to unbroken strings of nonsense syllables (e.g., bidakupado)
are able to detect the difference between three-syllable sequences that ap-
peared as a unit and sequences that also appeared in their learning set but in
random order. These infants achieved this learning on the basis of statistical
analysis of phonotactic sequence data, right at the age when their caregivers
start to notice systematic evidence of their recognizing words. In subsequent
experiments, Saffran, Johnson, Aslin, and Newport (1999) exposed participants
to continuous nonlinguistic auditory sequences whose elements were organized
into so-called tone words. As in their previous studies, statistical information
was the only word-boundary cue available to learners. Both adults and infants
succeeded at segmenting the tone stream, with performance indistinguishable
from that obtained with syllable streams. These results suggest that the same
learning mechanism previously shown to be involved in word segmentation
can also be used to segment sequences of nonlinguistic stimuli, putting these
results firmly within the broad experimental area of sequence learning that is
the research base of theories of implicit learning (Ellis, 1994a; Reber, 1993;
Stadler & Frensch, 1998).
However, there are other additional cues to word boundaries beyond se-
quential probabilities, including pauses at the end of utterances and intona-
tional cues. One important insight from connectionist explorations of cue
utility is the demonstration that, although any one source of information may
be insufficient to produce a solution, the combined effect of multiple cue
sources can dramatically improve performance (Redington & Chater, 1998).
Thus, for the example of segmenting words from speech, Christiansen, Allen,
and Seidenberg (1998) showed that phonotactic information on its own is
enough to produce 47% accuracy in word segmentation, whereas utterance-
boundary information and relative stress information alone produce even less
accurate results. However, when these three sources of cues are combined in
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 8 (native) -----
150
Nick C. Ellis
a connectionist simulation, performance levels exceed 70% accuracy. A count
in one dimension alone may not solve a categorization problem, just as the
height of a pot is insufficient to resolve whether it is a cup or a mug. Categori-
zation research demonstrates that our unconscious tallying takes place on
many multiple dimensions at once. In other words, our unconscious statistics
greatly surpasses the simple univariate stuff—it runs to multidimensional
scaling and beyond. Infants, similarly, can abstract and generalize beyond spe-
cific word order to show evidence of category-based abstraction and the com-
bination of multiple sources of information in artificial-language learning
experiments (see Go´mez & Gerken, 2000, for review).
A final example of our implicit knowledge of phonotactics is found in co-
hort effects in spoken-word recognition. We seem to handle this by using the
initial phoneme of a word to activate the set of all words in the lexicon that
have this same phoneme. Then, as the speech signal unfolds over time and
more information is received, we narrow the set down. In the cohort model of
speech recognition (Marslen-Wilson, 1990), activation in the cohort varies so
that items are not simply “in” or “out.” Rather, higher frequency words get
more activation from the same evidence than do low-frequency words. This
assumption provides a means for accounting for lexical similarity effects
whereby a whole neighborhood of words is activated but the higher frequency
words get more activation. The result is that listeners are slower to recognize
low-frequency words with high-frequency neighbors because the competitors
are harder to eliminate (Lively, Pisoni, & Goldinger, 1994). These effects dem-
onstrate that our language-processing system is sensitive both to the frequency
of individual words and to the number of words that share the same begin-
nings (at any length of computation).
READING AND SPELLING
Another area in which language learners have been shown to be sensitive to
the frequencies and consistencies of mappings is in relating symbols and their
sounds while reading aloud. To the extent that readers are able to construct
the correct pronunciations of novel words or nonwords, they have been said
to be able to apply sublexical “rules” or mappings that relate graphemes to
phonemes (Coltheart, Curtis, Atkins, & Haller, 1993; Patterson & Morton, 1985)
or larger orthographic units to their corresponding rimes or syllables (Ehri,
1998; Glushko, 1979; Goswami, 1999; Treiman, Mullennix, Bijeljac-Babic, &
Richmond-Welty, 1995). It is likely to be the operation of this system that ex-
plains why regular or consistent words are read better than irregular or incon-
sistent words. For the case of adult fluency in English, words with regular
spelling-sound correspondences (e.g., mint) are read with shorter naming la-
tencies and lower error rates than words with exceptional correspondences
(cf. pint) (Coltheart, 1978). In development, exception words (e.g., blood, bou-
quet) are acquired later than are regular words (e.g., bed, brandy) (Coltheart &
Leahy, 1996). Similarly, in fluent performance, words that are consistent in
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
151
their pronunciation in that they are spoken like their neighbors, who share
orthographic body and phonological rime (best is regular and consistent in
that all -est bodies are pronounced in the same way), are named faster than
inconsistent items (mint is regular in terms of its grapheme-phoneme conver-
sion [GPC] rule, but inconsistent in that it has pint as a neighbor) (Glushko).
The magnitude of the consistency effect for any word depends on the summed
frequency of its friends (having similar spelling pattern and similar pronuncia-
tion) in relation to that of its enemies (having similar spelling pattern but dis-
similar pronunciation) (Jared, McRae, & Seidenberg, 1990). Adult naming latency
decreases monotonically with increasing consistency on this measure (Tara-
ban & McClelland, 1987). In development, Laxon, Masterson, and Coltheart
(1991) have shown that, for regular words, consistent (pink, all -ink) and con-
sensus (hint, mostly as in mint, but cf. pint) items are acquired earlier than
ambiguous ones (cove vs. love, move). Similarly, irregular words—those in de-
viant gangs in which the several items sharing that rime are all pronounced in
the same irregular fashion (e.g., look, book, cook, etc., or calm, balm, palm)—
are acquired earlier than ambiguous ones (love). Because of the power law of
learning, these effects of regularity and consistency are more evident with
low-frequency words than with high-frequency ones on which performance is
closer to asymptote (Seidenberg, Waters, Barnes, & Tanenhaus, 1984). As with
the learning of other quasiregular language domains, these effects of consis-
tency or ambiguity of spelling-sound correspondence within language have
been successfully simulated in connectionist (Harm & Seidenberg, 1999; Plaut,
McClelland, Seidenberg, & Patterson, 1996; Seidenberg & McClelland, 1989;
Zorzi, Houghton, & Butterworth, 1998) and exemplar-based (Ellis & Hicks, 2000)
computational models.
These investigations compared the learnability and processing of words of
different degrees of spelling-sound ambiguity within a language. What about
the larger crosslinguistic issue: What are the effects of the overall ambiguity
of a language’s symbol-sound mappings on its speakers’ rate of literacy acqui-
sition? The orthographies of languages like Finnish, Italian, Welsh, Spanish,
Dutch, Turkish, and German are on the whole much more transparent than
those of opaque languages like English and French. In transparent orthogra-
phies, the mappings from letters to sounds are consistent. In opaque orthog-
raphies, the same grapheme may represent different phonemes in different
words and, as illustrated for English in the preceding paragraph, there are
many words that are irregular in terms of default grapheme-phoneme map-
ping. These language differences in overall orthographic transparency have a
determining effect on rate of reading acquisition. In alphabetic languages it is
commonly believed that there is a prolonged alphabetic stage of reading in
which words are decoded on the basis of learned symbol-sound associations
and that this provides the practice that allows the eventual development of
skilled orthographic reading abilities (e.g., Ehri, 1979, 1998; Ellis & Cataldo,
1990; Frith, 1985; Marsh, Friedman, Welch, & Desberg, 1981). An orthographic-
transparency hypothesis therefore predicts that children learning to read a
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 10 (native) -----
152
Nick C. Ellis
transparent orthography in which sound-symbol mappings are regular and
consistent should learn to read and spell faster than those learning an opaque
orthography in which the cues to pronunciation are more ambiguous. Empiri-
cal research supports this prediction. For example, children learning to read
German are more able to read their transparent orthography instantiation of
pairs of translation equivalents (e.g., Pflug-plough) than are matched learners
of English (Landerl, Wimmer, & Frith, 1997). Spanish children are able to read
more of a sample of eight monosyllabic and eight disyllabic words in their
language than are matched French or English children (Goswami, Gombert, &
de Barrera, 1998). Turkish children are able to read and spell with high de-
grees of accuracy by the end of their first grade (O¨ney & Durgunoglu, 1997).
Finally, Welsh children are able to accurately read aloud significantly more
of their language than are English children matched for reading instruction,
background, locale, and mathematical ability (Ellis & Hooper, in press). These
crosslinguistic effects of orthographic transparency demonstrate that where
the statistics are simpler, the figuring is faster.
LEXIS
Just as we are sensitive to the combinatorial sequential probabilities of sub-
lexical units, so, too, the recognition and production of words is a function
of their frequency of occurrence in the language. For written language, high-
frequency words are named more rapidly than low-frequency ones (Balota &
Chumbly, 1984; Forster & Chambers, 1973), they are more rapidly judged to
be words in lexical decision tasks (Forster, 1976), and they are spelled more
accurately (Barry & Seymour, 1988). Auditory word recognition is better for
high-frequency than low-frequency words (Luce, 1986; Savin, 1963). Kirsner
(1994) has shown that there are strong effects of word frequency on the speed
and accuracy of lexical recognition processes (speech perception, reading, ob-
ject naming, and sign perception) and lexical production processes (speaking,
typing, writing, and signing), in children and adults as well as in L1 and L2. He
proposed a life-span practice model to explain these frequency effects
whereby processing speed can be explained simply by reference to the power
law of learning (Anderson, 1982; Ellis & Schmidt, 1997; Newell, 1990), which is
generally used to describe the relationships between practice and perfor-
mance in the acquisition of a wide range of cognitive skills. That is, the effects
of practice are greatest at early stages of learning, but they eventually reach
asymptote. We may not be counting the words as we listen or speak, but each
time we process one there is a reduction in processing time that marks this
practice increment, and thus the perceptual and motor systems become tuned
by the experience of a particular language.
Jusczyk (1993, 1997) argued that exemplar-based models of memory are as
relevant to the origins of representations in infants as they are to adult lan-
guage processing (e.g., Goldinger, 1996, 1998; Hintzman, 1986, 1988; Jacoby &
Brooks, 1984). In these models, memories are formed for every speech input
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 11 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
153
experience and these traces retain detail (e.g., speaker’s voice characteristics
and context). Computer modeling, for example with Minerva 2 (Hintzman),
shows how abstraction is an automatic consequence of aggregate activation
of high-frequency exemplars, with regression toward central tendencies as
numbers of highly similar exemplars increase. Thus, there is a single-voice ad-
vantage (in that words repeated in the same voice are better recognized than
those in a different voice), and this advantage is greater for low-frequency
words; “old” words that have been frequently experienced in various places
by a variety of speakers inspire “abstract” echoes, obscuring context and
voice elements of the study trace (Goldinger, 1998, p. 255). Vihman (2000) pro-
posed a frequency-sensitive episodic processing and exemplar learning ac-
count of the transition from analogic echoic lexical representation to segmental
phonology.
MORPHOSYNTAX
The conclusion reached regarding orthography was that systems that are
noisy and inconsistent are harder to figure out than those that are reliable
and categorical. There is now a large body of research demonstrating that
greater ambiguity in the mappings between the forms and functions of lan-
guage causes less successful learning because of a larger degree of compe-
tition among the cues in the learning set (Bates & MacWhinney, 1987;
MacWhinney, 1987). Some cues are more reliable than others, and the lan-
guage learner’s task is to work out the most valid predictors. The Competition
Model shows how Bayesian cue use can result in the activation of a single
interpretative hypothesis in resolution of interacting cue—some conflicting,
some agreeing—that vary in their frequency, reliability, and validity (Mac-
Whinney, 1997c, 1999).
These effects have been well evidenced in the domain of morphosyntax.
Consider, for example, how the acquisition of grammatical gender is deter-
mined by the degree of transparency of its morphophonological marking.
Brooks, Braine, Catalano, Brody, and Sudhalter (1993) demonstrated that chil-
dren and adults showed better learning of the noun subclasses of artificial lan-
guages when ambiguity was reduced through the presence of a subset of
nouns of each subclass sharing a phonological feature than they did in a con-
dition in which the phonological features were less reliable cues in distin-
guishing the subclasses. Taraban and Roark (1996) manipulated the ambiguity
in the mapping of noun forms onto genders in two sets of French nouns. They
showed that learning the same set of feminine nouns took longer if the nouns
in the masculine class were as a set more ambiguous in the mappings of their
noun endings onto gender. This demonstration is important because it illus-
trates how the presence of nontransparent marking not only affects the speed
at which the nontransparent items themselves are acquired but also slows
down the learning of the whole system. Recent studies have simulated lan-
guage-learning data using simple connectionist models that relate cues and
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 12 (native) -----
154
Nick C. Ellis
their functional interpretations. For example, the simulations of Kempe and
MacWhinney (1998) showed why the Russian case inflection system is ac-
quired more rapidly than is that of German: Even though case marking in Rus-
sian is more complex than in German, the Russian inflections are more
reliable cues to sentence interpretation.
It has been claimed that there are only effects of frequency of past-tense
forms when fluent speakers generate irregular morphological forms and that
these are not to be seen with regular inflections. The early relevant experiments
were conducted by Prasada, Pinker, and Snyder (1990) and Seidenberg and
Bruck (1990), who showed that when fluent native English speakers saw verb
stems on a screen and were required to produce the past-tense form as quickly
as possible, they took significantly less time (16–29 ms in three experiments)
for irregular verbs with high past-tense frequencies (e.g., went) than for irregu-
lar verbs with low past-tense frequencies (e.g., slung), even when stem frequen-
cies were equated. However, in these experiments there was no effect on
latency of the past-tense frequency of regular verbs whose past tense was gen-
erated by adding -ed. Ellis and Schmidt (1997) argued that this apparent interac-
tion is simply a result of the power law of learning—that is, that frequency
effects are not easily observed for regular forms because performance on these
is close to asymptote. The same argument has been put forward by Plaut et al.
(1996) for the case of reading, and the general conclusion follows that frequency
by regularity interactions are a natural and necessary result of the power law of
practice. To verify this for morphology, Ellis and Schmidt measured production
of regular and irregular forms as learners practiced an artificial second language
where regularity and frequency were factorially combined. Accuracy and la-
tency data demonstrated frequency effects for both regular and irregular forms
early in the acquisition process. However, as learning progressed, the frequency
effect on regular items diminished whereas it remained the same for irregular
items. Other studies have confirmed this effect of frequency on the latency of
fluent adult production of regular morphological forms (Stemberger & Mac-
Whinney, 1986) and on the accuracy of this process in children with specific
language impairment (Oetting & Rice, 1993).
Morphological processing, like reading and listening, also shows effects of
neighbors and false friends where regular, inconsistent items (e.g., bake-baked
is similar in rime to neighbors make-made and take-took, which have inconsis-
tent past tenses) are produced more slowly than entirely regular ones such as
hate-hated, bate-bated, date-dated (Daugherty & Seidenberg, 1994; Seidenberg &
Bruck, 1990). I realize I am risking bathos in driving home the point about con-
sciousness, but if I ask you to quickly render the sentence Sam mixes the
dough, bakes the bread, and calls the family for breakfast in the past tense, I will
warrant that the last thing that comes to your mind while dealing with the
second verb is: “Hmm, bake rhymes with several verbs that have irregular
preterit forms, I’d better be careful in its production.”
The acquisition of morphology has been the major proving ground for con-
nectionist models of learning in quasiregular domains. The pioneers were
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 13 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
155
Rumelhart and McClelland (1986), who showed that a simple learning model
reproduced the characteristics of young children learning the morphology of
the past tense in English to a remarkable degree. The model generated the so-
called U-shaped learning curve for irregular forms; it exhibited a tendency to
overgeneralize, and, in the model as in children, different past-tense forms for
the same word could coexist at the same time. Yet there was no “rule,” as the
authors note: “It is possible to imagine that the system simply stores a set
of rote-associations between base and past tense forms with novel responses
generated by ‘on-line’ generalizations from the stored exemplars” (p. 267).
This original past-tense model was very influential: It laid the foundations for
the connectionist approach to language research; it generated a large number
of criticisms (Pinker & Prince, 1988; Lachter & Bever, 1988), some of which are
undeniably valid; and, in turn, it spawned a number of revised and improved
connectionist models of different aspects of the acquisition of the English past
tense. These recent models successfully capture the regularities that are pres-
ent in associating phonological form of lemma with phonological form of in-
flected form (Daugherty & Seidenberg, 1994; MacWhinney & Leinbach, 1991;
Marchman, 1993; Plunkett & Marchman, 1993), and between referents (+past
tense or +plural) and associated inflected perfect or plural forms (Cottrell &
Plunkett, 1994; Ellis & Schmidt, 1997), closely simulating the error patterns,
profiles of acquisition, differential difficulties, false-friends effects, reaction times
for production, and interactions of regularity and frequency that are found in
human learners (both L1 and L2), and, by abstracting the regularities from
experienced exemplars, they successfully apply the default case to “wug”
items in generalization tests. They therefore strongly support the notion that
acquisition of morphology is also a result of simple associative learning princi-
ples operating in a massively distributed system abstracting the statistical
regularities of association using optimal inference.
FORMULAIC LANGUAGE PRODUCTION
Just as we learn the common sequences of sublexical components of our lan-
guage, the tens of thousands of phoneme and letter sequences large and
small, so also we learn the common sequences of words. Formulas are lexical
chunks that result from binding frequent collocations. Large stretches of lan-
guage are adequately described by finite state grammars as collocational
streams where patterns flow into each other. Sinclair (1991), then director of
the Cobuild project, the largest lexicographic analysis of the English language
to date, summarized this in the Principle of Idiom:
A language user has available to him or her a large number of semi-precon-
structed phrases that constitute single choices, even though they might
appear to be analyzable into segments. To some extent this may reflect the
recurrence of similar situations in human affairs; it may illustrate a natural
tendency to economy of effort; or it may be motivated in part by the exi-
gencies of real-time conversation. (p. 110)
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 14 (native) -----
156
Nick C. Ellis
Instead of a rather minor feature, compared with grammar, Sinclair suggests
that for normal texts, the first mode of analysis to be applied is the idiom prin-
ciple, as most text is interpretable by this principle. Most of the material that
Sinclair was analyzing in the Bank of English was written text. Comparisons of
written and spoken corpora demonstrate that collocations are even more fre-
quent in spoken language (Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, & Finegan, 1999;
Brazil, 1995; Leech, 2000). Parole is flat and Markovian because it is con-
structed “off the top of one’s head” and there is no time to work it over. Utter-
ances are constructed as intonation units, and substantive units are fairly
strongly constrained to have a modal length of four words in English, a fact
indicative of the cognitive limits on how much information can be fully active
in the mind at any one time (Chafe, 1994). The majority of substantive intona-
tional units have the grammatical form of single clauses, though many others
are parts of clauses, and they are often highly predictable in terms of their
lexical concordance (Hopper, 1998). Language reception and production are
mediated by learners’ representations of chunks of language:
Suppose that, instead of shaping discourse according to rules, one really
pulls old language from memory (particularly old language, with all its
words in and everything), and then reshapes it to the current context:
“context shaping,” as Bateson puts it, “is just another term for grammar.”
(Becker, 1983, p. 218)
Frequency of collocation determines the growth of lexical phrases. These
play out as frequency effects within the realm of idioms, too. High-frequency
idioms are easier to comprehend than less familiar ones because their figura-
tive meanings are known and these, by dint of practice, have become more
salient than their literal ones (Giora, 1997; Nippold & Rudzinski, 1993). The
greater the working-memory demands of the processing task, the greater the
need to rely on formulas: “It is easier for us to look something up than to com-
pute it” (Bresnan, 1999). There is no more enjoyable demonstration of this
principle than the analyses by Kuiper (1996) of so-called smooth talkers—that
is, sports commentators and auctioneers who are in communicative contexts
that place an inordinate pressure to observe what is transpiring around them,
to analyze these happenings in short-term memory, and to formulate speech
reports describing what is observed in real time without getting left behind.
Smooth talkers use many formulas in their speech, such as recurrent se-
quences of verbal behavior, whether conventional or idiosyncratic, which are
sequentially and hierarchically organized. The faster the action, the more diffi-
cult it is for the commentator to provide an instantaneous commentary. By
contrasting slow-action commentators (cricket, real estate auctions) with
faster-action commentators (horse races, antique and livestock auctions),
Kuiper showed that the faster-action commentators made greater use of for-
mulas than did the slower-action ones. Horses for courses: The faster com-
mentaries of race-casters are highly formulaic, easily recognized, exciting, and
communicatively instantaneous in their effect. Compare this with reporting
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
157
that is as rich as the accompanying fruit cake when cricket commentators
slowly conjure their descriptions of the pigeons on the pitch during another
comforting rain interval.
The importance of such lexical units or idiomatic phrases is acknowledged
in SLA research under discussion of holophrases (Corder, 1973), prefabricated
routines and patterns (Hakuta, 1974), formulaic speech (Wong-Fillmore, 1976),
memorized sentences and lexicalized stems (Pawley & Syder, 1983), formulas
(R. Ellis, 1994), sequences in SLA (N. Ellis, 1996b, 2001), discourse manage-
ment (Do¨rnyei & Kormos, 1998; Tannen, 1987), register (Biber & Finegan, 1994),
style (Brewster, 1999), and lexical patterns and collocational knowledge (Car-
ter, 1998; Hoey, 1991; Lewis, 1993; Schmitt, 2000). As Nattinger (1980) pointed
out, “for a great deal of the time anyway, language production consists of piec-
ing together the ready-made units appropriate for a particular situation and . . .
comprehension relies on knowing which of these patterns to predict in these
situations” (p. 341). So too did Pawley and Syder:
In the store of familiar collocations there are expressions for a wide range
of familiar concepts and speech acts, and the speaker is able to retrieve
these as wholes or as automatic chains from the long-term memory; by do-
ing this he minimizes the amount of clause-internal encoding work to be
done and frees himself to attend to other tasks in talk-exchange, including
the planning of larger units of discourse. (p. 192)
The “store of familiar collocations” of the native language speaker is very
large indeed. The sheer number of words and their patterns variously explains
why language learning takes so long, why it requires exposure to authentic
sources, and why there is so much current interest in corpus linguistics in
SLA (Biber, Conrad, & Reppen, 1998; Collins Cobuild, 1996; Hunston & Francis,
1996; McEnery & Wilson, 1996). Nativelike competence, fluency, and idiomatic-
ity require an awful lot of figuring out which words go together.
LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION
Corpus linguistics, using powerful computers for statistical and distributional
analysis of large language corpora, has demonstrated the importance of the
idiom principle and has catalogued the majority of the multitude of underlying
chunks of language and the ways in which lexical items, with their particular
valences and subcategorization requirements, operate within these patterns.
Language learners use their heads to figure out the same things, and their un-
derstanding of language is driven by this lexical knowledge. The last 20 years
of linguistics demonstrates a trend whereby theories of grammar have in-
creasingly put more syntax into the lexicon and correspondingly less into
rules. The last 20 years of psycholinguistics have encouraged even greater em-
phasis on the lexical cues that guide sentence interpretation (McKoon & Rat-
cliff, 1998). The Competition Model (Bates & MacWhinney, 1987; MacWhinney,
1987, 1997c) emphasizes lexical functionalism, in which syntactic patterns are
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 16 (native) -----
158
Nick C. Ellis
controlled by lexical items. Lexical items provide cues to functional interpre-
tations for sentence comprehension or production. Some cues are more reli-
able than others. The language learner’s task is to work out which are the
most valid predictors. The Competition Model is the paradigmatic example of
constraint-satisfaction accounts of language comprehension.
Consider the particular cues that relate subject-marking forms to subject-
related functions in the English sentence The learner counts the words. They
are preverbal positioning (learner before counts), verb agreement morphology
(counts agrees in number with learner rather than words), sentence-initial posi-
tioning, and use of the article the. Case-marking languages, unlike English,
would additionally include nominative and accusative cues in such sentences.
The corresponding functional interpretations include actor, topicality, per-
spective, givenness, and definiteness. Competition Model studies analyze a
corpus of exemplar sentences that relate such cue combinations with their
various functional interpretations to determine the regularities of the ways in
which a particular language expresses, for example, agency. They then demon-
strate how well these probabilities determine (a) cue use when learners pro-
cess that language and (b) cue acquisition. The ease of learning an inflection
is determined by its cue validity, a function of how often an inflection occurs
as a cue for a certain underlying function (cue availability) and how reliably it
marks this function (cue reliability) (MacWhinney, 1997c). This present sec-
tion will concentrate on cue use in language comprehension.
Consider the sentences in (1) beginning with The plane left for the. . . . Does
the second word refer to a geometric element, an airplane, or a tool? Does the
third imply a direction, or is it the past tense of the verb leave in active or in
passive voice?
(1)
a.
The plane left for the East Coast.
b.
The plane left for the reporter was missing.
What of the likelihood of the past-tense passive interpretation of left in sen-
tence (2)? Is it greater or less than that for sentence (1b) (Seidenberg, 1997)?
(2)
The note left for the reporter was missing.
Psycholinguistic experiments show that fluent adults resolve such ambigu-
ities by rapidly exploiting a variety of probabilistic constraints derived from
previous experience. There is the first-order frequency information to the ef-
fect that plane is much more frequent in its vehicle than its other possible
meanings and left is used more frequently in active rather than passive voice.
Thus, the ambiguity is strongly constrained by the frequency with which the
ambiguous verb occurs in transitive and passive structures, of which reduced
relative clauses are a special type (MacDonald, 1994; MacDonald, Pearlmut-
ter, & Seidenberg, 1994; Trueswell, 1996). Additionally, there are combinato-
rial constraints to the effect that plane is an implausible modifier of the noun
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 17 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
159
left, so plane left is not a high-probability noun phrase, and sentence (2) is
therefore more easy to comprehend as a reduced relative clause than sen-
tence (1b) because it is much more plausible for a note to be left than to
leave. In this fashion, interpretation is also constrained by combinatorial lexi-
cal information (MacDonald; Tabossi, Spivey-Knowlton, McRae, & Tanenhaus,
1994; Trueswell, Tanenhaus, & Garnsey, 1994). The math is complicated be-
cause the combination of constraints is nonlinear in that manipulations of
noun agency or discourse context can successfully promote the rarer, reduced
relative interpretation only when properties of the ambiguous verb make this
interpretation a viable one (MacDonald et al.).
Consider the interpretation of prepositional phrases as a second general
class of example of parsing as constraint satisfaction.
(3)
The spy saw the cop with the binoculars.
In (3), the PP with the binoculars can be interpreted as modifying either the
verb, such that it is an instrument of seeing, or the direct object NP, such
that the spy saw the cop who had the binoculars rather than some other cop
(Seidenberg & MacDonald, 1999). Corpus data suggest that about 60% of such
PPs modify the direct object NP, and the remaining 40% modify the verb (Col-
lins & Brooks, 1995; Hindle & Rooth, 1993). Thus any simple structural metric
that resolved the ambiguity on the basis of overall frequency bias (e.g., Mitch-
ell, Cuetos, Corley, & Brysbaert, 1995) will make errors in the initial interpreta-
tion of this ambiguity approximately 40% of the time. The Minimal Attachment
metric used in the best-known structural account, the Garden Path model
(Frazier, 1987), initially chooses the verb attachment and therefore makes
about 60% errors. Yet human comprehenders figure out this ambiguity quite
easily. What information are they using to achieve this? There is the first-
order frequency information: Many prepositions do not modify nouns and
verbs with equal frequency (e.g., of almost exclusively modifies NPs, as in bot-
tle of beer, tally of the likelihoods). Choosing the verb versus noun attachment
based solely on the frequency bias of the preposition will resolve the ambigu-
ity correctly about 72% of the time (Collins & Brooks, 1995). Other key lexical
information comes from the verb. For example, perception verbs (see, hear,
feel, etc.) are not usually modified with instruments or manners, and they thus
bias toward the noun-modification interpretation of the PP. Action verbs,
which usually collocate with a PP expressing the instrument or manner of the
action (e.g., write with a pen, eat in a hurry), promote the interpretation in
which the PP modifies the verb (Spivey-Knowlton & Sedivy, 1995; Taraban &
McClelland, 1988). There are also additional, weaker cues provided by the di-
rect object NP: Definite NPs promote the verb-modification interpretation of
the PP whereas indefinite NPs promote the noun-modification interpretation
(Spivey-Knowlton & Sedivy). Again, such constraints combine in a nonlinear
manner: The weaker noun definiteness constraint has little effect when a verb
strongly promotes the verb-modification interpretation, but its effects can be
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 18 (native) -----
160
Nick C. Ellis
clearly seen when the verb is one of perception. The surprise that results
from breaking the usual frequency-driven expectancies in language processing
underpins both the processing regressions necessitated by garden-path sen-
tences and the humor of puns like those that open and close this paper in
which idiomatic meaning overtakes literal interpretation.
Just as frequent analyses are preferred and are easy to process, so it is
clear that less frequent constructions are more difficult because they are less
predictable and less well practiced. In the aptly named article “Learning and
losing syntax: Practice makes perfect and frequency builds fortitude,” St. John
and Gernsbacher (1998) analyzed why passive and cleft-object constructions
are more difficult to learn (de Villiers & de Villiers, 1985), are harder to com-
prehend, and break down more easily under processing stress (e.g., the very
rapid presentation conditions of Miyake, Carpenter, & Just, 1994) or brain
damage (Bates, Frederici, & Wolfeck, 1987) than active and cleft-subject con-
structions. St. John and Gernsbacher proposed that one reason is simply that
they are less frequent and concomitantly less practiced. They modeled this
frequency effect by using a simple recurrent connectionist model (St. John &
McClelland, 1990) and trained it on the four sentence constructions (simple
active, simple passive, cleft-subject, and cleft-object) employed by Miyake et
al., with, in different simulations, each construction trained more frequently
than the others. Generalization to new sentences was high, which demon-
strates mastery of the syntax rather than memorization of the training in-
stances, and the high-frequency construction was mastered first and proved
more robust under simulated brain damage.
These psycholinguistic studies of sentence processing show that fluent
adults have a vast statistical knowledge about the behavior of the lexical
items of their language. They know the strong cues provided by verbs, in En-
glish at least, in the interpretation of syntactic ambiguities. Fluent compre-
henders know the relative frequencies with which particular verbs appear in
different tenses, in active versus passive and in intransitive versus transitive
structures, the typical kinds of subjects and objects that a verb takes, and
many other such facts. This knowledge has been acquired through experience
with input that exhibits these distributional properties and through knowl-
edge of its semantics. This information is not just an aspect of the lexicon,
isolated from “core” syntax; rather, it is relevant at all stages of lexical, syntac-
tic, and discourse comprehension (Seidenberg & MacDonald, 1999). Frequent
analyses are preferred to less frequent ones.
THE VARIABLE NATURE OF “GRAMMATICALITY”
The gold standard empirical test in linguistics traditionally involves judgments
of grammatical acceptability: “One way to test the adequacy of a grammar
proposed for L is to determine whether or not the sequences that it generates
are actually grammatical, i.e., acceptable to a native speaker, etc.” (Chomsky,
1957, p. 13). Chomsky went on to write:
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 19 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
161
Any grammar of a language will project the finite and somewhat accidental
corpus of observed utterances to a set (presumably infinite) of grammati-
cal utterances. In this respect, a grammar mirrors the behavior of the
speaker who, on the basis of a finite and accidental experience with lan-
guage, can produce or understand an indefinite number of new sentences.
(p. 15, emphasis in original)
Grammaticality judgments rest on the introspection of language users who
have abstracted information about the language from their particular finite
and accidental experience of it. One can make some nomothetic conclusions
from the application of this measure across speakers (e.g., Furiously sleep ideas
green colorless might well warrant a firm, 100% solid * from any speaker of
English), yet it is clear that there is marked variation across individuals in
other respects, which is why this measure is used to investigate sociolinguis-
tic variation (Labov, 1975) and the interlanguage of second language learners
(e.g., Davies & Kaplan, 1998; Mandell, 1999). As Labov (1969) put it:
Today, a great many linguists study English through their own intuitions;
they operate “out of their heads” in the sense that they believe that they
can ask and answer all the relevant questions themselves. But even if a
teacher comes from the same background as his students, he will find his
grammar has changed: that he no longer has sound intuitions about
whether he can say Nobody don’t know nothing about it instead of Nobody
knows nothing about it. (p. 8)
It seems that the marked individual differences concerning judgments of gram-
matical acceptability directly reflect the patterns that have been abstracted
from the particular frequencies evidenced in each learner’s finite and particu-
lar accidental experience. I will return to this issue in the later section on so-
ciolinguistics.
Nor are individuals constant in their opinions. The subsequently very large
literature on the nature and utility of grammaticality judgments and other lin-
guistic intuitions demonstrates the instability and unreliability of such dis-
criminations (Schu¨tze, 1996) even in fluent L1 speakers. Sometimes this is
because, as in (4), the combined cue strengths do not fall clearly one way or
another.
(4)
a.
Tom is one of those clumsy people who cuts himself shaving.
b.
Tom is one of those clumsy people who cuts themself shaving.
c.
Tom is one of those clumsy people who cut themselves shaving.
d.
other
Instability, however, also comes from the fluid, ever-changing nature of each
individual’s system, wherein frequency patterns change as experience accu-
mulates and where the strength of a particular pattern can be temporarily
boosted as a result of a recent encounter; recall that the three key factors that
determine the activation of candidate schema are frequency, recency, and
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 20 (native) -----
162
Nick C. Ellis
context. Grammatical categorization is no different from other classifications
in these respects (Lakoff, 1987, p. 58; Langacker, 1987; Taylor, 1998). The
knowledge of a speaker-hearer cannot be understood as a fixed grammar but
rather as a statistical ensemble of language experiences that changes slightly
every time a new utterance is processed. R. Ellis (1999) used these ideas, as
expressed in N. Ellis (1996b), to explain free variation in L2 learner language.
There are several compelling demonstrations of standard implicit memory
effects in the priming of grammaticality judgments and of speech production.
The first evidence of syntactic priming came from Bock (1986), who showed
that using a particular syntactic pattern in one’s speech primes use of that
pattern in subsequent speech. On each priming trial, participants were cued
to produce a priming sentence in one of several syntactic forms. Several inter-
vening trials later they then viewed an unrelated event in a picture and were
asked to describe it in a sentence. The probability of a particular syntactic
form being used in the description increased when that form had occurred in
the prime, and this happened under presentation conditions that minimized
the participants’ attention to their speech, to the syntactic features of the prim-
ing sentences, and to connections between the priming sentences and the sub-
sequent pictures. These effects of priming are specific to features of sentence
form and independent of sentence content, the priming of particular lexical
items, thematic roles, or word sequences (Bock & Loebell, 1988). Subsequent
replications and extensions of this research demonstrated that these effects
are long lasting and can persist over at least 10 intervening sentences (Bock &
Griffin, 2000) and intervals of at least 20 minutes (Boyland & Anderson, 1998),
thus showing that syntactic priming operates on the same time scale as im-
plicit learning (Pickering, Branigan, Cleland, & Stewart, 2000). Fluent language
users tend to produce the most probable utterance for a given meaning on
the basis of the frequencies and recencies of utterance representations.
Evidence of syntactic priming of grammaticality judgments comes from Luka
and Barsalou (1998) and Luka (1999), who showed that recently read sen-
tences are judged to be more grammatically acceptable. In their first experi-
ment, sentences that had been read for content during an earlier part of the
experiment were judged as more grammatically acceptable during a subse-
quent test phase, a finding that demonstrates an implicit memory or the “mere
exposure” effect (Bornstein, 1989) for identically repeated natural language
stimuli. A subsequent experiment investigated whether this priming effect
generalized across priming and test sentences that were syntactically similar
as defined by a phrase-structural description but that did not have the same
content words. The priming effect was found for related syntactic structures
containing novel content words, and thus the priming effect observed in the
first experiment was not due to simple lexical repetition.
These standard, implicit learning and memory effects for grammatical con-
structions show that competence as assessed using grammaticality judgments
seems hardly more constant than grammatical performance. Both are affected
by frequency and recency of use of construction. Grammatical analyses that a
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 21 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
163
language user has frequently or recently experienced are preferred to analy-
ses that must be newly constructed.
SYNTAX
The sensitivity of morphosyntax, language comprehension, production, and
grammaticality to patterns of frequency of usage has important implications
for the structure of the grammatical system—namely, that representations
must have variable strengths reflective of their frequency, and connections
must similarly be variable in weight.
In defining the nature of grammaticality and in introducing the two now-
renowned exemplar test items in (5) and (6), Chomsky (1957) argued:
(5)
Colorless green ideas sleep furiously.
(6)
Furiously sleep ideas green colorless.
The notion “grammatical in English” cannot be identified in any way with
the notion “high order of statistical approximation to English.” It is fair to
assume that neither sentence (5) nor (6) (nor indeed any part of these sen-
tences) has ever occurred in an English discourse. Hence, in any statistical
model for grammaticalness, these sentences will be ruled out on identical
grounds as being equally ‘remote’ from English. Yet (5), though nonsensi-
cal, is grammatical, while (6) is not. . . . Evidently, one’s ability to produce
and recognize grammatical utterances is not based on notions of statistical
approximation and the like. (pp. 15–16)
This passage is the locus classicus for why generative grammars have tra-
ditionally paid no heed to the statistics of language. The conclusion is later
summarized: “The notion of grammaticalness cannot be identified with mean-
ingfulness (nor does it have any special relation, even approximate, to the no-
tion of statistical order of approximation)” (p. 106). Yet in the footnotes to
this defining text, things are left rather more open:
Given the grammar of a language, one can study the use of the language
statistically in various ways; and the development of probabilistic models
for the use of language (as distinct from the syntactic structure of lan-
guage) can be quite rewarding. Cf. B. Mandelbrot, “Structure formelle des
textes et communication: deux e´tudes,” Word 10.1–27 (1954); H. A. Simon,
“On a class of skew distribution functions,” Biometrika 42.425–400 (1955).
One might seek to develop a more elaborate relation between statistical
and syntactic structure than the simple order of approximation model we
have rejected. I would certainly not care to argue that any such relation is
unthinkable, but I know of no suggestion to this effect that does not have
obvious flaws. (p. 17, fn. 4)
It comes as no surprise that as original a thinker as Chomsky, who was shortly
to be working with Miller, the father of psycholinguistics, was pointing in
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 22 (native) -----
164
Nick C. Ellis
these quotations to the work of Mandelbrot, one of the forerunners of Chaos/
Complexity theory, and Simon, the progenitor of the information processing
model of human cognition, artificial intelligence (AI), and bounded rationality.
There may not have been a suitable model of the relation between statistical
and syntactic structure in 1957, but the very enterprises Chomsky identified
here have since developed this understanding. Psycholinguistics provided the
evidence of the effects of frequency that have been reviewed in this paper.
Cognitive psychology developed ways of rationalizing intelligence in terms of
models of optimal inference in the presence of uncertainty. AI, and more re-
cently connectionism, provided the computational framework for testing input-
based theories as simulations. Finally, complexity theory served as the founda-
tion for recent characterizations of language as an emergent system (e.g., Mac-
Whinney, 1997b, 1999, for L1; Ellis, 1998, and Larsen-Freeman, 1997, for L2).
Computational implementations of generative grammars that are large enough
to cover a nontrivial subset of natural language assign to many sentences an
extremely large number of alternative syntactic analyses, yet fluent humans
perceive only one or two of these when faced with the same input. Such mod-
els may be judged successful if the defining criterion is that it describes the
space of possible analyses that sentences may get. However, the combinato-
rial explosion of syntactic analyses and corresponding semantic interpreta-
tions are very problematic if the criterion is rather to predict which analyses
human comprehenders actually assign to natural language utterances (Bod,
1998; Church & Patil, 1982; Martin, Church, & Patil, 1981). The Natural Lan-
guage Processing community has moved to the use of stochastic grammars to
overcome these problems. Examples include stochastic context-free grammar
(Sampson, 1986), stochastic unification-based grammar (Briscoe, 1994), sto-
chastic head-driven phrase-structure grammar (Brew, 1995), stochastic lexi-
cal-functional grammar (Kaplan, 1999), and data-oriented parsing (DOP) (Bod).
Bod described experienced-based DOP models of language, which learn how
to provide appropriate linguistic representations from an unlimited set of ut-
terances by generalizing from examples of representations of previously oc-
curring utterances. These probabilistic models operate by decomposing the
given representations into fragments and recomposing those pieces to analyze
new utterances. Bod showed that any systematic restriction of the fragments
seems to jeopardize the statistical dependencies that are needed for predict-
ing the appropriate structure of a sentence. This implies that the productive
units of natural language cannot be defined in terms of a minimal set of rules,
constraints, or principles, but rather they need to be defined in terms of a
large redundant set of previously experienced structures with virtually no
restriction on size or complexity. The behavior of the society of syntax is de-
termined by the interactions and associations of all of its members; if commu-
nities are excised, or if new individuals join, then the whole ecology changes.
For these reasons it is becoming increasingly the case that models of syn-
tax, parsing, and natural language processing contain mechanisms for gather-
ing information about the frequencies of language representation along with
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 23 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
165
probabilistic algorithms that guide the access and disambiguation of linguistic
knowledge (Jurafsky, 1996; Jurafsky & Martin, 2000). Connectionist models of
sentence processing are still in their infancy. Nevertheless, Allen and Seiden-
berg (1999) reported a simulation of the emergence of grammaticality. The
model was sensitive to sequential word probabilities and to sequential seman-
tic probabilities (e.g., the representation of the word mother included the fea-
tures female-parent, parent, female, relative, human, living-thing, organism,
animate, entity). After being exposed to a training corpus of 100 utterances,
the model gave high grammaticality scores to utterances of high word and
high semantic transition probabilities such as which girl did you invite. It also
gave values that were close to these levels for sentences in which the transi-
tional probabilities between words was low but the transitional probabilities
between semantic types was high. Allen and Seidenberg claimed that this type
of sentence corresponds to colorless green ideas sleep furiously in which the
semantic subsequences [property property entity act manner] are consistent
with semantic sequences that appeared in the training set, but the bigram fre-
quencies of the words (e.g., colorless-green, green-ideas) were low or zero in
the training corpus. The model gave very low grammaticality scores for sen-
tences such as on invited cake street time the that had low word transition
probability and low semantic transition probability—that is, sentences that
Allen and Seidenberg claim to parallel examples of the type furiously sleep
ideas green colorless.
Other recurrent connectionist models of language include those of Elman
(1990) and Redington and Chater (1998), which demonstrate how learning the
grammatical categories and requirements of words and word groups reduces
to the analysis of the sequence in which words work in chunks. These part-of-
speech categories emerge from the language input without any semantics or
real-world grounding, and their category structure is hierarchical, soft, and im-
plicit. Landauer and Dumais (1997) presented a latent semantic analysis
model that simulated language learners’ acquisition of lexical semantics from
text. The same types of network architecture that discover sublexical regulari-
ties of language also discover important grammatical and semantic informa-
tion; sequential analysis provides useful language representation at all levels
of grain. The networks move from processing frequency relations between
mere surface regularities to representing something more abstract, without
this being built in as a prespecified syntactic or other linguistic constraint.
Relatively general architectural constraints give rise to language-specific rep-
resentational constraints as a product of processing the input strings. These
linguistically relevant representations are an emergent property. They emerge
from the analyses of co-occurrence patterns.
TYPE VERSUS TOKEN FREQUENCY
How exactly does the frequency of patterns in the input affect acquisition? We
have already discussed how representational strength is determined by the
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 24 (native) -----
166
Nick C. Ellis
power law of practice rather than raw frequency, as well as how the effects of
frequency in input are modulated by the need to simultaneously satisfy the
constraints of all other constructions that are represented in the learners’ sys-
tem. (See Ellis & Schmidt, 1998, pp. 329–331 for a detailed explanation of these
two factors in interaction in the example case of morphosyntax.) This section
considers the separable effects of token frequency and type frequency using
examples at the level of lexis and constructions.
Token frequency is how often particular words or specific phrases appear
in the input. Type frequency, on the other hand, is how many different lexical
items can be applied to a certain pattern, paradigm, or construction. Type fre-
quency refers to the number of distinct lexical items that can be substituted
in a given slot in a construction, whether it is a word-level construction for
inflection or a syntactic construction specifying the relation among words. For
example, the “regular” English past tense -ed has a very high type frequency be-
cause it applies to thousands of different types of verbs, whereas the vowel
change exemplified in swam and rang has much lower type frequency. Bybee
(1995), Bybee and Thompson (2000), and the researchers gathered in Bybee
and Hopper (2001) showed how the productivity of phonological, morphologi-
cal, and syntactic patterns is a function of type rather than token frequency.
In contrast, high token frequency promotes the entrenchment or conservation
of irregular forms and idioms; the irregular forms only survive because they
are high frequency. These findings support language’s place at the center of
cognitive research into human categorization, reviewed above, which also em-
phasizes the importance of type frequency in classification.
Type frequency determines productivity because: (a) the more lexical
items that are heard in a certain position in a construction, the less likely it is
that the construction is associated with a particular lexical item and the more
likely it is that a general category is formed over the items that occur in that
position; (b) the more items the category must cover, the more general are its
criterial features and the more likely it is to extend to new items; and (c) high
type frequency ensures that a construction is used frequently, thus strength-
ening its representational schema and making it more accessible for further
use with new items (Bybee & Thompson, 2000).
IMPLICATIONS FOR THEORIES OF L2 ACQUISITION
These psycholinguistic demonstrations that frequency sensitivity pervades all
aspects of language processing have profound implications for theories of lan-
guage acquisition—namely, that language learning is exemplar based. The evi-
dence reviewed here suggests that the knowledge underlying fluent use of
language is not grammar in the sense of abstract rules or structure but a huge
collection of memories of previously experienced utterances. These exem-
plars are linked, with like kinds being related in such a way that they resonate
as abstract linguistic categories, schema, and prototypes. Linguistic regulari-
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 25 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
167
ties emerge as central tendencies in the conspiracy of the database of memo-
ries of utterances.
For language learners to be accurate and fluent in their generalizations
they need to have processed sufficient exemplars that their accidental and fi-
nite experience is truly representative of the total population of language of
the speech community in terms of its overall content, the relative frequencies
of that content, and the mappings of form to functional interpretation. The
enormity of the lexical pool, the range of frequencies from 60,000 per million
down to 1 per million and below, and the wide range of different linguistic
constructions, when considered from the point of view of sampling theory,
makes it clear that the necessary representative experience for fluency must
be vast indeed.
Traditional descriptive and pedagogical grammars relate well to these theo-
ries of acquisition, both in their induction and in their descriptive grain, by
focusing on constructions as recurrent patterns of linguistic elements that
serve some well-defined linguistic function. These may be at the sentence
level (e.g., imperative, ditransitive, or yes-no question) or below (NP, PP, etc.).
Whereas generative grammar denied constructions, viewing them as epiphe-
nomena resulting from the interaction of higher level principles and parame-
ters and lower level lexicon, cognitive linguistics (Barlow & Kemmer, 2000;
Croft & Cruse, 1999; Langacker, 1987; Ungerer & Schmid, 1996), and Construc-
tion Grammar in particular (Goldberg, 1995), has brought constructions back
to the fore, suspecting instead that it is the higher-level systematicities that
emerge from the interactions of constructions large and small.
A construction is a conventional linguistic unit—that is, part of the linguis-
tic system, accepted as a convention in the speech community, and entrenched
as grammatical knowledge in the speaker’s mind. Constructions may be com-
plex, as in [Det Noun], or simple, as in [Noun] (traditionally viewed as “lexi-
con”); they may represent complex structure above the word level, as in [Adj
Noun], or below the word level, as in [NounStem-pl] (traditionally viewed as
“morphology”); and they may be schematic, as in [Det Noun], or specific, as
in [the United Kingdom] (traditionally viewed as “lexicon”). Hence, “morphol-
ogy,” “syntax,” and “lexicon” are uniformly represented in a construction gram-
mar, unlike both traditional grammar and generative grammar, and chunks of
language much larger than the analytic units of morphemes or even words are
the usual units of storage and processing. Constructions are symbolic. That
is, in addition to specifying the properties of an utterance’s defining morpho-
logical, syntactic, and lexical form, a construction also specifies the semantic,
pragmatic, and discourse functions that are associated with it. Constructions
form a structured inventory of a speaker’s knowledge of the conventions of his
or her language (Langacker, 1987, pp. 63–66), in which schematic construc-
tions can be abstracted over the less schematic ones that are inferred induc-
tively by the speaker in acquisition. A construction may provide a partial
specification of the structure of an utterance. Hence, an utterance’s structure
is specified by a number of distinct constructions. Constructions are indepen-
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 26 (native) -----
168
Nick C. Ellis
dently represented units in a speaker’s mind. Any construction with unique,
idiosyncratic formal or functional properties must be represented indepen-
dently to capture a speaker’s knowledge of his or her language. However, ab-
sence of any unique property of a construction does not entail that it is not
represented independently and simply derived from other, more general or
schematic constructions. Frequency of occurrence may lead to independent
representation of even so-called regular constructional patterns. In this usage-
based perspective, the acquisition of grammar is the piecemeal learning of
many thousands of constructions and the frequency-biased abstraction of reg-
ularities within them (Croft & Cruse, 1999).
Many constructions are based on particular lexical items, ranging from sim-
ple (Howzat! in cricket) to complex (Beauty is in the eye of the beholder). But
other constructions are more abstract. Goldberg (1995) focused on complex
argument-structure constructions such as the ditransitive (Pat faxed Bill the
letter), the caused motion (Pat pushed the napkin off the table), and the cona-
tive (Sam kicked at Bill). Goldberg held that these abstract and complex con-
structions themselves carry meaning, independently of the particular words
in the sentence. For example, even though the verb kick does not typically
imply transfer of possession, it works in the ditransitive Pat kicked Bill the foot-
ball, and even though one is hard-pressed to interpret anything but an intran-
sitive sneeze, the caused motion Pat sneezed the napkin off the table is equally
good. These abstract argument-structure constructions thus create an impor-
tant top-down component to the process of linguistic communication. They
would predict, for example, a reasonable analogic understanding of the sen-
tence Eloquence is in the ear of the hearkener. Such influences are powerful
mechanisms for the creativity of language, possibly even as manifest in deriva-
tional phenomena such as denominal verbs (e.g., They tabled the motion) and
deverbal nouns (e.g., Drinking killed him) (Tomasello, 1998b). As reviewed
earlier for human classification more generally, constructions show prototype
effects. For example, ditransitive constructions have a central sense of “agent-
successfully-causes-recipient-to-receive-patient” (Bill gave [handed, passed, threw,
took] her a book) and various more peripheral meanings such as future-trans-
fer (Bill bequeathed [allocated, granted, reserved] her a book) and enabling-
transfer (Bill allowed or permitted her one book).
Currently, we must look to child language research for the development
of construction-based theories of acquisition (Tomasello, 1998a, 2000). These
accounts emphasize the piecemeal learning of concrete exemplars. Longitudi-
nal child acquisition data suggest that, to begin with, each word is treated as
a semantic isolate in the sense that the ability to combine it with other words
is not accompanied by a parallel ability with semantically related words. Bow-
erman (1976) noted that her daughter acquired the more + X construction
long before other semantically similar relational words like again and all-gone
came to be used in the similar pivot position in two-word utterances. Pine and
Lieven (1993, 1997), Lieven, Pine, and Dresner Barnes (1992), and Pine, Lieven,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 27 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
169
and Rowland (1998) have since demonstrated widespread lexical specificity in
L1 grammar development. Children’s language between the ages of 2 and 3
years old is much more “low-scope” than theories of generative grammar have
argued. A high proportion of children’s early multiword speech is produced
from a developing set of slot-and-frame patterns. These patterns are often
based around chunks of one or two words or phrases and have slots into
which the child can place a variety of words, for instance subgroups of nouns
or verbs (e.g., I can’t + verb; where’s + noun + gone?). Children are very pro-
ductive with these patterns and both the number of patterns and their struc-
ture develop over time. They are, however, lexically specific: Pine, Lieven, and
colleagues analyzed recordings of 2- to 3-year-old children speaking with their
mothers, and they measured the overlap between the words used in different
slots in different utterances. For example, if a child had two patterns, I can’t +
X and I don’t + X, they determined whether the verbs used in the X slots came
from the same group and whether any other can- or do- auxiliaries could be
used. There was typically very little or no overlap, an observation that sup-
ports the conclusions that (a) the patterns are not related through an underly-
ing grammar (i.e., the child does not “know” that can’t and don’t are both
auxiliaries or that the words that appear in the patterns all belong to a cate-
gory of Verb), (b) there is no evidence for abstract grammatical patterns in
the 2- to 3-year-old child’s speech, and (c) in contrast, the children are picking
up frequent patterns from what they hear around them and only slowly mak-
ing more abstract generalizations as the database of related utterances grows.
Tomasello (1992) proposed the Verb Island hypothesis in which it is the
early verbs and relational terms that are the individual islands of organization
in young children’s otherwise unorganized grammatical system. In the early
stages, the child learns about arguments and syntactic markings on a verb-by-
verb basis, and ordering patterns and morphological markers learned for one
verb do not immediately generalize to other verbs. Positional analysis of each
verb island requires long-term representations of that verb’s collocations, and
thus this account of grammar acquisition implies vast amounts of long-term
knowledge of word sequences. Only later are syntagmatic categories formed
by abstracting regularities from this large dataset in conjunction with morpho-
logical marker cues (at least in case-marking languages). Goldberg (1995) ar-
gued that certain patterns are more likely to be made more salient in the input
because they relate to certain fundamental perceptual primitives, and thus
that the child’s construction of grammar involves both the distributional anal-
ysis of the language stream and the analysis of contingent perceptual activity:
Constructions which correspond to basic sentence types encode as their
central senses event types that are basic to human experience . . . that of
someone causing something, something moving, something being in a
state, someone possessing something, something causing a change of state
or location, something undergoing a change of state or location, and some-
thing having an effect on someone. (p. 39)
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 28 (native) -----
170
Nick C. Ellis
Goldberg and Sethuraman (1999) showed how individual, semantically pro-
totypic verbs are “pathbreakers” in that they seed the growth of verb-centered
argument-structure patterns. Generalizations of the verb-centered instances
emerge gradually as the verb-centered categories themselves are analyzed
into more abstract argument-structure constructions. The verb is a better pre-
dictor of sentence meaning than any other word in the sentence. Neverthe-
less, children ultimately generalize to the level of constructions because these
are much better predictors of overall meaning. Although verbs thus predomi-
nate in seeding low-scope patterns and eventually more abstract generaliza-
tions, Pine et al. (1998) have shown that such islands are not exclusive to
verbs and that the theory should be extended to include limited patterns
based on other lexical types such as bound morphemes, auxiliary verbs, and
case-marking pronouns. Nevertheless, the focus on verbs echoes their central
role in determining the syntactic structure of a sentence and, as reviewed pre-
viously, their providing the strongest constraints on the resolution of syntac-
tic ambiguities.
In sum, theories of the acquisition of first-language grammatical construc-
tions maintain that there is a developmental sequence from formula, through
low-scope pattern, to construction. Second and foreign language acquisition is
different from L1 acquisition in numerous respects. First, in conceptual devel-
opment: In child language acquisition, knowledge of the world and knowledge
of language are developing simultaneously, whereas adult SLA builds on pre-
existing conceptual knowledge. Moreover, adult learners have sophisticated
formal operational means of thinking and can treat language as an object of
explicit learning—that is, of conscious problem-solving and deduction—to a
much greater degree than can children (Ellis, 1994a). Second, in language in-
put: The typical L1 pattern of acquisition results from naturalistic exposure in
situations where caregivers naturally scaffold development (Tomasello & Brooks,
1999), whereas classroom environments for second or foreign language teach-
ing can distort the patterns of exposure, function, medium, and social interac-
tion (Ellis & Laporte, 1997). Third, in transfer from L1: Adult SLA builds on
preexisting L1 knowledge (Kellerman, 1995; MacWhinney, 1992; Odlin, 1989).
Nevertheless, the L1 acquisition sequence—from formulas, through low-scope
patterns, to constructions—could serve well as a reasonable default in guid-
ing the investigation of the ways in which exemplars and their type and token
frequencies determine the second language acquisition of structure.
SOCIOLINGUISTICS
Sociolinguistics is concerned with variation: regional and social variations of
language, diachronic change, and intra-individual variation tuned to differing
communicative situations. Differences between individuals result from their
differing histories of input: “No two speakers have the same language, because
no two speakers have the same experience of language” (Hudson, 1996, p. 11);
“the more speakers talk to each other, the more they will talk alike, and so
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 29 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
171
linguistic variation will pattern along lines of social contact and interaction”
(Kemmer & Israel, 1994, p. 167). If linguistic regularities emerge as central
tendencies in a conspiracy of the database of memories for utterances, it is
easy to see how input-frequency based accounts might lead to this variation
and change. Psychological processing models of language are well-suited col-
laborators alongside theories of social interaction and accommodation, as
well as Vygotskian and social psychology, in the sociolinguistic understanding
of mechanisms of variation (Tarone, 1988, 1997).
The Systematicity of Variability
Sociolinguistic variation provides the strongest empirical evidence against the
self-containedness of grammatical knowledge of the individual (Croft, 1995).
Variation occurs in the speech of single individuals and hence must be a part
of a speaker’s knowledge of the language. Fluent speakers have many variants
as part of their grammatical competence, and they employ them differently
depending on their social position in the speech community and the circum-
stances of the conversational interaction. To the degree that the systematicity
of an individual’s variable grammar is tied to the individual’s interactions in
social settings, the grammar is not self-contained. Labov (1972) importantly
demonstrated the systematicity of variability and proposed that variable rules
may stipulate the linguistic and social contexts in which a rule is more or less
likely to apply (e.g., omission of the contracted verb, as in We’re here, in Black
English occurs more often before consonants than before vowels and more
often in informal situations than formal). Such explanation in terms of rules
may be too top-down for present tastes and “rulelike” would be a preferred
conceptualization (Ellis, 1996a; Ellis & Schmidt, 1998), but the statistical sensi-
tivity that is displayed is another powerful example of learner’s frequency
matching:
[Labov’s work] . . . implies that it is wrong to think of an individual as mas-
tering a single idiolect, and understanding others’ speech only insofar as it
resembles his own. Rather, it seems that each speaker learns a structured
range of alternative speech patterns, together with the correlations be-
tween variation in his social environment and variation in that dialectal
continuum. There is nothing particularly surprising in the finding that
speakers are familiar with a variety of speech-styles, of course, but many
of us had supposed that such knowledge was patchy and largely inaccu-
rate—as speakers’ conscious beliefs about such facts certainly are. What
is staggering about Labov’s work is the subtlety, consistency, and mathe-
matical regularity it reveals in speakers’ use of statistical linguistic vari-
ables and hearers’ reactions to them. (Sampson, 1980, pp. 128–129)
As with other aspects of language, there are attempts to formalize this
knowledge in computational models. For example, one of the controversial
features of Word Grammar (WG) (Hudson, 1990) is that it allows the grammar
to include sociolinguistic information about speakers and addressees because
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 30 (native) -----
172
Nick C. Ellis
the relationships “speaker” and “addressee” are available (and are used else-
where, notably in treating deixis). Thus, it is possible to include both pave-
ment and sidewalk in the same grammar but to show that they are used by
different kinds of people—that is (roughly speaking), that they belong to dif-
ferent “dialects” in that the speaker of pavement is British and the speaker
of sidewalk is American. Hudson also discusses ways to give similar kinds of
information about registers (e.g., formality and other matters of style). The
WG model is based on a semantic network that incorporates spreading activa-
tion across paths of variable weight. At present, the strengths of these weights
are determined and set by the modeler. Emergentists would want better to
incorporate these ideas into connectionist types of model in which such rela-
tions are learned rather than hand-tuned.
Language Change
Individual learner grammars incorporate variation. This variation changes
through use in ways that can lead to the propagation of a change in the
speech community that will be established as such in the mental representa-
tions of speakers’ (variable) grammars, thus resulting in diachronic language
change. Boyland (1996) pointed out that the changes in form that occur in the
grammaticization process closely resemble changes that occur as nonlinguis-
tic skills are practiced and become automatized. Building on such ideas, By-
bee (1995, 2000) and Bybee and Hopper (2001) have developed a model of
grammaticization as the process of automatization of frequently occurring se-
quences of linguistic elements. With repetition, sequences of units that were
previously independent come to be processed as a single unit or chunk (Ellis,
1996b). This repackaging has two consequences: The identity of the compo-
nent units is gradually lost, and the whole chunk begins to reduce in form. As
described previously, these basic principles of automatization apply to all
kinds of motor activities—for example, playing a musical instrument, cooking,
or playing an Olympic sport. They also apply to grammaticization. A phrase
such as (I’m) going to + Verb, which has been frequently used over the last
couple of centuries, has been repackaged as a single processing unit. The
identity of the component parts is lost (children are often surprised to see
that gonna is actually spelled going to), and the form is substantially reduced.
Thus in Bybee’s model, frequency is the driving force of language change
in five ways. First, frequency of use leads to weakening of semantic force by
habituation. Second, phonological changes of reduction and fusion of gram-
maticizing constructions are conditioned by their high frequency. Third, in-
creased frequency conditions a greater autonomy for a construction, which
means that the individual components of the construction (such as go, to, or
-ing in the example of be going to) weaken or lose their association with other
instances of the same item (as the phrase reduces to gonna). Fourth, the loss
of semantic transparency accompanying the rift between the components of
the grammaticizing construction and their lexical congeners allows the use of
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 31 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
173
the phrase in new contexts with new pragmatic associations, leading to se-
mantic change. Fifth and finally, autonomy of a frequent phrase makes it more
entrenched in the language and often conditions the preservation of otherwise
obsolete morphosyntactic characteristics (Bybee, 2000). Frequency is the de-
terminant of lexical and construction strength that are key components of
Bybee’s schema-network models. It is similarly the driving force of other us-
age-based accounts of language change (Boyland, 1996; Croft, 2000; Kemmer &
Israel, 1994).
In sum, frequency is a mechanism underlying much of sociolinguistic varia-
tion, and the measurement of frequency of use is consequently an essential
descriptive foundation (Biber, 1996; Biber & Finegan, 1994; Biber et al., 1998).
To understand variation we must do what learners themselves do in order to
vary appropriately: In the words of a recent evolution in American English, we
must “Go figure.”
IMPLICATIONS FOR THEORIES OF IMPLICIT
AND EXPLICIT LEARNING
This review has shown that much of language learning is the gradual strength-
ening of associations between co-occurring elements of the language and that
fluent language performance is the exploitation of this probabilistic knowl-
edge. Because the conscious experiences of language learning do not revolve
around counting, to the extent that language processing is based on frequency
and probabilistic knowledge, language learning is implicit learning.
Two provisos must be added to put language learning in the proper bal-
ance. The first concerns initial registration of representations, the second ex-
plicit instruction. First, the frequency effects detailed here describe the tuning
of the language system through use. The initial registration of a language rep-
resentation may well require attention and conscious identification. Schmidt
(1990) has properly emphasized the importance of apperception for language
acquisition in his “noticing” hypothesis. Schmidt proposed that the subjective
experience of noticing is the necessary and sufficient condition for the conver-
sion of input to intake in SLA. An extension of the noticing hypothesis is that
what must be attended to and noticed is not just the input in a global sense
but whatever features of the input are relevant for the target system (Schmidt,
1993). That is, to acquire phonology one must attend to phonology, and to
acquire pragmatics, one must notice both linguistic forms and the relevant
contextual features, and so forth:
Noticing is used here as a technical term to refer only to registration of
the occurrence of a stimulus event in conscious awareness and subsequent
storage in long term memory, not the detection of form/meaning relation-
ships or inductive formation of hypotheses or other processes that may
lead to the organization of stored knowledge into a linguistic system.
(Schmidt, 1994, p. 179)
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 32 (native) -----
174
Nick C. Ellis
The strong form of the noticing hypothesis is that attention must be paid
to some aspect of the stimulus environment, and that aspect must be noticed
before a mental representation of that stimulus can first be formed. However,
the strong form of an implicit tallying hypothesis to accompany it is that once
a stimulus representation is firmly in existence, that stimulus, be it for exam-
ple the letter b or a rise in pitch at the end of questions, need never be no-
ticed again; yet as long as it is attended to for use in the processing of future
input for meaning, its strength will be incremented and its associations will be
tallied and implicitly cataloged. This latter is the same assumption as that first
proposed by Logan (1988) in his instance theory of automatization: “Encoding
into memory is an obligatory, unavoidable consequence of attention” (p. 493).
What remains in dispute falls between these two hypotheses and primarily
centers on the size of grain of representation: Are all types of association
equally learnable by implicit means, or are there some relations that require
explicit learning? The material reviewed here, as well as the research mar-
shaled in psycholinguistics texts (e.g., Altman, 1997; Gernsbacher, 1994; Har-
ley, 1995), shows us to be very well tuned to our language input at all levels.
Once low-level mental representations are formed, they can be grouped to-
gether hierarchically—that is, “chunked” by unconscious processes of associ-
ation to form larger units that are henceforth used in pattern recognition. As
Ellis (1996b) argued:
Although learners need not be aware of the processes of such pattern ex-
traction, they will later be aware of the product of these processes since
the next time they experience that pattern it is the patterned chunk that
they will be aware of in working memory, not the individual components
(for illustration, while young children learn about clocks they devote con-
siderable attention to the position of hands on an analog face in relation to
the pattern of numerals; when experienced adults consult their watch they
are aware of the time, and have no immediate access to lower-level percep-
tual information concerning the design of the hands or numerals [Morton,
1967]). (p. 109)
Nevertheless, there do seem to be more complex associations that require
more conscious explicit learning and hypothesis testing to acquire. The exper-
iments of Ellis, Lee, and Reber (1999) provided evidence suggesting that this
is the case for some long-distance discontinuous dependencies in language ac-
quisition. Similarly, Cohen, Ivry, and Keele (1990) and Curran and Keele (1993)
showed that, whereas unique sequences can be acquired implicitly in artificial
grammar learning experiments, ambiguous sequences require more attentional
forms of learning.
The second proviso is that these findings do not deny a role for explicit
instruction, the efficacy of which is now well established. Language acquisi-
tion can be speeded by explicit instruction. Reviews of the experimental and
quasiexperimental investigations into the effectiveness of L2 instruction (e.g.,
Ellis & Laporte, 1997; Hulstijn & DeKeyser, 1997; Lightbown, Spada, & White,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 33 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
175
1993; Long, 1983; Spada, 1997), particularly the Norris and Ortega (2000) com-
prehensive meta-analysis of the last 20 years’ empirical work, demonstrated
that focused L2 instruction results in large target-oriented gains, that explicit
types of instruction are more effective than implicit types, and that the effec-
tiveness of L2 instruction is durable. This is not to say that just providing
learners with pedagogical rules will make them into fluent language users. Far
from it (Krashen, 1985; Krashen & Terrell, 1983), because then the learner nei-
ther gets the exemplars nor the tuning. Pedagogical rules are only properly
effective when demonstrated in operation with a number of illustrative exem-
plars of their application (Ellis, 1993).
The real stuff of language acquisition is the slow acquisition of form-func-
tion mappings and the regularities therein. This skill, like others, takes tens of
thousands of hours of practice, practice that cannot be substituted for by pro-
vision of a few declarative rules. Communicative approaches give input, time-
on-task, and opportunity for relating form and function. All of this is necessary
for developing the associations required for language learning. Naturalistic en-
vironments provide motivation and plenty of opportunity for output practice
as well. These are situations that guarantee sufficient quantity of language and
proper involvement in the communicative functions of language. However,
without any focus on form or consciousness raising (Sharwood Smith, 1981),
formal accuracy is an unlikely result; relations that are not salient or essential
for understanding the meaning of an utterance are otherwise only picked up
very slowly, if at all (Schmidt, 1990; Terrell, 1991). Focus on forms alone can
teach some declarative rules of grammar but at its worst can be accompanied
by too little time on the task of language use itself. Focus-on-form instruction,
which is rich in communicative opportunities and which at the same time
makes salient the association between communicative function and structure,
can facilitate language acquisition (Doughty & Williams, 1998; Long, 1991). As
MacWhinney (1997a) put it:
Students who receive explicit instruction, as well as implicit exposure to
forms, would seem to have the best of both worlds. They can use explicit
instruction to allocate attention to specific types of input . . . , narrow their
hypothesis space . . . , tune the weights in their neural networks . . . , or
consolidate their memory traces. From the viewpoint of psycholinguistic
theory, providing learners with explicit instruction along with standard im-
plicit exposure would seem to be a no-lose proposition. (p. 278)
The communicative functions of language motivate the learner to the task. No-
ticing lays out the problem. Consciousness-raising can speed its solution. Fig-
uring provides the final tally of native levels of fluency and idiomaticity.
FREQUENCY IN APPLIED LINGUISTICS: LADO AND LATER
The acknowledgment of frequency as a causal variable in language learning,
though not prominent in the last 40 years of applied linguistics or second lan-
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 34 (native) -----
176
Nick C. Ellis
guage studies, is certainly not new. It was a key concept in the theories and
practices of American structural linguists such as Harris (1955, 1968). Harris’s
Mathematical structures of language described a recurrent dependence process
for identifying sentence boundaries at the points where the sequential likeli-
hood between word neighbors shows a discontinuity. He also described how
morphemes could be segmented out of a string of phonemes using the same
process. This work set firm foundations for more recent recurrent models of
language sequence analysis (Brent, 1999; Christiansen et al., 1998; Elman,
1990). There is no more thorough investigation of the effects of different fre-
quencies of behavior and contingencies of reinforcement than that estab-
lished in behaviorist psychology by Skinner (1957, 1969). Lado’s theory of
second language learning, built on the behaviorist principles of learning (in-
cluding the fundamental principle of contiguity, the law of exercise, the law of
intensity, the law of assimilation, and the law of effect), was that grammatical
structure is a system of habits (Lado, 1957, p. 57; 1964, pp. 37–45). For Lado,
acquisition is the learning of patterns of expression, content, and their associ-
ation, a concept closely akin to the constructions of the previous section. Lan-
guage learning occurs through experience, and because all experiences leave
a trace in the memory store, all previous experiences are a factor, either facili-
tating or inhibiting the learning of a new language, hence his later develop-
ment of contrastive analysis. His theory emphasized the shift from attentional
to unconscious processing through automatization:
Knowing a language is defined as the power to use its complex mechanism
through bundles of habits while only the thread of the argument and some
matters of selection and agreement are under attention. This power is
achieved gradually by strengthening the facilities for partial use through
repeated experiences so that attention is freed from the mechanics of use.
In other words, before learning, attention must control every minor ele-
ment of speaking or listening expression, content, or association. Since at-
tention is limited in the number of items that can be held simultaneously
under it, learning occurs when attention can be shifted to larger units and
patterns and eventually to the total utterance by increased facility with the
smaller units and patterns. (1964, p. 41)
I have only recently discovered these interests of his in automaticity and
attention. However, when I consider them alongside his other investigations
of short-term memory constraints as determinants of individual differences in
language learning (Lado, 1965), I admit to some weary feelings of familiarity in
observing the inadvertent similarity of our research paths. As Lado’s ideas on
language learning appear in their final form as lexicosemantic theory, they are
surprisingly reminiscent of cognitive linguistic approaches: “This view is lexi-
cal and semantic rather than syntactic in nature. It claims that humans ac-
quire and learn words, names, titles, expressions, sayings, and formulas as
undifferentiated lexical items (lexemes) first” (Lado, 1990, p. 96). In this view,
as the number of lexemes increases, so systems develop for storing and re-
trieving them as needed and a grammatical system emerges from these:
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 35 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
177
The combinations are amorphous at first and evolve into patterns and
eventually rules that permit the creation of new words and sentences.
Grammatical meaning attaches to word order, inflections, derivations, etc.
from meaningful samples that are experienced by learners in interaction
with speakers, and then the patterns and rules are applied to create and
understand new phrases and sentences. (1990, p. 99)
So why is this work of so little current influence? There are two special factors
besides the usual explanation that most papers have a limited shelf-life; ap-
plied linguistics is no less influenced by fashion and topicality than any other
discipline, and publication citation half-life is typically humblingly brief. The
first is that progress in behaviorist theories of language learning floundered
following Chomsky’s (1959) masterly and highly influential critique of Skin-
ner’s (1957) Verbal Behavior. The second is that behavioral approaches fell
from favor in applied linguistics in eventual reaction against Lado’s implemen-
tation of his theory in the Audio-Lingual Method (ALM) (Lado, 1948, 1964).
However laudable his belief in an applied psycholinguistics as a scientific ap-
proach to language learning and teaching, Lado’s operationalization champi-
oned behaviorist principles of learning at the expense of language and the
learner. Despite his premise of language learning as the learning of patterns of
expression, content, and their association, the ALM involved “mimicry-memo-
rization” in pattern drills in which the role of understanding was minimized as
much as possible. The major emphasis was on the mechanical production of
the utterance as a language form and on the development of automatic re-
sponses of the desired nature, that is, good habits. At its worst, the method
involved mindless repetition and meaningless drills, with unmotivated learn-
ers interacting with teaching machines using far from authentic materials. Fur-
ther, unlike grammar-translation methods, there was no capitalizing on learner’s
metalinguistic abilities or explicit instruction. The ALM was a blinkered and
limited implementation of theories of frequency and habit in language learn-
ing. Language learning involves much more than mindless repetition. Mindful
repetition in an engaging communicative context by motivated learners is
somewhat closer to the mark.
So it was that in the 1970s the ALM became unfashionable, and few applied
linguists considered frequency very much thereafter. Nonetheless, Larsen-
Freeman (1976) determined it was the only thing that could adequately ex-
plain the common acquisition order of English morphemes to which ESL learn-
ers, despite their different ages and language backgrounds, all seem to adhere;
Goldschneider and DeKeyser’s (2001) recent meta-analysis of the morpheme
acquisition studies confirms that this so-called natural order is a function of
the frequency of occurrence of these morphemes in adult native-speaker
speech. Frequency remained as a tacit factor, of course, in all input-based the-
ories of SLA (see Gass, 1997, for review). Only in the last decade, however,
has it been explicitly reintroduced to studies of SLA after its theoretical devel-
opment in psycholinguistics, connectionism, and child language acquisition. A
notable example of this is the Competition Model as a sophisticated theory of
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 36 (native) -----
178
Nick C. Ellis
frequency-based interactions and the associated tests of its predictions in
both L1 acquisition and SLA (Bates & MacWhinney, 1987; Kempe & MacWhin-
ney, 1998; MacWhinney, 1987, 1997c, 1999).
CONCLUSIONS AND CONNECTIONS
This review has demonstrated a range of influences of frequency in a wide
variety of theoretical approaches to language across the whole gamut of lan-
guage-relevant representations. Frequency is a necessary component of theo-
ries of language acquisition and processing. In some guises it is a very
rudimentary causal variable. Learners analyze the language input that they are
exposed to; practice makes perfect. In other guises it is incredibly complex.
The multiplicity of interacting elements in any system that nontrivially repre-
sents language makes the prediction of the patterns that will eventually
emerge as difficult as forecasting the weather, the evolution of an ecological
system, or the outcome of any other complex system (Ellis, 1998; Larsen-Free-
man, 1997; MacWhinney, 1997b, 1999). This is why complexity requires inves-
tigation using computational simulations.
Of course, frequency is not a sufficient explanation; otherwise we would
never get beyond the definite article in our speech. There are many other de-
terminants of acquisition. Semantic basicness, salience, communicative intent,
and relevance are major determining factors in the acquisition process
(Slobin, 1997). Whereas frequency explains some of the variance of morpheme
acquisition order, it does so in interaction with other determinants such as
perceptual salience, semantic complexity, morphophonological regularity, and
syntactic category (Goldschneider & DeKeyser, 2001). A hardliner might want
to argue that all of these aspects are emergent from patterns of experience as
well, but such generality is too abstract to buy very much explanation at all,
other than to say that we are adaptive organisms. Our language acquisition is
limited by cognitive constraints, and our limited working memories (Ellis,
1996b) determine bounds to our rationality:
The capacity of the human mind for formulating and solving complex prob-
lems is very small compared with the size of the problems whose solution
is required for objectively rational behaviour in the real world—or even
for a reasonable approximation to such objective rationality. (Simon, 1957,
p. 198)
As cognitive linguistics emphasizes, our language builds on our experience
and our embodiment that represents the world in a very particular way. The
different degrees of salience or prominence of elements involved in situations
that we wish to describe affect the selection of subject, object, adverbials, and
other clause arrangement. Figure and ground segregation and perspective tak-
ing are mirrored in language and have systematic relations with syntactic
structure. All of the systems of working memory, all perceptual representa-
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 37 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
179
tional systems, and our attentional resources and supervisory systems are in-
volved in collating the regularities of our experience and of cross-modal
associations relating them to language use. Our common physical, social, and
cognitive inheritance affects us all and commonly moderates the processing
of our language experience; there are universals of language acquisition that
derive from them. The Aspect Hypothesis—whereby language learners are ini-
tially influenced by the inherent semantic aspect of verbs or predicates in the
acquisition of tense and aspect markers associated with or affixed to these
verbs and may be less sensitive to tense or grammatical aspect (Andersen, 1991;
Bardovi-Harlig, 2000; Shirai & Andersen, 1995)—is a good example of such in-
fluences in both first and second language acquisition.
Nevertheless, the ubiquitous influence of frequency gives researchers
of language acquisition from different disciplines some common currency.
Corpus linguists count and analyze the patterns in the input, the different reg-
isters for sociolinguists, and the different stages of proficiency and interlan-
guage for child and L2 acquisition researchers. Psycholinguists investigate the
influence of these patterns in language processing. Psychologists, linguists,
and connectionists alike are concerned with the role of input frequency in de-
termining acquisition, the differential effects on implicit and explicit learning,
the ways that attention can modulate frequency effects, and the representa-
tions and regularities that emerge from these processes. There are important
collaborations to be made between child language researchers, second lan-
guage researchers, and cognitive linguists. Psychophysicists investigate the
relations between input frequency, sensation, and memory consolidation, and
neuroscientists research how synaptic plasticity substantiates these changes.
Educators try to ensure that learners meet a representative sample of authen-
tic language experience so that the learner representations that emerge ap-
proximate those of native speakers. . . . Enough drawing near and binding
tight.
The role of frequency has largely been ignored in theoretical and applied
linguistics for the last 40 years or so. As this review has shown, there is now
ample justification for its reinstatement as an all-pervasive causal factor. In
the final analysis of successful language acquisition and language processing,
it is the language learner who counts.
REFERENCES
Allen, J., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1999). The emergence of grammaticality in connectionist networks. In
B. MacWhinney (Ed.), The emergence of language (pp. 115–152). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Altman, G. T. M. (1997). The ascent of Babel. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Andersen, R. W. (1991). Developmental sequences: The emergence of aspect marking in second lan-
guage acquisition. In T. Huebner & C. A. Ferguson (Eds.), Crosscurrents in second language acqui-
sition and linguistic theories (pp. 305–324). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Anderson, J. R. (1980). Cognitive psychology and its implications. San Francisco, CA: W. H. Freeman.
Anderson, J. R. (1982). Acquisition of cognitive skill. Psychological Review, 89, 369–406.
Attneave, F. (1953). Psychological probability as a function of experienced frequency. Journal of Ex-
perimental Psychology, 46, 81–86.
Balota, D. A., & Chumbley, J. L. (1984). Are lexical decisions a good measure of lexical access? The
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 38 (native) -----
180
Nick C. Ellis
role of word frequency in the neglected decision stage. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Hu-
man Perception and Performance, 10, 340–357.
Bardovi-Harlig, K. (2000). Tense and aspect in second language acquisition: Form, meaning, and use.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Barlow, M., & Kemmer, S. (Eds.). (2000). Usage based models of language. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publica-
tions.
Barry, C., & Seymour, P. H. K. (1988). Lexical priming and sound-to-spelling contingency effects in
nonword spelling. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 40(A), 5–40.
Barsalou, L. W., Huttenlocher, J., & Lamberts, K. (1998). Basing categorization on individuals and
events. Cognitive Psychology, 36, 203–272.
Bates, E., Frederici, A., & Wulfeck, B. (1987). Sentence comprehension in aphasia: A crosslinguistic
study. Brain and Language, 32, 19–67.
Bates, E., & MacWhinney, B. (1987). Competition, variation, and language learning. In B. MacWhinney
(Ed.), Mechanisms of language acquisition (pp. 157–193). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Becker, A. L. (1983). Toward a post-structuralist view of language learning: A short essay. Language
Learning, 33, 217–220.
Biber, D. (1996). Investigating language use through corpus-based analyses of association patterns.
International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 1, 171–197.
Biber, D., Conrad, S., & Reppen, R. (1998). Corpus linguistics: Investigating language structure and use.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Biber, D., & Finegan, E. (Eds.). (1994). Sociolinguistic perspectives on register. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Biber, B., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and
written English. Harlow, UK: Pearson Education.
Bock, J. K. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language production. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 355–387.
Bock, J. K., & Griffin, Z. M. (2000). The persistence of structural priming: Transient activation or
implicit learning? Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 129, 177–192.
Bock, J. K., & Loebell, H. (1988). Framing sentences. Cognition, 35, 1–39.
Bod, R. (1998). Beyond grammar: An experience-based theory of language. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publica-
tions.
Bornstein, R. F. (1989). Exposure and affect: Overview and meta-analysis of research, 1968–1987. Psy-
chological Bulletin, 106, 265–289.
Bowerman, M. (1976). Semantic factors in the acquisition of rules for word use and sentence con-
struction. In D. Morehead & A. Morehead (Eds.), Normal and deficient child language (pp. 99–
180). Baltimore, MD: University Park Press.
Boyland, J. T. (1996). Morphosyntactic change in progress: A psycholinguistic approach. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.
Boyland, J. T., & Anderson, J. R. (1998). Evidence that syntactic priming is long-lasting. In M. A. Gerns-
bacher (Ed.), Proceedings of the 20th annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (p. 1205).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brazil, D. (1995). A grammar of speech. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Brent, M. R. (1999). Speech segmentation and word discovery: A computational perspective. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 3, 294–301.
Bresnan, J. (1999, August). Linguistic theory at the turn of the century. Plenary presentation at the 12th
World Congress of Applied Linguistics, Tokyo.
Brew, C. (1995). Stochastic HPSG. Proceedings of the seventh conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 83–99. Dublin: University College.
Brewster, J. (1999). Exploring gendered talk: Some effects of interactional style. In A. Tosi & C. Leung
(Eds.), Rethinking language education (pp. 196–212). London: CILT.
Briscoe, T. (1994). Prospects for practical parsing of unrestricted text: Robust statistical parsing
techniques. In N. Oostdijk & P. de Haan (Eds.), Corpus-based research into language (pp. 67–95).
Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Brooks, P. J., Braine, M. D. S., Catalano, L., Brody, R., & Sudhalter, V. (1993). Acquisition of gender-
like subclasses in an artificial language: The contribution of phonological markers to learning.
Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 76–95.
Bybee, J. (1995). Regular morphology and the lexicon. Language and Cognitive Processes, 10, 425–455.
Bybee, J. L. (2000). Mechanisms of change in grammaticalization: The role of frequency. Unpublished
manuscript, University of New Mexico.
Bybee, J., & Hopper, P. (Eds.). (2001). Frequency and the emergence of linguistic structure. Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 39 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
181
Bybee, J., & Thompson, S. (2000). Three frequency effects in syntax. Berkeley Linguistic Society, 23,
65–85.
Carter, R. (1998). Vocabulary: Applied linguistic perspectives (2nd ed.). London: Routledge.
Chafe, W. (1994). Discourse, consciousness, and time: The flow and displacement of conscious experi-
ence in speaking and writing. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic structures. The Hague: Mouton de Gruyter.
Chomsky, N. (1959). Review of the book Verbal behavior. Language, 35, 26–58.
Christiansen, M. H., Allen, J., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1998). Learning to segment speech using multiple
cues: A connectionist model. Language and Cognitive Processes, 13, 221–268.
Church, K., & Patil, R. (1982). Coping with syntactic ambiguity or how to put the block in the box on
the table. Computational Linguistics, 8, 139–149.
Cohen, A., Ivry, R. I., & Keele, S. W. (1990). Attention and structure in sequence learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16, 17–30.
Collins Cobuild. (1996). Grammar patterns 1: Verbs. London: Harper Collins.
Collins, M., & Brooks, J. (1995). Prepositional phrase attachment through a backed-off model. Pro-
ceedings of the third Workshop on Very Large Corpora, 27–38. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Coltheart, M. (1978). Lexical access in simple reading tasks. In G. Underwood (Ed.), Strategies of infor-
mation processing (pp. 151–216). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Coltheart, M., Curtis, B., Atkins, P., & Haller, M. (1993). Models of reading aloud: Dual-route and paral-
lel-distributed-processing approaches. Psychological Review, 100, 589–608.
Coltheart, M., & Leahy, J. (1996). Assessment of lexical and nonlexical reading abilities in children:
Some normative data. Australian Journal of Psychology, 48, 136–140.
Corder, S. P. (1973). Introducing applied linguistics. New York: Penguin.
Cottrell, G., & Plunkett, K. (1994). Acquiring the mapping from meaning to sounds. Connection Sci-
ence, 6, 379–412.
Croft, W. (1995). Autonomy and functionalist linguistics. Language, 71, 490–531.
Croft, W. (2000). Explaining language change: An evolutionary approach. London: Longman.
Croft, W., & Cruse, A. (1999). Cognitive linguistics. Unpublished manuscript, University of Manchester.
Curran, T., & Keele, S. W. (1993). Attention and non-attentional forms of sequence learning. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, 189–202.
Daugherty, K. G., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1994). Beyond rules and exceptions: A connectionist approach
to inflectional morphology. In S. D. Lima, R. L. Corrigan, & G. K. Iverson (Eds.), The reality of
linguistic rules (pp. 353–388). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Davies, W. D., & Kaplan, T. I. (1998). Native speaker vs. L2 learner grammaticality judgements. Ap-
plied Linguistics, 19, 183–203.
de Villiers, J. G., & de Villiers, P. A. (1985). The acquisition of English. In D. Slobin (Ed.), The crosslin-
guistic study of language acquisition: Vol. 1 (pp. 27–139). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Do¨rnyei, Z., & Kormos, J. (1998). Problem-solving mechanisms in L2 communication: A psycholinguis-
tic perspective. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 20, 349–385.
Doughty, C., & Williams, J. (Eds.). (1998). Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Ehri, L. C. (1979). Linguistic insight: Threshold of reading acquisition. In T. G. Waller & G. E. MacKin-
non (Eds.), Reading research: Advances in theory and practice: Vol. 1 (pp. 63–114). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Ehri, L. C. (1998). Word reading by sight and by analogy in beginning readers. In C. Hulme & R. M.
Joshi (Eds.), Reading and spelling: Development and disorders (pp. 87–111). Mahwah, NJ: Erl-
baum.
Ellis, N. C. (1993). Rules and instances in foreign language learning: Interactions of explicit and im-
plicit knowledge. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 5, 289–318.
Ellis, N. C. (Ed.). (1994a). Implicit and explicit learning of languages. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Ellis, N. C. (1994b). Implicit and explicit processes in language acquisition: An introduction. In N. Ellis
(Ed.), Implicit and explicit learning of languages (pp. 1–32). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Ellis, N. C. (1996a). Analyzing language sequence in the sequence of language acquisition: Some com-
ments on Major and Ioup. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 18, 361–368.
Ellis, N. C. (1996b). Sequencing in SLA: Phonological memory, chunking, and points of order. Studies
in Second Language Acquisition, 18, 91–126.
Ellis, N. C. (1998). Emergentism, connectionism, and language learning. Language Learning, 48, 631–
664.
Ellis, N. C. (2001). Memory for language. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language instruc-
tion (pp. 33–68). New York: Cambridge University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 40 (native) -----
182
Nick C. Ellis
Ellis, N. C., & Cataldo, S. (1990). The role of spelling in learning to read. Language and Education, 4,
1–28.
Ellis, N. C., & Hicks, W. (2000, July). Chunker 1.0—A two layer exemplar-model of reading and spelling
acquisition: Cross-linguistic simulations of learning to read in English, German, Welsh, and Dutch.
Paper presented at the seventh annual conference of the Society for the Scientific Study of
Reading, Stockholm, Sweden.
Ellis, N. C., & Hooper, A. M. (in press). It is easier to learn to read in Welsh than in English: Effects of
orthographic transparency demonstrated using frequency-matched cross-linguistic reading
tests. Applied Psycholinguistics, 22.
Ellis, N. C., & Laporte, N. (1997). Contexts of acquisition: Effects of formal instruction and naturalistic
exposure on second language acquisition. In A. M. B. de Groot & J. F. Kroll (Eds.), Tutorials in
bilingualism: Psycholinguistic perspectives (pp. 53–83). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ellis, N. C., Lee, M. W., & Reber, A. R. (1999). Phonological working memory in artificial language acqui-
sition. Unpublished manuscript, University of Wales, Bangor.
Ellis, N. C., & Schmidt, R. (1997). Morphology and longer-distance dependencies: Laboratory research
illuminating the A in SLA. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 145–171.
Ellis, N. C., & Schmidt, R. (1998). Rules or associations in the acquisition of morphology? The fre-
quency by regularity interaction in human and PDP learning of morphosyntax. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 13, 307–336.
Ellis, R. (1994). The study of second language acquisition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ellis, R. (1999). Item versus system learning: Explaining free variation. Applied Linguistics, 20, 460–
480.
Elman, J. L. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive Science, 14, 179–211.
Forster, K. (1976). Accessing the mental lexicon. In R. J. Wales & E. Walker (Eds.), New approaches to
language mechanisms (pp. 257–287). Amsterdam: North Holland.
Forster, K., & Chambers, S. (1973). Lexical access and naming time. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 12, 627–635.
Frazier, L. (1987). Sentence processing: A tutorial review. In M. Coltheart (Ed.), Attention and perfor-
mance: Vol. 12. The psychology of reading (pp. 559–586). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Frisch, S. F., Large, N. R., Zawaydeh, B., & Pisoni, D. B. (2001). Emergent phonotactic generalizations
in English and Arabic. In J. Bybee & P. Hopper (Eds.), Proceedings of the Symposium on Frequency
Effects and Emergent Grammar (pp. 159–180). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Frith, U. (1985). Beneath the surface of developmental dyslexia. In K. Patterson, M. Coltheart, & J.
Marshall (Eds.), Surface dyslexia (pp. 301–330). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gass, S. (1997). Input, interaction, and the development of second languages. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gernsbacher, M. A. (1994). A handbook of psycholinguistics. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Giora, R. (1997). Understanding figurative and literal language. Cognitive Linguistics, 8, 183–206.
Glushko, R. J. (1979). The organization and activation of orthographic knowledge in reading aloud.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 5, 674–691.
Goldberg, A. E. (1995). Constructions: A construction grammar approach to argument structure. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Goldberg, A., & Sethuraman, N. (1999). Learning argument structure generalizations. Unpublished
manuscript, University of Illinois, Urbana–Champaign.
Goldinger, S. D. (1996). Words and voices: Episodic traces in spoken identification and recognition
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22, 1166–1183.
Goldinger, S. D. (1998). Echoes of echoes? An episodic theory of lexical access. Psychological Review,
105, 251–279.
Goldschneider, J. M., & DeKeyser, R. M. (2001). Explaining the “natural order of L2 morpheme acqui-
sition” in English: A meta-analysis of multiple determinants. Language Learning, 51, 1–50.
Go´mez, R. L., & Gerken, L. (2000). Infant artificial language learning and language acquisition. Trends
in Cognitive Science, 4, 178–186.
Goswami, U. (1999). Causal connections in beginning reading: The importance of rhyme. Journal of
Research in Reading, 22, 217–240.
Goswami, U., Gomert, J. E., & de Barrera, L. F. (1998). Children’s orthographic representations and
linguistic transparency: Nonsense word reading in English, French, and Spanish. Applied Psycho-
linguistics, 19, 19–52.
Hakuta, K. (1974). Prefabricated patterns and the emergence of structure in second language acquisi-
tion. Language Learning, 24, 287–298.
Harley, T. A. (1995). The psychology of language: From data to theory. Hove, UK: Erlbaum and Taylor &
Francis.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 41 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
183
Harm, M. W., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1999). Phonology, reading acquisition, and dyslexia: Insights from
connectionist models. Psychological Review, 106, 491–528.
Harnad, S. (Ed.). (1987). Categorical perception: The groundwork of cognition. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Harris, Z. (1955). From phoneme to morpheme. Language, 31, 190–222.
Harris, Z. (1968). Mathematical structures of language. New York: Wiley and Sons.
Hasher, L., & Chromiak, W. (1977). The processing of frequency information: An automatic mecha-
nism? Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 16, 173–184.
Hasher, L., & Zacks, R. T. (1984). Automatic processing of fundamental information: The case of fre-
quency of occurrence. American Psychologist, 39, 1372–1388.
Hindle, D., & Rooth, M. (1993). Structural ambiguity and lexical relations. Computational Linguistics,
19, 103–120.
Hintzman, D. L. (1986). “Schema abstraction” in a multiple-trace memory model. Psychological Re-
view, 93, 411–428.
Hintzman, D. L. (1988). Judgements of frequency and recognition memory in a multiple-trace memory
model. Psychological Review, 95, 528–551.
Hoey, M. P. (1991). Patterns of lexis in text. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hopper, P. J. (1998). Emergent grammar. In M. Tomasello (Ed.), The new psychology of language: Cog-
nitive and functional approaches to language structure (pp. 155–176). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hudson, R. A. (1990). English word grammar. Oxford: Blackwell.
Hudson, R. A. (1996). Sociolinguistics (2nd ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hulstijn, J., & DeKeyser, R. (Eds.). (1997). Testing SLA theory in the research laboratory [Special issue].
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19.
Hunston, S., & Francis, G. (1996). Pattern grammar: A corpus driven approach to the lexical grammar of
English. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Jacoby, L., & Brooks, L. R. (1984). Nonanalytic cognition: Memory, perception, and concept learning.
In G. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation: Vol. 18 (pp. 1–47). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology: Vol. 2. New York: Holt.
Jared, D., McRae, K., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1990). The basis of consistency effects in word naming.
Journal of Memory and Language, 29, 687–715.
Jurafsky, D. (1996). A probabilistic model of lexical and syntactic access and disambiguation. Cogni-
tive Science, 20, 137–194.
Jurafsky, D., & Martin, J. H. (2000). Speech and language processing: An introduction to natural language
processing, speech recognition, and computational linguistics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Jusczyk, P. W. (1993). From general to language-specific capacities: The WRAPSA model of how
speech perception develops. Journal of Phonetics, 21, 3–28.
Jusczyk, P. W. (1997). The discovery of spoken language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kaplan, R. M. (1999, August). Computational and theoretical linguistics. Plenary presentation at the
12th World Congress of Applied Linguistics, Tokyo.
Kellerman, E. (1995). Crosslinguistic influence: Transfer to nowhere? Annual Review of Applied Lin-
guistics, 15, 125–150.
Kemmer, S., & Israel, M. (1994). Variation and the usage-based model. In K. Beals, J. Denton, R. Knip-
pen, L. Melnar, H. Suzuki, & E. Zeinfeld (Eds.), Papers from the thirtieth regional meeting of the
Chicago Linguistics Society: Vol. 2. Parasession on variation and linguistic theory (pp. 165–179).
Chicago: Chicago Linguistics Society.
Kempe, V., & MacWhinney, B. (1998). The acquisition of case-marking by adult learners of Russian
and German. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 20, 543–587.
Kirsner, K. (1994). Implicit processes in second language learning. In N. Ellis (Ed.), Implicit and ex-
plicit learning of languages (pp. 283–312). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Krashen, S. D. (1985) The input hypothesis: Issues and implications. London: Longman.
Krashen, S., & Terrell, T. (1983). The natural approach: Language acquisition in the classroom. Oxford:
Pergamon Press.
Kuiper, K. (1996). Smooth talkers: The linguistic performance of auctioneers and sportscasters. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Labov, W. (1969). A study of non-standard English. Champaign, IL: National Council of Teachers of
English.
Labov, W. (1972). Sociolinguistic patterns. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, W. (1975). Empirical foundations of linguistic theory. In R. Austerlitz (Ed.), The scope of Ameri-
can linguistics (pp. 77–133). Lisse, The Netherlands: Peter de Ridder Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 42 (native) -----
184
Nick C. Ellis
Lachter, J., & Bever, T. (1988). The relation between linguistic structure and associative theories of
language learning: A constructive critique of some connectionist learning models. Cognition, 28,
195–247.
Lado, R. (1948). Pattern practice: Completely oral? Language Learning, 1, 24–28.
Lado, R. (1957). Linguistics across cultures: Applied linguistics for language teachers. Ann Arbor: Univer-
sity of Michigan Press.
Lado, R. (1964). Language teaching: A scientific approach. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lado, R. (1965). Memory span as a factor in second language learning. IRAL, 3, 123–129.
Lado, R. (1990). Toward a lexico-semantic theory of language and language learning. The Georgetown
Journal of Languages and Linguistics, 1, 96–100.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things: What categories reveal about the mind. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to Plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis
theory of acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge. Psychological Review, 104,
211–240.
Landerl, K., Wimmer, H., & Frith, U. (1997). The impact of orthographic consistency on dyslexia: A
German-English comparison. Cognition, 63, 315–334.
Langacker, R. W. (1987). Foundations of cognitive grammar: Vol. 1. Theoretical prerequisites. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (1976). An explanation for the morpheme acquisition order of second language
learners. Language Learning, 26, 125–134.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (1997). Chaos/complexity science and second language acquisition. Applied Lin-
guistics, 18, 141–165.
Laxon, V., Masterson, J., & Coltheart, V. (1991). Some bodies are easier to read: The effect of consis-
tency and regularity on children’s reading. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Experimental Psychology, 43(A), 793–824.
Leech, L. (2000). Grammars of spoken English: New outcomes of corpus-oriented research. Language
Learning, 50, 675–724.
Lewis, M. (1993). The lexical approach: The state of ELT and the way forward. Hove, UK: Language
Teaching Publications.
Lieven, E. V. M., Pine, J. M., & Dresner Barnes, H. (1992). Individual differences in early vocabulary
development: Redefining the referential-expressive dimension. Journal of Child Language, 19,
287–310.
Lightbown, P. M., Spada, N., & White, L. (Eds.). (1993). The role of instruction in second language acqui-
sition [Special issue]. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 15.
Lively, S. E., Pisoni, D. B., & Goldinger, S. D. (1994). Spoken word recognition. In M. A. Gernsbacher
(Ed.), Handbook of psycholinguistics (pp. 265–318). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Logan, G. D. (1988). Toward an instance theory of automatization. Psychological Review, 95, 492–
527.
Long, M. H. (1983). Does second language instruction make a difference? A review of research. TESOL
Quarterly, 17, 359–382.
Long, M. H. (1991). Focus on form: A design feature in language teaching methodology. In K. de Bot,
R. Ginsberg, & C. Kramsch (Eds.), Foreign language research in cross-cultural perspective (pp. 39–
52). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Luce, P. A. (1986). A computational analysis of uniqueness points in auditory word recognition. Per-
ception and Psychophysics, 39, 155–158.
Luka, B. J. (1999). Familiarity breeds consent: Is structural facilitation evidence for the implicit knowl-
edge of syntactic structures? (Doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago, 1999). Dissertation
Abstracts International, 60(6-B), 2973.
Luka, B., & Barsalou, L. (1998). The role of sentence priming on the implicit memory of syntactic
structures. In M. A. Gernsbacher (Ed.), Proceedings of the 20th annual meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (p. 1240). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
MacDonald, M. C. (1994). Probabilistic constraints and syntactic ambiguity resolution. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 9, 157–201.
MacDonald, M. C., Pearlmutter, N. J., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1994). The lexical nature of syntactic ambi-
guity resolution. Psychological Review, 101, 676–703.
MacWhinney, B. (Ed.). (1987). Mechanisms of language acquisition. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
MacWhinney, B. (1992). Transfer and competition in second language learning. In R. J. Harris (Ed.),
Cognitive processing in bilinguals (pp. 371–390). Amsterdam: North Holland.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 43 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
185
MacWhinney, B. (1997a). Implicit and explicit processes: Commentary. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 19, 277–282.
MacWhinney, B. (1997b). Models of the emergence of language. Annual Review of Psychology, 49, 199–
227.
MacWhinney, B. (1997c). Second language acquisition and the competition model. In A. M. B. de
Groot & J. F. Kroll (Eds.), Tutorials in bilingualism: Psycholinguistic perspectives (pp. 113–144).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
MacWhinney, B. (Ed.). (1999). The emergence of language. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
MacWhinney, B., & Leinbach, J. (1991). Implementations are not conceptualizations: Revising the
verb learning model. Cognition, 40, 121–157.
Mandell, P. B. (1999). On the reliability of grammaticality judgement tests in second language acquisi-
tion research. Second Language Research, 15, 73–99.
Marchman, V. A. (1993). Constraints on plasticity in a connectionist model of the English past tense.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 5, 215–234.
Marsh, G., Friedman, M. P., Welch, V., & Desberg, P. (1981). A cognitive-developmental theory of
reading acquisition. In T. G. Waller & G. E. MacKinnon (Eds.), Reading research: Advances in
theory and practice: Vol. 3 (pp. 199–221). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (1990). Activation, competition, and frequency in lexical access. In G. T. M.
Altmann (Ed.), Cognitive models of speech processing (pp. 148–172). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Martin, W. K., Church, K., & Patil, R. (1981). Preliminary analysis of a breadth-first parsing algorithm:
Theoretical and experimental results (Tech. Rep. No. MIT/LCS/TR-261). Cambridge, MA: Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology, Laboratory for Computer Science.
McEnery, T., & Wilson, A. (1996). Corpus linguistics. Edinburgh, UK: Edinburgh University Press.
McKoon, G., & Ratcliff, R. (1998). Memory-based language processing: Psycholinguistic research in
the 1990s. Annual Review of Psychology, 49, 25–42.
Mitchell, D. C., Cuetos, F., Corley, M. M. B., & Brysbaert, M. (1995). Exposure-based models of human
parsing: Evidence for the use of coarse-grained (nonlexical) statistical records. Journal of Psy-
cholinguistic Research, 24, 469–488.
Miyake, A., Carpenter, P. A., & Just, M. A. (1994). A capacity approach to syntactic comprehension disor-
ders: Making normal adults perform like aphasic patients. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 11, 671–717.
Morton, J. (1967). A singular lack of incidental learning. Nature, 215, 203–204.
Nattinger, J. R. (1980). A lexical phrase grammar for ESL. TESOL Quarterly, 14, 337–344.
Newell, A. (1990). Unified theories of cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Nippold, M. A., & Rudzinski, M. (1993). Familiarity and transparency in idiom explanation: A develop-
mental study of children and adolescents. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 36, 728–737.
Norris, J., & Ortega, L. (2000). Effectiveness of L2 instruction: A research synthesis and quantitative
meta-analysis. Language Learning, 50, 417–528.
Odlin, T. (1989). Language transfer. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Oetting, J. B., & Rice, M. L. (1993). Plural acquisition in children with specific language impairment.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 36, 1236–1248.
O¨ney, B., & Durgunoglu, A. Y. (1997). Beginning to read in Turkish: A phonologically transparent
orthography. Applied Psycholinguistics, 18, 1–15.
Patterson, K. E., & Morton, J. C. (1985). From orthography to phonology: An attempt at an old inter-
pretation. In K. E. Patterson, J. C. Marshall, & M. Coltheart (Eds.), Surface dyslexia: Neuropsycho-
logical and cognitive studies of phonological reading (pp. 335–359). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pawley, A., & Syder, F. H. (1983). Two puzzles for linguistic theory: Nativelike selection and nativelike
fluency. In J. C. Richards & R. W. Schmidt (Eds.), Language and communication (pp. 191–225).
London: Longman.
Pickering, M. J., Branigan, H. P., Cleland, A. A., & Stewart, A. J. (2000). Activation of syntactic informa-
tion during language production. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 29, 205–216.
Pine, J. M., & Lieven, E. V. M. (1993). Reanalyzing rote-learned phrases: Individual differences in the
transition to multi-word speech. Journal of Child Language, 20, 551–571.
Pine, J. M., & Lieven, E. V. M. (1997). Slot and frame patterns in the development of the determiner
category. Applied Psycholinguistics, 18, 123–138.
Pine, J. M., Lieven, E. V. M., & Rowland, C. F. (1998). Comparing different models of the development
of the English verb category. Linguistics, 36, 807–830.
Pinker, S., & Prince, A. (1988). On language and connectionism: Analysis of a parallel distributed
processing model of language acquisition. Cognition, 29, 195–247.
Plaut, D. C., McClelland, J. L., Seidenberg, M. S., & Patterson, K. (1996). Understanding normal and
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 44 (native) -----
186
Nick C. Ellis
impaired word reading: Computational principles in quasi-regular domains. Psychological Re-
view, 94, 523–568.
Plunkett, K., & Marchman, V. (1993). From rote learning to system building: Acquiring verb morphol-
ogy in children and connectionist nets. Cognition, 48, 21–69.
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. (1970). Retention of abstract ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
83, 304–308.
Posner, M. I., & Snyder, C. R. (1975). Attention and cognitive control. In G. H. Bower & J. T. Spence
(Eds.), Psychology of learning and motivation: Vol. 3 (pp. 55–85). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Prasada, S., Pinker, S., & Snyder, W. (1990, November). Some evidence that irregular forms are re-
trieved from memory but regular forms are rule-governed. Paper presented at the 31st meeting of
the Psychonomic Society, New Orleans, LA.
Reber, A. S. (1993). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge: An essay on the cognitive unconscious. Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press.
Redington, M., & Chater, N. (1998). Connectionist and statistical approaches to language acquisition:
A distributional perspective. Language and Cognitive Processes, 13, 129–192.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Cognitive representations of semantic categories. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: General, 104, 192–233.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C. B., Gray, W. D., Johnson, D. M., & Boyes-Braem, P. (1976). Basic objects in natu-
ral categories. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 382–439.
Rumelhart, D., & McClelland, J. (1986). On learning the past tense of English verbs. In D. E. Rumel-
hart & J. L. McClelland (Eds.), Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of
cognition: Vol. 2. Psychological and biological models (pp. 272–326). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996). Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science,
274, 1926–1928.
Saffran, J. R., Johnson, E. K., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1999). Statistical learning of tone se-
quences by human infants and adults. Cognition, 70, 27–52.
Sampson, G. (1980). Schools of linguistics. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Sampson, G. (1986). A stochastic approach to parsing. Proceedings of COLING’86, 151–155.
Savin, H. B. (1963). Word-frequency effects and errors in the perception of speech. Journal of the
Acoustic Society of America, 35, 200–206.
Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 11,
129–158.
Schmidt, R. (1993). Awareness and second language acquisition. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics,
13, 206–226.
Schmidt, R. (1994). Implicit learning and the cognitive unconscious: Of artificial grammars and SLA.
In N. Ellis (Ed.), Implicit and explicit learning of languages (pp. 165–210). San Diego, CA: Aca-
demic Press.
Schmitt, N. (2000). Vocabulary in language teaching. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schu¨tze, C. T. (1996). The empirical base of linguistics: Grammaticality judgments and linguistic method-
ology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Seidenberg, M. S. (1997). Language acquisition and use: Learning and applying probabilistic con-
straints. Science, 275, 1599–1603.
Seidenberg, M. S., & Bruck, M. (1990, November). Consistency effects in the generation of past tense
morphology. Paper presented at the 31st meeting of the Psychonomic Society, New Orleans, LA.
Seidenberg, M. S., & MacDonald, M. C. (1999). A probabilistic constraints approach to language acqui-
sition and processing. Cognitive Science, 23, 569–588.
Seidenberg, M. S., & McClelland, J. (1989). A distributed, developmental model of word acquisition.
Psychological Review, 94, 523–568.
Seidenberg, M. S., Waters, G. S., Barnes, M. A., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (1984). When does irregular spell-
ing or pronunciation influence word recognition? Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
23, 383–404.
Shapiro, B. J. (1969). The subjective estimate of relative word frequency. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 8, 248–251.
Sharwood Smith, M. (1981). Consciousness raising and the second-language learner. Applied Linguis-
tics, 2, 159–168.
Shirai, Y., & Andersen, R. W. (1995). The acquisition of tense-aspect morphology. Language, 71, 743–
762.
Simon, H. A. (1957). Models of man: Social and rational. New York: Wiley and Sons.
Sinclair, J. (1991). Corpus, concordance, collocation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 45 (native) -----
Frequency Effects in Language Processing and Acquisition
187
Skinner, B. F. (1957). Verbal behavior. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Skinner, B. F. (1969). Contingencies of reinforcement: A theoretical analysis. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pren-
tice-Hall.
Slobin, D. I. (1997). The origins of grammaticizable notions: Beyond the individual mind. In D. I.
Slobin (Ed.), The crosslinguistic study of language acquisition: Vol. 5 (pp. 265–323). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Spada, N. (1997). Form-focused instruction and second language acquisition: A review of classroom
and laboratory research. Language Teaching, 30, 73–87.
Spivey-Knowlton, M., & Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Resolving attachment ambiguities with multiple con-
straints. Cognition, 55, 227–267.
St. John, M. F., & Gernsbacher, M. A. (1998). Learning and losing syntax: Practice makes perfect and
frequency builds fortitude. In A. F. Healy & L. E. Bourne, Jr. (Eds.), Foreign language learning:
Psycholinguistic studies of training and retention (pp. 231–255). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
St. John, M. F., & McClelland, J. L. (1990). Learning and applying contextual constraints in sentence
comprehension. Artificial Intelligence, 46, 217–257.
Stadler, M.A., & Frensch, P. A. (Eds.). (1998). Implicit learning handbook. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
Stemberger, J. P., & MacWhinney, B. (1986). Frequency and the lexical storage of regularly inflected
forms. Memory and Cognition, 14, 17–26.
Tabossi, P., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., McRae, K., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (1994). Semantic effects on syntac-
tic ambiguity resolution: Evidence for a constraint-based resolution process. In C. Umilta & M.
Moscovitch (Eds.), Attention and performance: Vol. 15. Conscious and nonconscious information
processing (pp. 589–615). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tannen, D. (1987). Repetition and variation as spoken formulaicity in conversation. Language, 63,
574–605.
Taraban, R., & McClelland, J. L. (1987). Conspiracy effects in word pronunciation. Journal of Memory
and Language, 26, 608–631.
Taraban, R., & McClelland, J. L. (1988). Constituent attachment and thematic role assignment in sen-
tence processing: Influences of content-based expectations. Journal of Memory and Language, 27,
597–632.
Taraban, R., & Roark, B. (1996). Competition in language-based categories. Applied Psycholinguistics,
17, 125–148.
Tarone, E. (1988). Variation in interlanguage. London: Edward Arnold.
Tarone, E. (1997). Analyzing IL in natural settings: A sociolinguistic perspective of second-language
acquisition. Communication and Cognition, 30, 137–150.
Taylor, J. R. (1998). Syntactic constructions as prototype categories. In M. Tomasello (Ed.), The new
psychology of language: Cognitive and functional approaches to language structure (pp. 177–202).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Terrell, T. (1991). The role of grammar instruction in a communicative approach. The Modern Lan-
guage Journal, 75, 52–63.
Tomasello, M. (1992). First verbs: A case study of early grammatical development. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Tomasello, M. (Ed.). (1998a). The new psychology of language: Cognitive and functional approaches to
language structure. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tomasello, M. (1998b). The return of constructions [Review of the book Constructions: A Construction
Grammar approach to argument structure]. Journal of Child Language, 75, 431–447.
Tomasello, M. (2000). The item-based nature of children’s early syntactic development. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 4, 156–160.
Tomasello, M., & Brooks, P. (1999). Early syntactic development: A Construction Grammar approach.
In M. Barrett (Ed.), The development of language (pp. 116–190). London: University College Lon-
don Press.
Treiman, R., & Danis, C. (1988). Short-term memory errors for spoken syllables are affected by the
linguistic structure of the syllables. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 14, 145–152.
Treiman, R., Mullennix, J., Bijeljac-Babic, R., & Richmond-Welty, E. D. (1995). The special role of rimes
in the description, use, and acquisition of English orthography. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: General, 124, 107–136.
Trueswell, J. C. (1996). The role of lexical frequency in syntactic ambiguity resolution. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 566–585.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 46 (native) -----
188
Nick C. Ellis
Trueswell, J. C., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Garnsey, S. M. (1994). Semantic influences on parsing: Use of
thematic role information in syntactic ambiguity resolution. Journal of Memory and Language,
33, 285–318.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological Review, 84, 327–352.
Underwood, B. J. (1971). Recognition memory. In H. H. Kendler & J. T. Spence (Eds.), Essays in neo-
behaviorism (pp. 313–335). New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Ungerer, F., & Schmid, H. J. (1996). An introduction to cognitive linguistics. London: Longman.
Vihman, M. (2000). From prosodic response to segmental patterning: The origins of representations for
speech. Unpublished manuscript, University of Wales, Bangor.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations. New York: Macmillan.
Wong-Fillmore, L. (1976). The second time around. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Stanford Uni-
versity, Stanford, CA.
Zorzi, M., Houghton, G., & Butterworth, B. (1998). Two routes or one in reading aloud. A connection-
ist dual process model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
24, 1131–1161.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263102002024 Published online by Cambridge University Press