

----- Page 1 (native) -----
REVIEW ARTICLE
OPEN
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Xiaolu Li1, Yanyan Yang2, Bei Zhang2, Xiaotong Lin3, Xiuxiu Fu4, Yi An5, Yulin Zou4, Jian-Xun Wang2, Zhibin Wang4✉and Tao Yu1✉
The current understanding of lactate extends from its origins as a byproduct of glycolysis to its role in tumor metabolism, as
identiﬁed by studies on the Warburg effect. The lactate shuttle hypothesis suggests that lactate plays an important role as a
bridging signaling molecule that coordinates signaling among different cells, organs and tissues. Lactylation is a posttranslational
modiﬁcation initially reported by Professor Yingming Zhao’s research group in 2019. Subsequent studies conﬁrmed that lactylation
is a vital component of lactate function and is involved in tumor proliferation, neural excitation, inﬂammation and other biological
processes. An indispensable substance for various physiological cellular functions, lactate plays a regulatory role in different aspects
of energy metabolism and signal transduction. Therefore, a comprehensive review and summary of lactate is presented to clarify
the role of lactate in disease and to provide a reference and direction for future research. This review offers a systematic overview of
lactate homeostasis and its roles in physiological and pathological processes, as well as a comprehensive overview of the effects of
lactylation in various diseases, particularly inﬂammation and cancer.
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305 
; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-022-01151-3
INTRODUCTION
Since its discovery in 1780, lactate has been often wrongly
assumed to be a metabolic waste product under hypoxic
conditions with multiple harmful effects and to be associated
with low oxygen conditions1. The lactate shuttle hypothesis
describes the roles of lactate in the delivery of oxidative and
gluconeogenic
substrates
and
cellular
signaling2.
Brooks’
research demonstrated how lactate is formed and utilized under
completely aerobic conditions3. Evidence for lactate as a
signiﬁcant modulator of the coordination of systemic metabo-
lism has grown immensely4,5. No longer considered a waste
product of anaerobic metabolism, lactate is increasingly being
explored as a signaling molecule. Lactate has been shown to
signal through its speciﬁc receptor G protein-coupled receptor
81 (GPR81)6 or to be transported into cells by monocarboxylate
transporters (MCTs)7.
In the 1920s, Otto Warburg observed for the ﬁrst time that
tumors consume more glucose than surrounding normal tissue,
leading him to propose the phenomenon of aerobic glycolysis,
wherein glucose can be fermented to produce lactate instead of
carbon dioxide, even in the presence of oxygen; this phenom-
enon is now known as the Warburg effect. The most immediate
consequences of aerobic glycolysis are increased intracellular and
extracellular lactate concentrations8. Warburg’s original thesis
delineates the process by which irreversible mitochondrial
damage leads to aerobic glycolysis in tumor cells9. In contrast,
cell metabolic reprogramming leading to the inhibition of
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) is the primary
factor underlying aerobic glycolysis in tumor cells10,11. The
occurrence of aerobic glycolysis can be attributed to the
increased metabolic demand for ATP in proliferative cells, such
as tumor cells12. Therefore, glycolysis is highly vigorous in
proliferative cells, ensuring higher intracellular and extracellular
concentrations of lactate than those found in cells at the resting
state. Notably, lactate accumulation in the tissue microenviron-
ment is characteristic of inﬂammatory diseases and cancer13.
Nevertheless, overwhelming evidence suggests the occurrence of
the Warburg effect in many nontumor cells and in a wide range of
noncancerous diseases, such as pulmonary hypertension, pul-
monary ﬁbrosis, heart failure, atherosclerosis, and polycystic
kidney disease14,15. Compelling evidence indicates how aerobic
glycolysis produces lactate under stressful conditions, such as
trauma, infection, myocardial infarction, and heart failure. Lactate
is always an inevitable end product of glycolysis, regardless of
oxygen availability.
A study published in 2019 illustrated the important role of
lactate in promoting the modiﬁcation of histone lysine residues16.
Similar to other posttranslational modiﬁcations (PTMs), such as
acetylation, succinylation, and malonylation, lactylation leads to
transcriptional regulation. Epigenetic modiﬁcations that drive
metabolic regulation play signiﬁcant roles in inﬂammation and
cancer17–20. Hence, this review summarizes the biological func-
tions of lactate and lactylation in regulating immune homeostasis
and promoting tumor growth and emphasizes the importance of
more comprehensive study of the other functions of lactate and
lactylation. Therefore, in this unique review, the important roles of
histone
acetyltransferases
(HATs)
and
histone
deacetylases
(HDACs) in the regulation of lactylation are elaborated. In
summary, we present a comprehensive description of the
important ﬁndings in the areas of lactate transport and signaling
Received: 19 March 2022 Revised: 17 July 2022 Accepted: 9 August 2022
1Center for Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Translational Medicine, The Afﬁliated Hospital of Qingdao University; Department of Cardiac Ultrasound, The Afﬁliated Hospital of
Qingdao University, No. 16 Jiangsu Road, Qingdao 266000, China; 2Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medicine, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, China;
3Department of Respiratory Medicine, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao 266011, China; 4Department of Cardiac Ultrasound, The Afﬁliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
No. 16 Jiangsu Road, Qingdao 266000, China and 5Department of Cardiology, The Afﬁliated Hospital of Qingdao University, No. 1677 Wutaishan Road, Qingdao 266555, China
Correspondence: Zhibin Wang (m17853291291@163.com) or Tao Yu (yutao0112@qdu.edu.cn)
These authors contributed equally: Xiaolu Li, Yanyan Yang
www.nature.com/sigtrans
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy
© The Author(s) 2022
1234567890();,:

----- Page 2 (native) -----
and other functions of lactate/lactylation in several pathophysio-
logical processes and in speciﬁc diseases.
LACTIC ACID HOMEOSTASIS
Lactic acid production and clearance
The production of lactate as fuel increases when the demand for
oxygen and ATP exceeds the cellular supply, such as during
strenuous exercise and infection21,22. Lactate is a classical
byproduct
of
glucose
metabolism,
and
the
main
lactate
production pathway depends on glycolysis (Fig. 1). The glycolysis
pathway is activated to compensate for a lack of ATP production
when
hypoxia
inhibits
the
tricarboxylic
acid
(TCA)
cycle.
Speciﬁcally, glucose in the cytoplasm is converted to pyruvate
through a series of classic catalytic reactions; pyruvate does not
enter mitochondria for oxidation but is directly reduced to
lactate in a process dependent on lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH)23. The accumulation of lactate in the human body is more
dangerous than the accumulation of other molecular fuels, and a
rise in serum lactate can lead to lactic acidosis24; therefore,
lactate needs to be rapidly metabolically removed from tissues
and circulation. Irreversible lactate removal is achieved by
pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH)25 (Fig. 1), which catalyzes the
formation of pyruvate, which enters the TCA cycle in the form of
acetyl-CoA26. Upon entry into the TCA cycle, acetyl-CoA forms a
two-carbon unit because in mammals it cannot be converted
into a three-carbon unit. Hence, the systemic balance between
glycolysis and PDH ﬂux may be a key determinant of lactate
levels. PDH is a component of a catalytically active complex that
is regulated by the phosphorylation status of the E1α subunit
and NADH, which together inhibit PDH activity, resulting in
elevated
levels
of
circulating
lactate
under
conditions
of
impaired mitochondrial activity or respiration27. In addition,
lactate accumulation can activate gluconeogenesis in liver and
skeletal muscle cells, through which lactate is converted to
glucose and released into the blood to drive additional glucose
consumption during energy expenditure28.
In addition to glycolysis, glutamine catabolism is another source
of lactate in cancer cells29. Under the regulation of c-Myc,
glutamine crosses the cell membrane through the amino acid
transporter type 2 (ASCT2) and sodium-coupled neutral amino
acid transporter 5 (SN2), enters the cytoplasm, and is converted to
glutamate
by
glutaminase
(GLS/GLS2).
Then,
glutamate
is
converted to α-ketoglutarate (α-KG) by glutamate dehydrogenase
(GLUD) or a group of transaminases, including glutamate-
oxaloacetate transaminase (GOT), glutamate-pyruvate transami-
nase (GPT), and phosphoserine aminotransferase (PSAT); α-KG
then enters the TCA cycle. In this cycle, glutamine-derived carbon
is converted to oxaloacetate, which is then converted to malate
and leaves the mitochondria for subsequent conversion to NADPH
and pyruvate by malic enzyme (ME1) in the cytoplasm. NADPH is
required for the synthesis of fatty acids and sterols and for
antioxidant mechanisms, while pyruvate is a source of lactate.
Through this metabolic pathway, glutamine provides the carbon
skeleton for lactate production and is a secondary source for
lactate production in cancer cells.
MCTs constitute a class of transmembrane lactate transporters
in the solute carrier family 16 (SLC16) family7. Among the 14
identiﬁed MCTs, MCT1-4 are expressed in a variety of tissues and
are involved in catalytic proton coupling and the bidirectional
transport of monocarboxylic acid30. MCT1 is an important
subtype that was ﬁrst discovered to be widely distributed in
cells and to contribute to basal homeostatic maintenance. Under
physiological conditions, synergistic activity of MCT1-4 promotes
lactate shuttling between glycolytic and oxidizing cells, a key
factor in lactate homeostasis within different tissues. In normal
tissues, the high-afﬁnity MCT1 maintains lactate homeostasis
because it is responsible for the transfer of lactate according to
the transmembrane lactate gradient30. Cells with high intracel-
lular lactate concentrations, such as tumor cells, rely on the low-
afﬁnity MCT4 for lactate transport30. The transport process
begins with the binding of free protons to MCT, followed by the
binding of lactate, which undergoes a conformational change
within the transporter and then is expelled on the other side of
the membrane. The release of protons follows the release of
lactate. When MCT is deprotonated, it undergoes a conforma-
tional change, restoring its initial structure in anticipation of the
next transfer. Abnormal expression or inactivation of MCT1 has
been associated with a variety of diseases, including sympto-
matic deﬁciency in lactate transport (SDLT), hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemia familial 7 (HHF7), and monocarboxylate transpor-
ter 1 deﬁciency (MCT1D). More importantly, high expression of
MCT1, MCT2, and MCT4 is closely related to the development of
cancer. Lactate shuttle mediated by MCT1 and other subtypes
establishes intracellular connections and is involved in the
synergistic metabolism between glycolytic tumor cells and
oxidative tumor cells, thereby promoting tumor occurrence
and development.
A class of G protein-coupled receptors (GPRs) on the cell
membrane interact with endogenous ligands to function as
intermediate metabolites in hydroxycarboxylic acid generation
during cellular energy metabolism. Among these GPRs, the
lactate receptor GPR81 (Fig. 2) is highly expressed in adipose
tissue, the kidney, skeletal muscle, the central nervous system,
the heart and other organs and tissues6. Studies have found that
GPR81 mediates biological processes such as lactate-induced
energy metabolism, lipodieresis, neuronal protection, and inﬂam-
matory regulation31–34.
Fig. 1
Lactate metabolism and lactylation in cells. In the cytoplasm,
lactate is transported into cells by MCTs and is produced from
glycolysis or glutamine decomposition. The catabolism of lactate in
cells occurs through two pathways. In one pathway, lactate is
oxidized to pyruvate, which enters mitochondria and is metabolized
through the tricarboxylic acid cycle. In the other pathway, lactate is
converted to glucose through gluconeogenesis. Lactate can be
converted into lactyl-CoA and is involved in the lactylation of
histones and nonhistone proteins. LDH lactate dehydrogenase; PDH
pyruvate dehydrogenase; GLUD glutamate dehydrogenase; HDACs
Histone Deacetylases. (Figure was created with Biorender.com.)
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
2
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Fig. 2
Lactate is involved in the regulation of cellular physiological and pathological processes. In addition to the intracellular production of
lactate, lactate can enter target cells through intercellular shuttling involving nonchannel pathways or MCT1. As a signaling molecule or
metabolic substrate, lactate is involved in glucose metabolism, fatty acid synthesis, redox homeostasis, and the PTM of proteins. Meanwhile, as
a GPR81 ligand, lactate stimulates the GPR81 signaling pathway. Lactate has been shown to regulate muscle contraction, wound healing,
memory formation, and tumor development. MCT monocarboxylate transporter; OXPHOS oxidative phosphorylation; GLUT glucose
transporter. (Figure was partly created with SMART – Servier Medical ART)
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
3
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 4 (native) -----
Roles of lactic acid in biological processes
Energy regulation.
Organisms can obtain energy from glucose
through OXPHOS and glycolysis, both of which begin when
glucose is broken down into two pyruvate molecules. Pyruvate
enters mitochondria to participate in the TCA cycle during
OXPHOS but is directly reduced to lactate during glycolysis. In
the presence of oxygen, the production of each molecule of
glucose through OXPHOS in the mitochondrial electron transport
chain (ETC) leads to the rapid release of 36 or 38 molecules of ATP,
but in the absence of oxygen, electron transfer cannot occur in
mitochondria, and therefore, glycolysis becomes the only available
pathway for glucose production35. The traditional view suggests
that glucose consumption involves many more processes than
lactate consumption and that lactate is a minor byproduct of rapid
energy production under anaerobic conditions that is valuable
only as a substrate for glucose production in the context of
gluconeogenesis36
(Fig.
1).
However,
advances
in
research
have led lactate to be reconsidered; it is no longer labeled a
waste product but rather is recognized as a participant in glucose
metabolism. Glucose has been determined to be the primary
energy
source
in
the
brain,
and
circulating
lactate
is
a
supplementary source of glucose that satisﬁes excitatory brain
activities when blood glucose levels are insufﬁcient37. A study in
1988 reported that in the absence of glucose, lactate supported
synaptic transmission in brain slices38. Other studies have shown
that lactate can directly support neuronal activity: when lactate
shuttling in hypothalamic ependymal-glial cells was inhibited, the
energy balance in proopiomelanocortin (POMC) neurons was
destroyed. Therefore, lactate, not glucose, is required to maintain
POMC neuron activity39, which supports the energy balance in the
whole body40. Lactate is largely a promoter of the TCA cycle. The
concentration of lactate in circulation is higher than that of other
energy substances; in mice, the level of circulating lactate was
found to be 1.1-fold higher than that of glucose, and in fasting
mice, the difference increased to 2.5-fold. A quantitative analysis
showed that lactate has direct functions in organs, except the
brain, of fasting mice, whereas glucose mainly contributes
indirectly to TCA cycle metabolism. Lactate is the main fuel for
the TCA cycle and is crucial for energy generation41, and studies
have shown that lactate contributes more than glucose to the TCA
cycle in lung and pancreatic cancer. Lactate also regulates energy
based on the accumulation of both exogenous and endogenous
lactate, which inhibits glycolysis through a product feedback
pathway42. In addition, lactate has been found to activate Mg2+
release from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in a variety of cells,
and this Mg2+ transport mechanism is linked to the main
metabolic feedback loop and mitochondrial bioenergetic function
to promote mitochondrial Mg2+ production4 (Fig. 2).
Redox buffer.
As an important metabolic substrate, lactate is an
intercellular
and
inter-tissue
redox
signaling
molecule
that
provides energy for oxidative metabolism in many tissues and
helps maintain redox homeostasis and tissue and whole-organism
integrity. Energy metabolism is based on continuous redox
reactions43. Oxidation leads to the release of electrons that are
accepted by oxidized nicotinamide adenine dinucleotides (NAD+
or NADP+), which are then reduced to NADH or NADPH44; these
reduced coenzymes release electrons during reoxidation through
mitochondrial respiration or lactate fermentation, thus maintain-
ing redox homeostasis in cells. In general, disruptions in home-
ostasis are detrimental to the body, regardless of whether the
change leads to excessive oxidation or reduction. For example,
when the NAD+/NADH (or NADP+/NADPH) ratio increases, cells
enter an oxidation state, produce more active substances,
undergo accelerating aging, and potentially cause cardiovascular
disease; in contrast, in a high-reduction state, cells can accept
electrons, their capacity to prevent oxidative stress is greatly
reduced, and glycolysis is inhibited. Cytoplasmic LDH and
mitochondrial ETC complex I are the main drivers of NADH
oxidation to NAD+. First, the production and removal of lactate, as
a metabolic intermediate, maintain electron ﬂux through a speciﬁc
process in which NADH is oxidized to NAD+ and H+, accompanied
by
LDH-mediated
catalysis
of
lactate
to
pyruvate45.
High
concentrations of lactate have been shown to increase the
NADH/NAD+ ratio, leading to the inhibition of GAPDH and PGDH
activity and, subsequently, glycolysis and mitochondrial respira-
tion46,47. Second, as a regulator of mitochondrial oxidative
respiration, lactate controls the redox balance. When the demand
for NAD+ in support of oxidation exceeds the rate of ATP turnover
in cells undergoing active aerobic glycolysis, NAD+ is regenerated
under conditions of limited mitochondrial respiration. At this
point, cells tend to undergo glycolysis, which can lead to an
increased NAD+/NADH ratio, and in response, PDH activation
increases
pyruvate
oxidation,
which
can
attenuate
lactate
accumulation and reduce the NAD+/NADH ratio48. When the
mitochondrial ETC is dysfunctional, the intracellular NADH/NAD+
ratio is increased, and the lactate/pyruvate (L/P) ratio is increased
in a reactive manner. When lactate oxidase (LOX) and catalase
(CAT) irreversibly convert extracellular lactate into pyruvate in a
timely manner, the intracellular NADH/NAD+ ratio tends to
normalize, and ATP production increases49. Reactive oxygen
species (ROS) are produced by the mitochondrial ETC50. Mito-
chondrial stress leads to increased ROS production, driving cells
into a high oxidation state51. Data have conﬁrmed that when
lactate is actively oxidized, many ROS are produced in mitochon-
dria, and excess ROS may lead to oxidative damage that can
severely and irreversibly harm cells if not neutralized in a timely
fashion52,53. A recent study found that the increased intake of
lactate by neurons promoted ROS production, enhanced mito-
chondrial energy metabolism, and produced an oxidative state in
neurons. Oxidative stress impairs ATP synthesis in mitochondria,
resulting in higher ROS production; this vicious cycle ultimately
leads to axon degeneration in the peripheral nervous system54. In
addition, the intercellular transport of lactate is critical for the
maintenance of the redox state. The inhibition of MCT1 and MCT4
activity and the continued lactate efﬂux result in intracellular
acidiﬁcation that inhibits LDH activity, leading to a greater loss in
NAD+ regeneration capacity, ATP depletion, and ultimately cell
death55. In conclusion, lactate is a redox buffer that contributes
greatly to the oxidation state. However, when the ratio of
oxidizing coenzyme to reducing coenzyme is unbalanced, lactate
responds by regulating other forms of energy metabolism to
stabilize the redox state of cells.
Regulator of fatty acid metabolism.
Fatty acid anabolism is
essential for cell membrane structure and function, energy
storage, and signal transduction56. Lactate has been reported to
accumulate at high concentrations, ranging from the physiological
concentration of 1.5–3 to 10–40 mM, in inﬂammatory environ-
ments57. Lactate accumulation is known to promote fatty acid
synthesis in cells, and lactate can replenish the intracellular pool of
acetyl-CoA, which is necessary for fatty acid synthesis. Speciﬁcally,
lactate has been reported to increase the activation of acetyl-CoA
carboxylase (ACC), a key enzyme that regulates fatty acid
synthesis, and to enhance the anabolism of fatty acids. Interest-
ingly, Interestingly, lactate can induce CD4+ T cells to upregulate
the expression of the lactate transporter SLC5A12, which mediates
the uptake of lactate by CD4+ T cells, forming a positive feedback
loop to increase the synthesis of fatty acids58. The lactate
produced by glial cells can be transported into neurons, where
it promotes adipogenesis by mediating ROS production59. A study
on rat muscle showed that lactate underwent glyceroneogenesis,
a seemingly unconventional way to promote fatty acid synth-
esis60. The fatty acid catabolism pathway involves β-oxidation,
which releases a large amount of energy. Despite reports that
prolonged exposure to lactate increased oleic acid oxidation61, the
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
4
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 5 (native) -----
current understanding suggests that lactate inhibits fatty acid
catabolism. A study of metabolic responses to exercise showed
that the accumulation of circulating lactate during exercise was
inversely related to fat oxidation62. Similarly, a study of post-acute
sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC) found that patients with PASC
presented with signiﬁcant β-oxidation disorders and lactate
accumulation in the blood during exercise63. Although the
mechanism by which lactate regulates β-oxidation is currently
unclear, it seems to be related to lactate signaling during exercise-
induced mitochondrial adaptation. Some studies have shown that
lactate production can be stimulated by treatment with high
levels of lipids64, but further study is needed to determine
whether a lactate feedback loop increases the inhibitory effect on
fatty acid oxidation. Clearly, the effect of lactate on fatty acid
oxidation is not unilateral. In the inﬂammatory stress response,
acetyl-CoA produced by fatty acid oxidation can promote
glycolysis through nonenzymatic acetylation, which can promote
lactate formation65.
Lactate shuttle
The lactate shuttle theory mainly describes intracellular and
intercellular lactate shuttling, summarizing the entire process of
lactate transmembrane migration66. As mentioned above, the
complete removal of lactate through oxidation is achieved
through the conversion to pyruvate by LDH, but the cellular
location of this reaction remains unclear. The initiation of lactate
oxidation to pyruvate is generally considered a cytoplasmic
reaction, but to date, no evidence strongly supports this
assumption.
In fact,
numerous
studies have
reported
that
contractions
in
skeletal
muscle
and
beating
heart
muscle
exponentially increase the lactate/pyruvate (L/P) ratio67. Consider-
ing this ﬁnding and a dynamic LDH model, Brooks proposed that
lactate is shuttled within cells68. According to this theory, the
lactate level increases more rapidly than the pyruvate level during
exercise. Moreover, the oxidation of lactate to pyruvate does not
seem to occur in the cytoplasm, where lactate is generated. In
addition, lactate can enter mitochondria, where it undergoes
direct oxidation without ﬁrst being converted into pyruvate in the
cytoplasm68. To reinforce this theory, Brooks proposed the
mitochondrial lactate oxidation complex (mLOC) model, which
involves MCT, its membrane partner basigin (BSG or CD147), LDH,
and cytochrome oxidase (COX). According to this theory, the
mLOC is located in the outer mitochondrial membrane and can
oxidize lactate to pyruvate. However, this theory and model are
controversial because no lactate transporter in this context has
been identiﬁed and there is no evidence that LDH is activated in
this context. In fact, one experimental study showed that
mitochondria isolated from rat skeletal muscle failed to oxidize
lactate and that LDH activity in mitochondria constituted only
0.7% of total cellular LDH activity69. However, another study found
that MCT1, MCT2, and LDH colocalized with COX, a mitochondrial
marker, in mouse cortical, hippocampal and thalamic neurons70. In
another study, mitochondria isolated from the heart, skeletal
muscle, and liver of rats were incubated with lactate and showed
the ability to oxidize lactate71. Colocalization of MCT1, CD147, and
LDH in the mitochondrial intima of L6 muscle cells provided
evidence for the mLOC72. Hashimoto et al. summarized the
following six points in support of the intracellular lactate shuttle
theory. One, LDH was detected in mitochondria of the myocar-
dium, liver and skeletal muscle of rats and humans by electron
microscopy and laser scanning confocal microscopy. Two, the
results of these analyses showed that mitochondria in the skeletal
muscle and myocardium of rats and humans colocalized with
MCT1. Three, LDH and MCT1, along with its molecular chaperone
CD147, have been found in mitochondria isolated from rat and
human skeletal muscle, myocardium, liver and kidney. Four,
physiological
experimental
data
showed
that
mitochondria
oxidize lactate more quickly than pyruvate. Five, mitochondria in
the myocardium and skeletal muscle cells of humans and other
mammals can oxidize lactate, as indicated by isotope tracing and
nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Six, the results of
mitochondrial proteomic studies support the lactate shuttle
hypothesis71. The intracellular lactate shuttle theory subverts
conventional thinking, to a certain extent, because it updates the
theory of inherent lactate oxidation in cells. Furthermore, the
lactate shuttle theory suggests that lactate production during
exercise is an adaptive response by cell signaling molecules,
explaining the mechanism through which training enhances
lactate removal through oxidation.
The concept of intercellular lactate shuttling was proposed and
systematically explained in 19852. The theory suggests that at the
beginning of exercise, lactate is rapidly produced and accumulates
in muscle cells; then, some of this lactate enters tissues, where it is
internalized and oxidized by adjacent cells, whereas the remaining
lactate enters the blood circulatory system and is delivered to the
heart, liver, and kidney, where it is a substrate for oxidative energy
production and gluconeogenesis. Brooks and his team explained
the important roles of lactate identiﬁed during the formation and
validation of the lactate shuttle theory. They not only conﬁrmed
that aerobic oxidation is the main pathway of lactate removal
during and after exercise but also emphasized the function of
lactate as an energy source and a substrate for gluconeogenesis.
More importantly, this theory recognizes a new biologically
signiﬁcant role of lactate by detailing how it regulates oxidation
and intercellular signal communication73–75. With advances in
research, lactate shuttling between skeletal muscle and the heart
has been increasingly reported and veriﬁed to provide energy to
the heart76. Lactate shuttling has also been identiﬁed between
cardiomyocytes and ﬁbroblasts. In a coculture system, the
production of lactate increased in ﬁbroblasts, and MCT1, which
induces the inﬂux of lactate, migrated to the myocardial
membrane77. This study provided direct evidence that lactate is
a paracrine signaling molecule. Another study showed that in the
brain, lactate produced by astrocytes entered neurons, subse-
quently participated in energy metabolism, and was converted
into pyruvate and acetyl-CoA to regulate fatty acid synthesis59.
Defective lactate shuttling from glial cells to neurons led to
dysregulated brain metabolism, causing degeneration similar to
that in Alzheimer’s disease (AD)78. In line with these ﬁndings,
disruption of lactate shuttling has been shown to negatively affect
motor function and destabilize motor units79. In the kidney, lactate
is produced by the proximal tubule and consumed by the distal
tubule, and the lactate shuttle allows lactate to fulﬁll its function as
a fuel through transfer from the proximal to the distal nephron80.
In summary, the lactate shuttle theory is applicable to a variety of
practical areas, such as sports nutrition and hydration, acidosis, the
treatment of traumatic brain injury, the maintenance of blood
glucose, the reduction of inﬂammation, cardiac support after heart
failure, and myocardial infarction, and the enhancement of
cognition, whereas dysregulation of the lactate shuttle disrupts
metabolic ﬂexibility and supports tumorigenesis81.
Lactate shuttling between different cell populations in the
tumor microenvironment (TME) is a new phenomenon in the ﬁeld
of tumor biology. Lactate shuttling occurs in many physiological
and pathological conditions, where in lactate is exported by one
cell type and imported by another cell type. The well-known Cori
cycle involves lactate shuttling between skeletal muscle and the
liver. Because lactate is an energy-rich metabolite that can be used
as a precursor for gluconeogenesis and ATP synthesis, it is
especially important for this metabolite to shuttle through the
TME, which contains hypoxic and normoxic cell populations. In
essence, glycolysis is dependent on oxygen as cancer cells cannot
oxidize lactatea, and glucose is known to decrease oxygen uptake;
therefore, mitochondrial respiration is used for ATP synthesis. As
the understanding of tumor cell heterogeneity based on oxygen
availability has increased, there has been a paradigm shift in our
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
5
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 6 (native) -----
current understanding of cancer related to the Warburg effect.
Because tumors grow faster than blood vessels can form, cancer
cells close to blood vessels receive oxygen and are therefore
normoxic, while those farther from blood vessels lack sufﬁcient
oxygen supply and are hypoxic. Speciﬁcally, hypoxic tumor cells
utilize LDH-A to produce lactate, which is exported from the cell to
be absorbed by normoxic tumor cells, which convert it to pyruvate
through LDH-B to produce ATP. According to the functional
characteristics of MCT1 and MCT4 and the differential regulation
of hypoxia-related genes, MCT4 mediates the release of lactate by
hypoxic tumor cells, while MCT1 mediates the uptake of lactic acid
by normoxic tumor cells, highlighting the mutual relationship and
metabolic symbiosis between cancer cells in different parts of a
single tumor. This metabolic symbiosis occurs between different
types of cancer cells within the tumor and between normoxic
cancer cells and tumor-associated stromal cells.
Lactylation modiﬁcation
Yingming
Zhao
at
the
University
of
Chicago
used
high-
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)–tandem mass spec-
trometry (MS/MS) to detect core histone proteins in human MCF-
7 cells. They found that the mass shift on the lysine residues of
three proteolytic peptides was the same as that caused by the
addition of a lactyl group to the lysine ε-amino group16. This
study demonstrated for the ﬁrst time the presence of histone
lysine lactylation (Kla) and indicated that Kla is a new type of
epigenetic modiﬁcation that occurs after the translation of
lactate-derived proteins. Surprisingly, many studies have shown
the accumulation of histone Kla on gene promoters in cells
stimulated by hypoxia, interferon (IFN)-γ, lipopolysaccharide (LPS),
or bacterial attack to produce lactate16,82, thereby directly
regulating gene expression16 (Fig. 1).
To date, research on Kla has focused on both histone and
nonhistone aspects. Histone Kla has unique time dynamics
compared
to
those
of
histone
acetylation.
Histone
Kla
is
signiﬁcantly increased on the promoters of M2-like genes in the
later stage of stimulated M1 macrophage polarization, suggesting
that histone Kla probably acts as a lactate clock to promote the
switch from an inﬂammatory phenotype to a steady-state
phenotype in macrophages. This switch occurs in the later stages
of inﬂammation, which may be related to wound healing. B-cell
adapter for PI3K (BCAP), a signal adapter for Toll-like receptors
(TLRs), has been shown to play a vital role as an internal cell switch
in promoting macrophage gene expression that supports the
transition from a proinﬂammatory state to a reparative state83,84.
Ricardo et al. revealed that mice with macrophage-speciﬁc BCAP
deletion had decreased Arg1 and Klf4 expression, failed to recover
from dextran sodium sulfate-induced colitis, and eventually
died82. Other studies found that BCAP deﬁciency also resulted in
defective aerobic glycolysis and reduced lactate production,
causing decreased histone Kla. The addition of exogenous sodium
lactate (NaLa) to bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs)
lacking BCAP promoted histone Kla and recovered the decreases
in ARG1 and Klf4 expression mediated by BACP deﬁciency82.
These observations led to the conclusion that BCAP is an upstream
adapter that connects TLR signals with the optimal aerobic
glycolysis in macrophages, resulting in the lactate production
necessary for proper histone Kla to promote the rescue of gene
expression. This phenomenon thereby promotes the transforma-
tion of macrophages from a proinﬂammatory phenotype to a
reparative phenotype. Another recent study found that lactate
produced by probiotic Saccharomyces cerevisiae effectively inhib-
ited BMDM activation and thus attenuated ulcerative colitis, as
lactate increased H3K9 acetylation and H3K18 lactylation in
BMDMs. Regarding, the speciﬁc mechanism for this therapeutic
effect, the genes or proteins regulated by H3K18 lactylation may
be involved in the inhibition of M1 macrophage polarization and
the NLRP3 inﬂammasome85. In addition, increased lactate levels in
human alveolar macrophages led to an increase in histone Kla86.
Increased levels of histone Kla were observed in a mouse model of
bleomycin-induced pulmonary ﬁbrosis and in human pulmonary
ﬁbrosis. Results from CHIP assays using lactate-treated BMDMs
conﬁrmed increased histone Kla in the promoter regions of the
ARG1, PDGFA, THBS1, and VEGFA genes, leading to their
signiﬁcant upregulation. It is obvious from these observations
that lactate activates gene expression by inducing histone Kla of
the promoters of proﬁbrotic mediators.
AD
was
recently
shown
to
be
associated
with
histone
lactylation87. Studies showed increased lactylation of H4K12 in
AD mice, and this histone modiﬁcation was enriched at the
promoter of glycolysis-related genes and activated transcription,
thereby increasing glycolytic activity. Finally, activation of the
positive feedback cycle of glycolysis-H4K12La-PKM2 was shown to
exacerbate microglial dysfunction in AD87.
Histone Kla has been proven to promote tumor development
(Fig. 3). Yu et al. found that increased histone Kla was associated
with the poor prognosis of patients with ocular melanoma88.
Inhibition of histone Kla in ocular melanoma cells conﬁrmed the
signiﬁcant positive correlation of ocular melanoma with intracel-
lular histone Kla. The underlying mechanism leading to the
occurrence of melanoma involves activating YTHDF2 expression
by increasing histone Kla of the promoter. YTHDF2, a reader of
m6A, plays a vital role in promoting tumorigenesis in ocular
melanoma. Although some studies support the notion that
histone Kla is essential for tumor growth, others state that histone
Kla cannot transform normal cells into cancerous cells, indicating a
role of histone Kla in promoting the growth of developing tumors
rather than driving initial tumorigenesis. Tumor cells interact with
extracellular matrix (ECM) components to form a complex TME.
Hypoxia and deﬁciencies in blood-derived nutrients are the main
characteristics of the TME, and tumor cells adjust their metabolism
to survive in this unfavorable environment89. A subsequent study
on non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) conﬁrmed that histone Kla
downregulated the gene expression of the glycolysis-related
enzymes hexokinase (HK)-1 and pyruvate kinase (PKM) and
upregulated that of the TCA cycle-related enzymes succinate
dehydrogenase (SDH) and isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)90. These
results reveal that lactate-mediated changes in metabolic gene
expression via histone Kla induce glucose uptake by tumor cells;
therefore, lactate plays an essential role in the metabolic disorders
of NSCLC. Similarly, the study by Zhao et al. veriﬁed that ARG1
gene expression was positively correlated with histone Kla in
TAMs isolated from B16F10 melanoma and LLC1 lung tumor
tissues16. In addition, histone Kla has been detected in various
other tumor cell lines, such as HeLa cells, MCF-7 cells, and HepG2
cells (Table 1); these data support further investigation into the
mechanisms by which histone Kla is regulated in these cells. In
summary, lactate in the TME induces immunosuppression and
promotes immune evasion in tumors, thereby helping maintain
tumor survival and growth. Moreover, histone Kla fulﬁlls the goals
of lactate-mediated signaling to support tumor growth. Addition-
ally, histone Kla regulates the transcription of tumor-related genes
such as YTHDF2, which promotes tumor growth, metastasis, and
invasion by encouraging the degradation of downstream tumor
suppressors. Histone Kla induces the expression of TCA cycle-
related enzymes such as SDH, which promotes tumor cell
metabolism and growth. The genetic and phenotypic hetero-
geneity of tumor cells is a major obstacle to cancer treatment.
Random genetic changes create highly chaotic and unpredictable
intratumoral heterogeneity. Hence, the regulation of histone Kla
could be a powerful target for adjuvant treatment to inﬂuence the
epigenetic landscape of tumors.
Kla has been found to also occur on nonhistone proteins. In
terms of acute inﬂammation, abnormally elevated levels of lactate
in the blood of sepsis patients can be taken up by macrophages,
thereby increasing the Kla of intracellular HMGB1 protein91.
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
6
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 7 (native) -----
This research also proved that lactate can mediate the transfer of
HMGB1 from the nucleus to the cytoplasm through GPR81 and
MCTs and can cause an increase in HMGB1 modiﬁcation by
lactylation. Meanwhile, lactylated HMGB1 is secreted and released
through the exosome pathway, whereby it damages endothelial
integrity and increases vascular permeability, leading to endothe-
lial barrier dysfunction and promoting the development of sepsis.
A recent study revealed that lactate accumulated in the TME
regulated the N6-methyladenosine (m6A) modiﬁcation of tumor-
inﬁltrating myeloid cells (TIMs) mediated by the RNA methyl-
transferase METTL3 through Kla to promote the immunosuppres-
sive function of TIMs and mediate tumor immune escape92.
Moreover, lactate promoted METTL3 transcription in TIMs through
histone Kla. In addition, Kla can occur in the zinc ﬁnger domain
(ZFD) of METTL3, which functions as the target recognition
domain (TRD), thereby enhancing METTL3 binding and catalysis of
the m6A modiﬁcation of target RNA. Systemic lupus erythemato-
sus (SLE) is an autoimmune inﬂammatory connective tissue
disease. Defects in red blood cell (RBC) development have been
reported as a possible trigger of SLE. During RBC maturation, the
regulatory
metabolic
switch
responsible
for
activating
the
ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS) is mediated by hypoxia-
inducible factor (HIF). However, the UPS undergoes Kla in SLE93,
which impacts UPS activation mediated by the metabolic switch,
resulting in an inability to clear mitochondria by autophagy and a
consequent increase in these organelles in mature RBCs. Once
abnormal RBCs are taken up by macrophages, the mitochondrial
DNA in the RBCs stimulates the powerful inﬂammatory cGAS/
STING pathway, which promotes the production of type I IFN and
causes SLE93. Recently, a study explained how lactate levels in the
brain are regulated by systemic changes in brain cells, neural
excitement, and behavior-related stimuli, thereby leading to Kla94.
Murine brain neurons stimulated with electrical convulsions
were excited, accompanied by an increase in Kla. In the social
frustration stress model of depression with elevated brain lactate
levels, the increase in brain neuron excitability also increased Kla.
Studies have reported reduced social behavior and increased
anxiety-like behavior in mice. It is hypothesized that stress-
induced meta-excitation may lead to Kla, which affects emotion-
related behaviors in such cases. The report mentioned above was
from a pioneering study that led to the discovery of the potential
role of Kla in neuronal activity.
Classical acyltransferases such as p300/CREB binding protein
(CBP) are known to catalyze various acylation modiﬁcations,
including the acetylation of transcription factors, histones, and
other nuclear proteins, thereby regulating gene expression95–97. In
vitro cell-free experiments showed that p300 may catalyze the
chemical Kla reaction, with a strong dependence on the p53
pathway. p300/CBP has been conﬁrmed by several studies to
regulate histone lactylation in macrophages and induced plur-
ipotent stem cells (iPSCs)16,86,91,98,99. In addition, there are reports
that p300 can serve as a “writer” of lactylation on the YTHDF2
promoter in ocular melanoma cells88. Another major study that
led to the discovery of histone Kla demonstrated that the addition
and removal of this modiﬁcation were enzymatic processes driven
by HDACs. A detailed analysis of the mechanism of delactylation
was carried out in vitro using 18 recombinant HDACs and core
histones as substrates; the results revealed that HDAC1-3 and
SIRT1-3 reduced histone (including H3K18 and H4K5) Kla and that
HDAC3 was the most potent eraser of Kla99.
Fig. 3
Mechanism by which lactylation promotes tumorigenesis. Lactylation leads to tumor immunosuppression by maintaining TAM
homeostasis. Lactylation directly promotes the expression of the oncogene YTHDF2 in tumor cells. Lactylation maintains the metabolic
homeostasis of tumor cells. Lactylation may lead to tumor immunosuppression and immune escape by inhibiting the function of various
immune cells in the TME. HK-1 hexokinase-1; G6PD glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase; PKM pyruvate kinase; SDH succinate
dehydrogenase; IDH isocitrate dehydrogenase; TCA cycle tricarboxylic acid cycle
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
7
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Consistent with many other PTMs, Kla is theoretically regulated
by adding and removing lactyl groups from histone pro-
teins100,101.
However,
the
currently
understood
biochemical
process of lactylation may rely on the function of two metabolic
mechanisms. Among the components of these mechanisms,
lactyl-CoA is closely associated with enzymatic lactylation, and
lactyl-glutathione (LGSH) participates in nonenzymatic lactylation
(Fig. 1)102. Studies have shown that methylglyoxal (MGO) is a
byproduct of glucose metabolism; in glycolysis, MGO is generated
to produce triose phosphate and glyceraldehyde triphosphate
through spontaneous nonenzymatic dephosphorylation103. Under
physiological conditions, glyoxalase (GLO) activity maintains a low
level of MGO. GLO1 promotes the synthesis of glutathione (GSH)
and MGO to produce D-LGSH, and GLO2 hydrolyzes LGSH to
produce GSH and D-lactate104. A previous study found an increase
in Kla accompanied by a signiﬁcant increase in LGSH in GLO2-
knockout cell lines102. This study further revealed that proteins
that underwent Kla were enriched in carbon metabolism and
glycolytic pathways. Taken together, these data indicate that
glycolysis-related proteins undergo nonenzymatic Kla regulated
by glucose metabolites.
LACTATE AND ALLOSTERIC BINDING
Lactate is commonly produced as three isomers, D-lactate,
L-lactate, and racemic DL-lactate, because of carbon atom
asymmetry. L-Lactate is the main form in the human body, and
LDH-A reduces pyruvate to lactate. Studies showed that excessive
lactate accumulation in the cytoplasm of HepG2 hepatoma cells
exposed LDH-A to an acidic environment that induced an
allosteric transformation resulting in reduced activity105.
In contrast, D-lactate is a primary metabolite in gut bacteria106,
and only approximately 1–5% of L-lactate content is derived
from pyruvate metabolism107. Generally, D-LDH is not present in
mammals, and D-lactate is metabolized by D-α-hydroxy acid
dehydrogenase, which is active in only a very narrow pH range
and induces very slow catalysis. Therefore, most scholars believe
that D-lactate content in humans under normal conditions is too
low to activate enzymes related to catabolism108. However,
recent studies have suggested that D-LDH is expressed in human
and mammalian mitochondria109. Moreover, D-lactate has been
shown to be metabolized more readily than initially thought, as
conﬁrmed by studies on the half-life of D-lactate in plasma and
its excretion in urine after infusion or oral administration110,111.
D-Lactate may be involved in the transport of metabolic
substrates in vivo. Studies have reported the identiﬁcation of
three
new
D-lactate/H+
cotransporters,
D-lactate/pyruvate
reverse transporters, and D-lactate/malate reverse transporters
that transport D-pyruvate from the cytoplasm to the mitochon-
drial membrane. Hence, D-lactate/malate reverse transporters
are suspected to localize to the mitochondrial intima where
D-pyruvate is transported after mitochondrial D-LDH-mediated
oxidation, and malic acid is transported in the reverse direction
to the cytoplasm108.
ROLES OF LACTIC ACID IN PATHOPHYSIOLOGICAL PROCESSES
Inﬂammatory responses
Inﬂammatory response involves a variety of acute and chronic
diseases in almost all organs112–116. In addition to participating in
inﬂammatory injury and immune energy metabolism, accumu-
lated lactate triggers the activation of a series of cellular signaling
Table 1.
The regulation of lactylation in cell lines and diseases
Cell lines
Lactylated protein(s)/site(s)
Function and mechanism
Disease
MCF-7
H3K9,18,23,27,56,122
N/A
Breast cancer16
H4K5,8,12,31,77,91
HeLa
H3K9,18,23,27,79
N/A
Cervical cancer16
H4K5,8,12,16,31,77,91
H2AK11,13,115
H2BK5,11,15,16,20,23,43,85,108,116,120
MEF
N/A
N/A
N/A
HCT116
H3K18
N/A
Colon cancer16
BMDM
H3K14,18,23,27,56
Wound healing 16; inﬂammation repair 70; tumor cell
proliferation; pulmonary ﬁbrosis 72; upregulate ARG1,
PDGFA, THBS1, and VEGFA.
N/A
H4K8,12,31,91
H2AK11,115
H2BK5,11,15,16,20,85,108
HepG2
H3K18
N/A
Hepatocellular
carcinoma16
HEK293T
H3K18
N/A
N/A
LLC1
H3K18
N/A
Lung cancer 16
B16F10
H3K18
N/A
Cutaneous
melanoma16
PIG1
H3K18
N/A
N/A
OCM1/OMM1/
MUM2B/CRMM1/2/
CM2005.1
H3K18
Tumorigenesis 74; upregulate the oncogene YTHDF2.
Ocular melanoma74
BEAS-2B/A549/H1299
H4
Tumor cell proliferation 76; upregulate SDH and IDH;
downregulate HK-1 and PKM.
Non-small cell lung
cancer76
Notes: N/A not available
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
8
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 9 (native) -----
pathways that regulate inﬂammatory progression and tumor
immune tolerance. Notably, these regulatory effects are not
related to the ability of lactate to acidify the cellular environment.
The occurrence of acute inﬂammation is generally considered a
host defense mechanism, but the unrestrained activation of acute
inﬂammation will lead to tissue necrosis and prolonged disease.
Recent studies have conﬁrmed that lactate has an inhibitory effect
on acute inﬂammation (Fig. 4).
NF-κB
Signaling
regulates
genes
involved
in
numerous
biological processes such as innate and acquired immunity,
inﬂammation, stress response, B cell formation, and lymphoid
organ formation117,118. In the classical pathway, NF-κB/Rel binds
to and is inhibited by IκB119. Proinﬂammatory factors, LPS, growth
factors, and antigen receptors activate the IKK complex (including
IKKβ, IKKα, and NEMO), and the latter phosphorylates the IκB
protein, leading to ubiquitination and lysosomal degradation of
IκB, resulting in the release of NF-κB. Activated NF-κB is further
phosphorylated and transferred into nuclear-induced target gene
expression.
TLRs
Pathway
also
plays
a
signiﬁcant
role
in
inﬂammation. TLRs signal transduction from the intracellular TIR
domain of the receptor (Toll/IL-1 receptor) When stimulated by
ligands, MyD88 binds the IRAK(IL-1 receptor-associated kinase) to
TLRs through the interaction of the two molecular death
domains120. IRAK-1 is phosphorylated and activated, which then
binds to TRAF6, resulting in the activation of JNK and NF-KB121.
Lactate was shown to inhibit the production of inﬂammatory
cytokines and the degranulation of mast cells in vitro122, delay
the LPS-induced upregulation of monocyte inﬂammatory genes,
and reduce nuclear NF-κB accumulation. Moreover, lactate was
shown to signiﬁcantly reduce the production of TNF-α and IL-6
and the activation and nuclear translocation of NF-κB and YAP
through
the
GPR81
pathway
in
LPS-stimulated
macro-
phages123,124. Lactate can inhibit TLR-mediated activation of
mononuclear macrophages, delay the phosphorylation of Akt and
the degradation of IκBα, and inhibit the secretion of cytokines
TNF-α, IL-23, and chemokine CCL2, CCL7123.
Macrophages undergo polarization into different phenotypes
based on local microenvironmental stimuli. As mentioned earlier,
the activation of glycolytic pathways is accompanied by the
activation of hypoxia and inﬂammation, which increase the
production and release of lactate125. Macrophages must react
quickly to synthesize and release a burst of proinﬂammatory
factors to ﬁght pathogenic microorganisms and simultaneously
recruit more immune cells to the inﬂammation site to cope with
bacterial infections. Such phenomena result in the M1 polarization
of macrophages. During this process, macrophages secrete
various proinﬂammatory cytokines (e.g., TNFα, IFNγ, IL-12, etc.),
shifting the metabolic pattern toward aerobic glycolysis126–128. In
contrast, M2-polarized macrophages express and release more
anti-inﬂammatory factors (e.g., ARG1, TGFβ, etc.), which are
generally involved in tissue repair and wound healing129, and in
the late stage of inﬂammation, macrophages were often observed
to have an M2-like immunophenotype which played a key role in
the
pathogenesis
of
immune
system
dysfunctions130.
High
concentration of lactate inﬁltration has a great impact on the
polarization and cell function of monocyte-macrophages. First of
all, lactate can inhibit the key glycolysis enzyme PFK-1 and
promote the decomposition of active PFK-1 into less active dimer,
thus reducing the glycolysis ﬂux of monocytes131 and affect the
immune function and further differentiation of monocytes.
Secondly, lactate can be used as a signaling molecule to induce
polarization of M2-like macrophages132. Selleri et al. reported that
lactate secreted by human mesenchymal stromal cells induced
the differentiation of monocytes into M2 macrophages in a dose-
dependent manner133.
Mast cells are unique tissue-resident immune cells of the
myeloid lineage that have long been implicated in the pathogen-
esis of allergic and autoimmune disorders134. Lactate was found to
target MAS-associated G protein-coupled receptor X2 (MRGPRX2)
expressed by mast cells to inhibit both the early (calcium
mobilization and degranulation) and late (chemokine/cytokine
release) phases of mast cell activation in asthma135. In addition,
Fig. 4
Lactate contributes to various diseases. Lactate is involved in the regulation of cardiovascular system, respiratory system, digestive
system, urinary system, and other diseases. Lactate plays an important role in clinical diagnosis and prognosis of diseases. (Figure was created
with Biorender.com)
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
9
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 10 (native) -----
lactate has been shown to rely on MCT1 to inhibit the production
and degranulation of inﬂammatory cytokines in IgE-mediated
mast cells, thereby limiting mast cell-mediated inﬂammation122.
Studies in mouse models of colitis showed that activation of the
lactate receptor GPR81 reduced inﬂammation136, In a DSS-induced
mouse model of colitis, MCTs-mediated increased uptake of
lactate inhibits overactivation of inﬂammasome NLRP3 and its
downstream caspase-1 pathways in macrophages85. In septic
acute kidney injury, the lactate-activated PD-1/PD-L1 pathway
induced immunosuppression by evoking lymphocyte apopto-
sis137,138. In addition, lactate inhibits the activation of inﬂamma-
somes that cause liver and pancreatic damage through the GPR81
pathway139. In sepsis,
accumulated lactate
can inhibit the
activation of NF-KB pathway, the production of inﬂammatory
factors, the glycolysis process and ATP production through MCT1
in mast cell, and participate in the inﬂammatory stage to the
secondary immunosuppression stage of sepsis140. Thus, local
administration of lactate can be one of the potential treatments
for acute inﬂammatory diseases.
Chronic inﬂammation is characterized by greater inﬁltration of T
lymphocytes
and
macrophages
and,
in
contrast
to
acute
inﬂammation, is enhanced by lactate141. Lactate has been
reported to inhibit the migration of T cells and thus retain
T cells at the site of inﬂammation, thereby prolonging chronic
inﬂammation by increasing the production of inﬂammatory
cytokines and decreasing cell lysis142,143. In mouse arthritis
models, lactate
activated the expression of its transporter
SLC5A12, which mediates the entry of lactate into CD4+ T cells,
and
promoted
IL-17
production
through
the
PKM2/
STAT3 signaling pathway. Conversely, blocking SLC5A12 was
shown to decrease disease severity58. Additionally, studies have
shown that LDH-A is overexpressed in all CD8+ T-cell subsets in
the context of rheumatoid arthritis, and LDH-A inhibition can
alleviate the inﬂammatory and destructive effects of CD8+ T cells
in the development of autoimmune diseases144; to some extent,
these ﬁndings may provide indirect evidence that lactic acid
promotes chronic inﬂammation. Enhanced glycolysis causes the
localized accumulation of lactate in the ﬁbrotic lung, which
promotes the proﬁbrotic activity of alveolar macrophages145.
Studies have also found that lactate is an effective stimulant of the
proﬁbrotic phenotype of macrophages146.
The TME is hypoxic, and both hypoxia and high lactate
concentrations may be key drivers of the recruitment and
polarization of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs)147. In recent
years,
tumor
immunity
has
attracted
increasing
attention.
Immunosuppression plays an important role in tumor growth
and invasion. Lactate plays a crucial role in regulating the
functions of macrophages and lymphocytes in the process of
immune suppression.
Hypoxic tissues secrete high levels of the chemokines, HIF1/2
and endothelin-2, which attract macrophages to hypoxic areas to
affect the local immune response. Continuous tumor antigen
stimulation and immune activation prompt a state of exhaustion
or remodeling in the immune effector cells in the TME, rendering
these cells unable to perform their normal functions. TAMs
integrate hypoxia and lactate levels into activation of the MAPK
signaling cascade to promote malignant and tumorigenic factors,
such as the expression of arginase 1 (ARG1) and mannose receptor
type C1 (MRC1)148,149. M1-like macrophages in the TME inhibit
tumor cell growth. M1 macrophage polarization is positively
correlated with a favorable clinical prognosis in many types of
cancer, while M2-polarized macrophages promote tumor occur-
rence and development150–154. Macrophages in an acidic TME
tend to have an M2 phenotype: tumor-derived lactate induces M2
macrophage polarization by activating the ERK/STAT3 signaling
pathway. Inhibition of ERK/STAT3 signaling is known to hinder
tumor growth and angiogenesis by restraining lactate-mediated
M2 macrophage polarization155. Previous studies have shown that
the treatment of BMDMs with lactate extracted from tumor cells
drives
an
M2-like
phenotype
characteristic
of
TAMs156.
In
summary, lactate in the TME induces immunosuppression and
promotes tumor immune evasion, which helps maintain tumor
growth and survival.
Inﬂammatory factors in the cellular microenvironment activate
the
immune
response,
thereby
promoting
glycolysis
and
increasing the production and release of lactate157. The response
to lactate by different cells is highly variable. For example,
immune cells in cancer respond to lactate in the opposite way as
those in chronic inﬂammatory diseases, although both sets of
cells ultimately promote the disease. Moreover, tumor-derived
lactate has been reported to inhibit the immune response to the
tumor itself and to promote the expression of anti-inﬂammatory
genes, thus creating a conducive microenvironment for tumor
growth158,159. Although the signiﬁcant effect of lactate on
cellular function is well established, its precise contributions
remain to be further explored13.
It is not difﬁcult to ﬁnd interesting effects of lactate signaling.
As an immune system modulator, lactate seems to have
contradictory potential proinﬂammatory and anti-inﬂammatory
functions. For example, lactate signaling inhibited the LPS-
induced expression of a series of cytokines and chemokines, as
measured in cell culture medium160. In macrophages and
monocytes, lactate inhibited glycolysis and various speciﬁc
receptor signaling cascades123. Lactate can also regulate and
control gene expression through PTMs; therefore, lactate not
only inhibits inﬂammatory macrophage (M1) function but also
enhances the regulation of anti-inﬂammatory M2 polarization,
helping reduce macrophage-mediated inﬂammation and restore
homeostasis through an intrinsic regulatory feedback pathway.
In contrast, lactate has been shown to enhance the macrophage
secretion of IL-6, matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1), and IL-1β
and to increase NF-κB activity through MCTs161. In addition,
lactate appears to play an inconsistent role in T cells. Lactate was
shown to inhibit the proliferation, degranulation, and active
cytolysis of CD8+ T cells and to release inﬂammatory mediators
of CD8+ T cells162. However, in the CD4+ T-cell lineage, lactate
can increase the release of IL-2143, inhibit the inﬂammatory
function
of
regulatory
T
cells
(Tregs),
and
promote
the
differentiation of T-helper 17 (Th17) cells163. There are three
possible explanations for the different regulatory effects of
lactate in immune cells. First, the microenvironment of immune
cells differs from that of other somatic cells; for example,
granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) can
induce an increase in M1 and regulatory M2 mediators in
monocytes in the presence of lactate, and this induction is
consistent with the phenotype acquired by TAMs164. Second, the
expression of lactate transporters in effector T cells results in
different functions of lactate; for example, the differential effects
in CD8+ and CD4+ T cells are mediated by the selective
expression of MCT-1 and SCL5A12, respectively143. Third, the
concentration of lactate and its effect on culture medium acidity
are related to different effects; for example, 12.5 mM lactate
reduced the pH of the culture medium to 6.7 and inhibited
cytokine production140,165, and adjusting the pH to 7.4 reversed
the inhibitory effect of lactate in dendritic cells166. Needless to
say, lactate can indeed be used as a research target for clinical
diagnosis and treatment of inﬂammatory diseases. At present,
the determination of serum lactate is of great signiﬁcance
for clinical monitoring of the course of diseases such as
acute peritonitis, acute pancreatitis, sepsis, and septic shock. At
the same time, clinical trials have conﬁrmed that serum lactate
concentration can be used to guide the medication of clinical
patients, as the goal of treatment167,168, prognosis forecast169,170,
and predict the prognosis171–174. Experiments have revealed that
lactate can prevent cardiac dysfunction in rats with sepsis,
improve microcirculation, and reduce inﬂammation175.
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
10
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 11 (native) -----
Memory formation and neuroprotection
At rest, the brain is considered a net lactate producer176,177. The
lactate produced by the cells in the brain is released to the
extracellular ﬂuid gap through the membrane, and then the blood
vessels or lymphatic system within the gap is led into the blood,
thus entering the systemic circulation. When the blood lactate
level rises, the brain transforms into a net organ of lactate uptake,
and blood lactate is transported into the center by MCT on the
blood-brain barrier. The uptake of lactate by brain cells increases,
and the brain can remove up to 11% of the body lactate in
exercise state176.
Under different physiological and pathophysiological condi-
tions, lactate exerts different effects at the molecular and organ
levels in the brain to inﬂuence behaviors, such as facilitating
learning and memory and enabling the regulation of emotions.
Lactate and MCT-mediated lactate transport have been shown to
be important for brain energy metabolism178. Pyruvate could not
rescue memory impairment caused by MCT2 downregulation in
neurons, but an increase in endogenous lactate levels increased
learning-induced mRNA translation and Arc/Arg3.1 expression,
suggesting that lactate plays a key role as fuel for the neuronal
responses
required
for
long-term
memory179.
N-Methyl-D-
aspartate receptors (NMDARs) are glutamate receptors and
typical mediators of synaptic plasticity. Lactate enhances the
NMDAR-dependent inward current ﬂow and calcium inﬂux
induced by glutamate and glycine, thereby activating NMDARs
and downstream ERK1/2 signaling and increasing the expression
of c-Fos and Zif268, which are involved in neuronal plasticity and
activity maintenance180,181. The abovementioned evidence for
lactate shuttling between astrocytes and neurons suggests that
lactate homeostasis plays a coordinating role in long-term
memory formation. Disrupted gene expression of the lactate
transporter MCT1 in brain endothelial cells eliminated lactate
transport and impaired hippocampal neurogenesis and cognitive
function182. Lactate injections prevented the destruction of
memory retention caused by damage to the hippocampus, but
injections of glucose at the same concentration did not have the
same effect183. Studies have shown that the lactate content in
the cerebral cortex and hippocampus decreases during memory
impairment in mouse models of AD184. Coincidentally, exercise-
generated lactate enters the hippocampus through the lactate
shuttle and increases the expression of brain-derived neuro-
trophic factor (BDNF) by activating SIRT1185, and increases in
BDNF expression improve cognition by facilitating learning and
memory formation. Moreover, lactate signaling between astro-
cytes and neurons is disrupted in AD, amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS), and schizophrenia180.
In conclusion, lactate not only acts as an energy substrate in the
brain, but also plays a certain role in the maintenance of long-term
memory formation and cognitive function. In addition, lactate can
be used as a signal molecule to bind to GPR81 receptor in the
brain186 for reducing excitatory injury, which suggests that lactate
may be involved in the whole brain metabolism and functional
regulation (Table 2).
Wound healing
Wound
healing
is
a
dynamic,
complex
biological
process.
Generally, wound healing can be divided into four overlapping
stages,
namely,
hemostasis,
inﬂammation,
proliferation,
and
remodeling, which are regulated by various cytokines and growth
factors187. Importantly, lactate is metabolized in mass during
wound healing and plays an indispensable role because of the
high levels of secreted cytokines and growth factors and the
neovascularization that occurs upon immune system activation,
resulting in increased metabolism and possibly hypoxia188. Thus,
lactate, an energy substrate, can meet the high metabolic
demands of wound healing. In addition, accumulated lactate
reduces the pH of the alkaline environment caused by the
reduction in carbon dioxide levels and the high oxygen tension,
enabling cells to proliferate and differentiate within the optimized
physiological pH range189. Hence, Trabold et al. suggested that
lactate can be used as a substitute for oxygen to initiate
healing190. Lactate also plays a role in promoting angiogenesis,
as supported by the increased vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) levels and increased angiogenesis at oxygenated sites after
the subcutaneous implantation of a matrix glue containing a
lactate-releasing agent in mice191. In addition, some evidence
indicates that lactate can stimulate ﬁbroblasts to synthesize
collagen in the ECM192,193. Lactate has been shown to stimulate
vasogenic stem cells through the redox system194. Liu et al.
demonstrated that lactate facilitated the activation of the
transcription
factor
HIF-1α,
which
can
regulate
hypoxia195.
Previously, Vural et al. found that HIF stimulated VEGF, promoted
angiogenesis, and accelerated wound healing196. M2-polarized
macrophages mediate wound healing through Akt, ERK1/2, and
STAT3 pathway197–200, and the promoting effect of lactate on the
polarization and function of M2 macrophages has been discussed.
It has been shown that lactate can promote wound healing.
Preclinical trials have found that the improvement of wound
healing in recombinant L.reuteri depends not only on the
transformation of CXCL12 in the bacteria, but also on the combined
presence of lactate produced by L.Reuteri201,202. Lactate production
by L.reuteri alters the local wound environment, lowering pH,
inhibiting the enzyme CD 26 that degrades CXCL12, and allowing
increased bioavailability of CXCL12203.
Ischemic injury
Tissue ischemia disrupts oxygen and glucose delivery, resulting in
metabolic disorders204. Hypoxia directly leads to lactate accumu-
lation, which lowers pH to activate ion transporters205, primarily
Na+/H+ exchange (NHE) proteins that regulate intracellular pH by
exchanging protons for extracellular sodium ions206. In acute
tissue ischemia, NHE1 elevates intracellular Na+ levels, leading to
increased Ca2+–Na+ exchange and intracellular calcium overload.
During ischemia/reperfusion injury, lactate induced the release of
TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1 in the myocardium and brain, further
exacerbating neuronal damage in acute stroke207. Inhibition of the
lactate-activated GPR81 signaling pathway plays a protective role
in ischemic brain injury208. In addition, evidence suggests that
lactate treatment alleviated brain damage and improved behavior
in rat models of hypoxic ischemia (HI)209,210, indicating that lactate
may play a neuroprotective role in ischemic hypoxic encephalo-
pathy. In a study of acute heart failure (AHF) in zebraﬁsh, lactate
acquired as an active component of herbal extracts was found to
inhibit AHF, inﬂammation, and cardiac hypertrophy211. Moreover,
increasing lactate levels during ischemia restored the M2-like
polarization of macrophages in an MCT1-dependent manner, and
an increase in VEGF production by polarized macrophages
generated a positive feedback loop that further stimulated
angiogenesis and ultimately facilitated postischemia revascular-
ization and the regeneration of damaged muscle132.
As a product of tissue hypoxia, lactate itself can be used as an
indicator of tissue hypoperfusion. Clinically, the determination of
serum lactate plays a very important role in guiding the treatment
of patients with ischemic injury, especially in the treatment of
tissue hypoxia and ischemia-reperfusion injury caused by cerebral
ischemia and insufﬁcient blood ﬂow in patients with myocardial
infarction212–215. In addition, lactate is considered to be a predictor
of major complications after cardiac surgery216,217, the signiﬁcance
of blood lactate measurement in monitoring the progress of
cardiac surgery has been clariﬁed.
Tumor growth and metastasis
GPR81 and acidiﬁcation function.
Lactate and lactate-mediated
activation of the GPR81 signaling pathway contribute to several
facets of tumor progression, including cell proliferation, invasion,
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
11
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 12 (native) -----
angiogenesis, immune tolerance, and immune cell escape from
surveillance6. Because of their low perfusion, tumors are usually
considered to reside in an isolated metabolic microenvironment,
where local nutrient exchange predominates over circulating
nutrient exchange. When the nutrient demand required for rapid
tumor growth exceeds the energy supply, tumor growth depends
on glycolysis, which produces a large amount of lactate. This
process is called the Warburg effect, and lactate is considered a
metabolic substrate that enables cancer cells to proliferate.
Overexpression of TAp73, a key regulator of glycolysis, has been
identiﬁed as a protector of tumor proliferation by promoting
lactate production218. A large number of studies have recognized
that lactate is a possible mediator of the loss of p53 signaling,
which
promotes
tumor
cell
proliferation219.
Lactate
signals
through the cell-surface receptor GPR81 in a process that is
independent of MCT, protons, and cellular glucose metabolism
but that plays an important role in tumor growth. Studies have
shown that GPR81 expression increases in tumor cells in response
to autocrine signaling by lactate; that is, the lactic acid produced
by tumor cells activates GPR81 on tumor cells and produces an
oncogenic phenotype220. In addition, lactate can act in a paracrine
manner by activating GPR81 on nontumor cells in the TME to
promote tumor growth, and tumor cell-derived lactate can
activate GPR81 on dendritic cells and thus prevent tumor-
speciﬁc antigen presentation to other immune cells221. A more
speciﬁc
study
showed
that
GPR81
activation
reduced
the
intracellular cAMP concentration, thereby decreasing the phos-
phorylation of the transcriptional activator TAZ in the Hippo
pathway, promoting TAZ to enter the nucleus and bind TEAD1
(forming the TaZ-Tead1 complex), leading to the activation of PD-
L1 expression to provide an effective means for tumor cells to
escape the immune system222. In conclusion, lactate secreted by
tumor cells acts on GPR81 of tumor cells or nontumor cells in the
TME, ultimately affecting tumor cell function as well as informa-
tion exchange and interactions between cells, all of which has the
potential to affect tumor cell growth and proliferation. The ﬂow of
lactate out of tumor cells prevents further acidiﬁcation of the
intracellular environment but acidiﬁes the extracellular environ-
ment. The mechanisms by which tumor cells can release H+
include the upregulation of NHE1 (Na+/H+ exchanger) and CAR9
(carbonic anhydrase IX)223,224. NHE1 promotes H+ efﬂux across the
plasma membrane of cancer cells via a naturally occurring,
internally oriented Na+ gradient. CAR9 catalyzes the conversion of
extracellular water and carbon dioxide to carbonic acid, which is
decomposed into bicarbonate and H+; then, sodium bicarbonate
is transported into tumor cells through the sodium bicarbonate
cotransporter HVCn1, leaving H+ outside. In addition, vacuolar (V)-
type proton pumps in the tumor cell plasma membrane225
actively pump H+ out of the cell in a manner driven by direct
binding and hydrolysis of ATP. Studies have conﬁrmed that NHE1,
Table 2.
Summary of lactate in disease and the related signaling pathways
Disease
Mechanism
Clinical signiﬁcance
Cancer
Energy metabolism
Potential therapeutic targets
PD-L1/PD-1 pathway T-cell apoptosis
PAR-VEG/VEGFR2
Histone/Non-Histone lactylation
Activate the ERK–STAT3 pathway, GPR132 and Notch
Stabilize the HIF1 pathway
Inhibit NFAT, NKp46, and mTOR signaling
Traumatic brain injury
Energy metabolism
Neuroprotective effects
Biomarker of systemic physiology
Therapy for treating encephaledema
Cardiovascular disease Energy metabolism
Biomarker of myocardial injury
GPR81/KLF2-mediated down-regulation of inﬂammatory cytokines IL-6, IL-8, MCP-
1 and increased secretion of VCAM-1 and E-selectin
Predictors of prognosis and
mortality rate
NF-κB pathway, FGF23 pathway, NO/cGMP signal transduction pathway, ATP ion
channel
Reduce myocardial reperfusion injury
Excite C1 neurons/Increases sympathetic nerve activity and arterial blood pressure Risk factors for atherosclerosis
Respiratory disease
Energy metabolism
Biomarker of severity of disease
Inhibite IL-33/TGF-β, JNK, ERK, NF-κB
Predictors of the prognosis and
mortality rate
MRGPRX2-mediated inﬂammation
Indicators of diagnosis and
therapeutic effect
Chronic liver disease
Energy metabolism
Predictors of prognosis and
mortality rate
Kidney disease
Energy metabolism
Predictors of kidney injury and
mortality rate
PD-1/PD-L1 pathway, Sirtuin 3/AMPK-regulated autophagy
Indicators of therapeutic effect
Sepsis
Energy metabolism
Biomarker of severity of disease
HMGB1 lactylation
Predictors of prognosis and
mortality rate
Inhibit NF-κB pathway-mediated production of inﬂammatory cytokines
Arthritis
Energy metabolism
Indicators of diagnosis
Slc5a12-inhibit binding of CXCR3 and CXCL10
Slc5a12/PKM2/STAT3/IL-17
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
12
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 13 (native) -----
HVCn1, and V-type proton pumps can promote the proliferation,
migration, and drug resistance of tumor cells225–234, and silencing
NHE1 or SLC4A7 signiﬁcantly reduced tumor growth in a mouse
xenograft model235. In conclusion, NHE1, CAR9, HVCn1, and V-type
proton pumps act together on the plasma membrane of tumor
cells to form a transmembrane pH gradient based on the inward
H+ gradient. This pH regulation is crucial for tumor cell survival
and proliferation. Therefore, the data support further investigation
of these transporters, which promote cancer cell growth by
exporting H+, as potential drug targets.
Tumor angiogenesis.
We have previously discussed the role of
lactate in promoting angiogenesis during wound healing. To a
certain extent, the TME is similar to a trauma-related micro-
environment. Lactate in the TME stimulates endothelial cell
activation and angiogenesis through HIF-independent and HIF-
dependent pathways. In the HIF-independent pathway, lactate is
transported into cells via MCT1, wherein it is oxidized to pyruvate
to produce NADH, which activates ROS production; as previously
established, ROS production stimulates angiogenesis236. Another
HIF-independent
mechanism
that
facilitates
angiogenesis
involves the direct binding of lactate to NDRG3, a downstream
regulatory protein in the N-Myc pathway; this binding event
prevents NDRG3 degradation237. NDRG3 binds c-Raf to activate
RAF-ERK signaling and promote angiogenesis under conditions
of low oxygen tension and high lactate concentrations. HIF-1α
has
been
reported
to induce
VEGF
expression.
The
HIF-
dependent pathway is based on the ability of lactate to stabilize
HIF-1α under normoxic conditions. HIF-1α is a key regulator of
the response to hypoxia238,239 that is continuously synthesized
and degraded in the cytoplasm. Under normoxic conditions,
proline hydroxylases (PHDs) are the main oxygen sensors in cells,
and PHDs can hydroxylate HIF-1α at speciﬁc proline residues to
promote the subsequent degradation of HIF-1α by the UPS. PHD,
however, is inactivated under hypoxic conditions. This inactiva-
tion of PHD prevents the proteasomal degradation of HIF-1α,
allowing HIF-1α to migrate to the nucleus, where it binds HIF-1β
and promotes the transcription of many tumor-promoting
genes240. Lactate has been reported to be absorbed by tumor
cells and subsequently converted to pyruvate, which directly
competes with α-KG to inhibit the activity of PHD, thereby
stabilizing HIF-1α levels240. Hence, exogenous lactate stabilizes
HIF-1α by acting as a substrate for pyruvate production, and a
high lactate concentration in the TME ensures the transcriptional
activation of tumor-promoting genes in all tumor cells regardless
of oxygen supply.
Tumor invasion.
Considerable evidence suggests that basal
membrane
(BM)
remodeling241
and
epithelial–mesenchymal
transition (EMT)242 are two features of invasive tumors. Cancer-
associated ﬁbroblasts (CAFs) synthesize type I collagen, an
important promoter of BM remodeling243. There is evidence that
lactate promotes the proliferation and migration of CAFs and
enhances the synthesis of type I collagen in CAFs244. In CAFs, COX-
2 regulates the biosynthesis of type I collagen, and lactate was
shown to increase COX-2 expression in a p38 kinase-dependent
manner245. MMPs degrade collagen and glycoproteins and are the
key collagenases that promote tumor invasion246. Lactate has
been reported to promote LPS-stimulated MMP expression
through
the
PLD/MAPK/NF-κB
pathway247
and
to
increase
caveolin1-induced MMP expression through the ERK/p90RSK
pathway248. In conclusion, this evidence indicates that lactate
may be a signaling molecule that increases MMP expression,
leading to collagen degradation and the increased invasion of
tumor cells. EMT is mainly activated by a cascade of speciﬁc
factors/cytokines and related signaling pathways, and lactate has
been shown to be involved in the TGF-β/Smad and Wnt/β-catenin
signaling pathways, among others, that can activate EMT249.
Tumor immunity.
Immune cells are an important component of
the TME, and lactate is generally considered an immunosuppres-
sive molecule that promotes malignant tumor growth due to the
dependence on both H+ and lactate (Table 3). The pH in tumors
can be as low as 5.6 but primarily ranges from 6.0 to 7.0250. The
accumulation of lactate in the TME entails acidiﬁcation of the TME,
and a lower extracellular pH has been shown to impair almost all
aspects of CD8+ and CD4+ T lymphocyte function, including the
activation of cytotoxicity, chemotactic motility, and prolifera-
tion251. Experiments have shown that252 the accumulation of
lactate in the TME entails acidiﬁcation of the TME, and a lower
extracellular pH has been shown to impair almost all aspects of
CD8+ and CD4+ T lymphocyte function, including the activation of
cytotoxicity, chemotactic motility, and proliferation253,254. During
immune activation, the coactivator CD28 binds to the B7 receptor
on antigen-presenting cells, stimulates the PI3K/Akt signaling
pathway, and allows T cells to accelerate the synthesis of cytokines
required for the immune response255,256. Speciﬁcally, for T cells,
the activation
of immune function
directly coincides
with
metabolic reprogramming257; activated T cells and tumor cells
both depend on glycolytic metabolism, and both must excrete
lactate to avoid intracellular acidiﬁcation. Due to the change
in the lactate concentration gradient across the cell membrane,
the accumulation of extracellular lactate from tumors prevents
activated
T
cells
from
releasing
lactate.
In
essence,
high
Table 3.
Effects of lactate on immune cells in tumor
microenvironment
Cell type
Mechanism
Effect
macrophages Activation of the ERK-STAT3
pathway
M2 polarization (↑IL-6,
↑VEGF, ↑ARG1, ↑CCL5)
Activation of GPR132
and Notch
HIF1α stablization
Histone lactylation
T cell
Acidic pH environment
↓Effector function
Activation PD-L1/PD-1
pathway
↓Proliferation
Inhibition of p38 and
JNK–JUN
↑PD-1
Inhibition of lactate efﬂux
↑Apoptosis
Reduced NAD availability
↓Cytokine production
Dendritic cell
Acidic pH environment
↓Differentiation
Reduced CD1a and
increased CD14 expression
↓IL-12
Activation of GPR81 and
import via SLC16A
↓IL-6
↓TNF
↑Kynurenine
Treg cell
FOXP3-mediated repression
of MYC and modulation of
LDH
↑Proliferation
Sustained fatty acid
synthesis through ACC
↑Differentiation
↑TGFβ
↑IL-10
NK cell
Inhibition of NFAT
and NKp46
↓Cytolytic function
Inhibition of mTOR
signaling
↓IFNγ
Acidic pH environment
↑Apoptosis
HDAC inhibition
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
13
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 14 (native) -----
extracellular lactate in the TME leads to the accumulation of
endogenous lactate within T cells, which reduces the secretion of
proinﬂammatory cytokines258. However, this phenomenon is
unique to activated cytotoxic T cells because in Tregs, the Treg-
speciﬁc transcription factor FoxP3 inhibits c-Myc signaling to
enable a switch to OXPHOS, thus keeping these cells active in the
TME158.
Alcinotto
et
al.
used
the
proton
pump
inhibitor
esomeprazole to restore normal pH and reverse the acid-
induced impairment of tumor-speciﬁc CD8+ T lymphocytes in
humans and mice259. Further studies conﬁrmed that inhibition of
the acidiﬁer ion channel Ae2 or activation of the alkalization
channel HVCn1 signiﬁcantly improved T-cell function and the
antitumor activity of Glypican 3 (GPC3)-speciﬁc CAR T cells
in vitro260. In conclusion, the inhibition of lactate is a potential
strategy for overcoming T-cell dysfunction under acidic pH
conditions that could enhance adoptive T-cell transfer-based
immunotherapy. Lactate itself has been found to mediate
mechanisms of immunosuppression. High lactate production by
tumor cells increases the acidity of the TME. The hypoxic TME
induces the HIF-1α-mediated upregulation of PD-L1, leading to
CD8+ T-cell dysfunction261. Studies have also found that SLC43A2,
a methionine transporter in tumor cells, disrupts methionine
metabolism in CD8+ T cells and reduces the methylation of T-cell
histones, thereby inhibiting T-cell-mediated immunity262. Lactate
was found to inhibit nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT),
leading to the inactivation of tumor-inﬁltrating CD8+ T cells and
NK cells and reduced IFNγ production263. Therefore, some
researchers have speculated that lactate could ultimately promote
the differentiation of Th1 and Th2 effector cells through signal
transduction and metabolic regulation while inhibiting Treg
induction and T-cell inactivation264,265. It is worth mentioning
that a recent study found that in tumors, the metabolite lactate
affected the TME by regulating the lactylation of MOESIN in Tregs
and enhancing TGF-β signal transduction, thus promoting a new
mechanism of tumorigenesis266. Regarding innate immunity,
lactate can increase the expression of VEGF and ARG1 in TAMs,
polarizing them toward the immunosuppressive and protumori-
genic M2 phenotype156. The ability of lactate to mediate this
process has been thought to depend on MCTs and HIF-1α stability.
However, the subsequent discovery of histone lactate modiﬁca-
tion suggests a new mechanism, namely, histones can be
modiﬁed by lactatelto regulate the polarization state of TAMs
through increased expression of ARG1 and other TAM-related
genes; thus, TAMs function through multiple mechanisms to
disrupt antitumor immune responses, and their presence is
considered a negative prognostic marker267. TAMs produce IL-
10, an immunosuppressive cytokine268. TAMs also express the
checkpoint inhibitor PD-L1, which binds to its receptor PD-1 on
activated T lymphocytes and drives cell apoptosis269. In addition,
TAMs express CCL22, attract Tregs to increase the production of
molecules such as PD-L1, disrupt T-cell metabolism by expressing
ARG1, and deprive T cells of L-arginine, a key nutrient for T-cell
growth270. Therefore, lactate-driven TAM polarization is a key
mechanism of malignant tumor cell immune escape. Lactate and
lactylation are also associated with the release of high mobility
group box protein 1 (HMGB1), a damage-associated molecular
pattern (DAMP), from activated macrophages91,271. Emerging
evidence suggests that DAMPs, including HMGB1, play an
important role in initiating and sustaining chronic inﬂammation
that impairs antitumor immunity and promotes cancer progres-
sion272,273. However, HMGB1 is also thought to have antitumor
properties, and interestingly, it inhibits glycolysis in tumor cells,
leading to metabolic cell death274. Therefore, it is necessary to
clarify the effects of DAMPs such as HMGB1 on tumor metabolism
and their dual roles in promoting or inhibiting cancer progression.
Clinical signiﬁcance.
Previous studies have highlighted how
lactate creates a conducive microenvironment for tumor cell
growth and represents an energy course for tumor cells. Lactate
promotes tumor growth in a number of ways. On the one hand,
lactate inhibits immune cell effects in the TME. Lactate blocks the
activity of MCT1, a lactate transporter in immune cells in the
TME275, to prevent the removal of lactate from cells and inhibits
the proliferation and survival of immune cells263. Moreover,
lactate-mediated signaling activates tumor cell proliferation and
drug resistance through GPRs that enhance the expression of PD-
L1222. Lactate also prevents dendritic cells in the TME from
presenting tumor-speciﬁc antigens to immune cells221. On the
other hand, lactate can be directly absorbed and metabolized by
tumor cells to promote the TCA cycle41,42, and as a signaling factor
that regulates the hypoxia response, lactic acid promotes tumor
cell growth237. In view of its immunosuppressive role in promoting
angiogenic tumor invasion and metastasis, lactate is considered
an indicator of high malignancy and poor prognosis in several
types of cancer. In lung cancer, elevated systemic lactate is a
negative prognostic factor for metastatic NSCLC and is associated
with signiﬁcantly shorter overall survival276. Wei et al. found that
serum lactate levels were higher in patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer than in patients without systemic disease277. In
addition, studies have reported that increased lactate levels are
negatively correlated with the percentages of Th1 cells and
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) in tumors, reﬂecting the impaired
immune capacity in the TME. In head and neck cancer, an
increased
tumor lactate
concentration
was identiﬁed as a
predictor of subsequent lymph node metastasis or distant
metastasis278. New techniques, such as nuclear magnetic reso-
nance spectroscopy (MRS) and hyperpolarized (HP) 13C-MRI, are
changing the prospects of measuring intracellular lactate con-
centration and increasing the feasibility of using this concentra-
tion as a tumor biomarker279–282. MRS has been used to show that
an elevated lactate level within tumors is a poor prognostic
indicator in breast cancer283. In addition, in HER2-positive breast
cancer, elevated intratumoral lactate levels are associated with
HER2 addiction status and susceptibility to trastuzumab, a HER2
inhibitor. Therefore, lactate can be used as a predictive biomarker
for the optimal prescription of HER2-targeted drugs in this patient
population284. MRS-based detection of lactate predicted the poor
prognosis of patients with diffuse endogenous pontine glioma285.
Therefore, the future development of metabolic imaging must
consider the different metabolic phenotypes of tumors. Current
studies on the application of lactic acid imaging as a biomarker for
tumor diagnosis include NCT01881386 (the use of MRS to observe
changes in tumor lactic acid levels in vivo in response to
treatment), NCT04584827 (the effects of lactic acid levels on
mortality and morbidity in patients undergoing intracranial mass
surgery under general anesthesia), NCT03129776 (HP 13C-MRI of
lactic acid in cervical tumors to identify areas of radiation
resistance and to guide radiotherapy), and NCT03531307 (the
association of lactic acid levels with the tumor proliferation marker
Ki67 in patients with brain tumors).
Therapeutic targets.
Studies have conﬁrmed that glycolysis
accelerates the metabolic switch associated with increased
lactate production in tumor cells as a result of the increased
expression of oncogenes, mainly c-Myc and HIF-1α286. The
conversion of intracellular pyruvate to lactate is catalyzed by
LDH, a heteromeric protein composed of two subunits each of
LDH-A and LDH-B that exists in ﬁve isomeric forms. LDH-5 (A4)
has a higher afﬁnity for pyruvate than for lactate, which is
conducive for the conversion of pyruvate to lactate, while LDH-1
(B4) has a higher afﬁnity for lactate than for pyruvate, which is
conducive for the conversion of lactate to pyruvate. In general,
the induction of LDH-A and silencing of LDH-B leads to increased
LDH-5 activity, decreased LDH-1 activity, and an increase in
intracellular lactic acid production. The malignant proliferative
and invasive potential of tumors has been shown to be
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
14
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 15 (native) -----
dependent on LDH-A activity287, and the activation of HIF-1α and
c-Myc and the inhibition of p53 regulate LDH-A gene transcrip-
tion288. LDH-B is inhibited by epigenetic mechanisms such as
DNA methylation289–292. The priority of glycolysis is to convert
pyruvate into lactate. Because LDH-A is increased in cancer and is
responsible for generating the main form of lactate, LDH-A is a
potential drug target for cancer treatment. In fact, a large
number of studies have shown that the inhibition of LDH-A both
in vivo and In vitro can block tumor growth and invasion293–297.
FX-11, a selective LDH-A inhibitor, has shown antitumor activity
in xenograft tumor models298,299 and has potential for develop-
ment
as
a
cancer
treatment.
Galloﬂavin
inhibited
LDH-A
activity300 and thus inhibited lactate production and proliferation
in Burkitt lymphoma cells301. Chronic stress-induced epinephrine
alters the pH to promote cancer stem cell-like properties in
breast cancer cells through lactic acid production involving LDH-
A; as vitamin C can inhibit LDH-A, it may be an effective
therapeutic in stress-related breast cancer302. LDH-A is consid-
ered a safe target for cancer treatment because the loss of LDH-A
protein due to an inherited deletion in the LDHA gene results in
only mild myopathy303,304. Theoretically, blocking lactate pro-
duction in tumor cells by inhibiting LDH-A could have some
unmanageable adverse effects. For example, the intracellular
accumulation of pyruvate and NADH drives ECM remodeling by
inducing collagen hydroxylation, which results in increased
collagen stability and thereby promotes the metastatic growth
of breast cancer cells305. As pyruvate is catalyzed to lactate, a
molecule of NADH is oxidized to NAD+; blocking these reactions
directly leads to a lack of NAD+ for glycolysis, which slows the
reaction rate. In addition, the production and activity of lactic
acid play signiﬁcant roles in the maintenance of cellular and
biological functions and immune regulation. Therefore, even
though the anticancer potential of LDH-A has been conﬁrmed,
LDH-A blockade may have many nontarget effects; these
potential challenges must be overcome in the application of
LDH-A inhibitors for the treatment of cancer.
The regulation of lactate by c-Myc and HIF-1α in tumors can also
be achieved by the induction of MCT; c-Myc induces MCT1306,307,
and HIF-1α induces MCT1 and MCT4308, the major lactate
transporters utilized by cancer cells. Blocking MCT1 and MCT4
function or reducing their density in the plasma membrane are
potential strategies for cancer treatment309. The rationale is that if
the outlet for lactic acid in cancer cells is blocked or reduced, the
resulting intracellular acidiﬁcation will kill the cell; importantly,
selective inhibitors of MCT1/4 have been shown to be effective
cancer treatments in preclinical studies310. Syrosingopine is an
effective dual inhibitor of MCT1 and MCT4311 that has been proven
to sensitize cancer cells to metformin in vivo312, thus enhancing its
antitumor activity; these data suggest the potential for syrosingo-
pine as an adjunctive therapy for future clinical anticancer drugs.
AZD3965, a dual inhibitor of MCT1 and MCT2, was shown in both
in vitro and in vivo preclinical studies to be safe for breast cancer
treatment313. A phase I clinical trial of AZD3965 in patients with
advanced solid tumors and B-cell lymphoma has been completed
(NCT01791595). MCT1 and MCT4 transport to the cell surface after
expression depends on the glycoprotein chaperone CD147314.
Therefore, CD147 has become a potential drug target to disrupt
MCT membrane insertion and function in cancer therapy.
There are several possible antitumor therapies that aim to inhibit
lactate production (Table 4): 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG), which can
compete with glucose in vivo, reduces lactate production in tumor
cells, and inhibits rapid tumor cell growth by reducing glucose
utilization315. Phase I clinical trials have been conducted to
evaluate the dosage of 2-DG in patients with several types of
solid tumors, including prostate cancer and glioblastoma, based on
preclinical efﬁcacy316. Breast cancer cells were treated with 2-DG as
a metformin adjuvant, and the results indicated a synergistic effect
on growth arrest317. In addition, 2-DG enhanced CD8+ memory cell
formation and antitumor function, including increasing the homing
of lymphocytes to lymph nodes, IFN-γ and TNF-α production, and
tumor regression in mice with melanoma318. These results suggest
that glucometabolic modulators can exert certain antitumor effects
Table 4.
Drugs that target production and transport of lactate
Molecule
Target
Mechanism
Condition
Clinical trial
AZD3965
Lactate
transporters
Inhibits MCT1/2
Malignant tumor
Phase I Trial
α-Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamate Lactate
transporters
Inhibits MCT1/2
Hyperglycolytic malignancies
N/A
AR-C155858
Lactate
transporters
Inhibits MCT1/2
Hyperglycolytic malignancies
N/A
Syrosingopine
Lactate
transporters
Inhibits MCT1/4
Malignant tumor
N/A
Meplazumab
CD147
Inhibits the distribution of MCT1/4
on cell membrane
Malignant tumor, COVID-19
Phase I Trial
Stiripentol
LDH
Inhibits LDH
Epilepsy, Dravet Syndrome
Approved by FDA
Galloﬂavin
LDH
Binds the free enzyme
Malignant tumor
N/A
N-hydroxyindoles
LDH
Compete with pyruvate and NADH N/A
N/A
AT-101 (gossypol)
LDH
Inhibits LDH
Malignant tumor
Phase II Trial
FX-11
LDH
Inhibits LDH-A
Pancreatic cancer
N/A
GSK2837808A
LDH
Inhibits LDH-A
N/A
N/A
Vitamin C
LDH
Inhibits LDH-A
Breast cancer
N/A
2-DG
HK
Inhibits glycolysis by competing
with glucose
Malignant tumor
Dose Escalation Trial, Phase
I/II Trial
DCA
PDK
Increases glucose uptake into
mitochondria
Malignant tumor, Lactic
acidosis
Phase I/II Trial
Lonidamine
HK
Inhibits glycolysis
Malignant tumor
Phase II Trial
Notes: N/A not available
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
15
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 16 (native) -----
alone or as
adjuvants to traditional
drugs. Lonidamine, a
dechlorinated derivative of indolizazol-3-carboxylic acid, strongly
inhibits oxygen consumption, aerobic glycolysis, and lactate
transport and accumulation in tumor cells. Because its speciﬁc
mechanism of action and side effect proﬁles do not overlap with
those of standard antineoplastic drugs, lonidamine combined with
standard chemotherapy for the treatment of solid tumors has been
widely studied. Lonidamine was conﬁrmed to increase the toxicity
of anthracycline-based drugs in human breast cancer cell lines and
to enhance cisplatin activity in platinum-sensitive and platinum-
resistant ovarian cancer cell lines. The results from phase II-III
clinical trials of lonidamine for advanced breast, ovarian and lung
cancer are encouraging. Dichloroacetate (DCA) inhibits pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase, increases glucose uptake into mitochon-
drial oxidation, and decreases lactate production. The results of a
phase I clinical trial showed that long-term oral DCA treatment was
feasible and well tolerated in patients with relapsed glioblastoma
and other tumors that have metastasized to the brain319. The
results from another phase II study of DCA in combination with
chemoradiotherapy in unresected locally advanced squamous cell
carcinoma of the head and neck showed that the addition of DCA
to cisplatin-based chemoradiation (CRT) appeared to be safe and
had no adverse effect on survival or expected metabolite changes.
These data provide support for further studies on combinations of
metabolic drugs with CRT320.
CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES
Two ATP production systems are functional in mammalian cells:
glycolysis and OXPHOS. Glycolysis does not require oxygen, and
the ﬁnal product of this pathway is lactate. Less ATP is
generated through glycolysis than through OXPHOS. Therefore,
in textbooks, glycolysis has been described as a supplementary
method of ATP production under anaerobic conditions, and
historically, lactate has been considered a waste product that
helps maintain temperature and generate heat produced by
muscle movement; hence, lactate is known to cause muscle
fatigue. However, a “lactate revolution” in the 1970s led
researchers to realize that lactate, at the intersection of
anaerobic and aerobic carbohydrate metabolism, is a direct
and critical component in the cellular energy repository and
that the steps through which lactate leads to ATP production
are simpler and faster than those involved in the oxidative
utilization of glucose. Subsequent studies gradually revealed
that lactate is a major renewable carbohydrate fuel in mammals
and a recyclable redox buffer that maintains a balanced cellular
redox state in tissues throughout the body. Thus, the roles of
lactate as a metabolic feedback regulator and unique signaling
molecule were considered, and the function of lactylation as a
novel PTM of proteins has been explored. Therefore, lactate is
recognized to play a signiﬁcant role in many physiological and
pathological processes, including the regulation of energy
metabolism, immunity responses, memory formation, wound
healing, and tumor development. These processes are regulated
by lactate as a signaling molecule or through lactylation, in
addition to its role as a metabolic substrate. Currently, lactate is
mostly used as an indicator for disease diagnosis, prognosis, and
efﬁcacy evaluation in the clinical (Table 2). Lactate has rarely
been used as a therapeutic target in clinical practice, and
studies focus more on the therapeutic potential of small nucleic
acid
drugs
that
target
cell
function321–323.
As
a
plasma
biomarker of disease, lactate theoretically has potential to be
a molecule that stimulates speciﬁc-responsive drugs as same as
glucose324. With the exploration of its functions in signal
transduction and post-translational modiﬁcation of proteins,
lactate is expected to become a valuable target for the
treatment of chronic cardiovascular diseases, nerve injury,
inﬂammatory disease, and tumors.
As a necessary product of glycolysis, lactate has continued to be
the subject of study for reasons that include abnormally elevated
levels in inﬂammatory diseases and the TME. Since the discovery
of the Warburg effect, glycolysis and lactate production are no
longer considered speciﬁc to hypoxia, which better explains
disease heterogeneity. This recognition has also greatly improved
the understanding of inﬂammatory diseases and cancer. Advances
in research have revealed the metabolic regulation of cell
function, the adaptability of cells to different environments, and
the feedback regulation of metabolism by metabolites. The
breakthrough in discovering the epigenetic function of lactate
as a substrate of histone Kla seems to represent a fulcrum of
metabolism and gene regulation.
PTMs are important epigenetic mechanisms that regulate cell
function. With the rapid development of high-resolution MS
technology in recent years, various novel acylation pathways have
been identiﬁed in succession, including formylation, propionyla-
tion,
butyrylation,
crotonylation,
2-hydroxyisobutyrylation,
β-hydroxybutyrylation (bhb), succinylation, malonylation, glutar-
ylation, benzoylation, and lactylation. Among the known classical
HATs, p300/CBP has been identiﬁed as a mediator of the most
diverse acyltransferase activities325. Given the functional speciﬁcity
of acyl modiﬁcations, what are the main factors that determine
the speciﬁcity and selectivity of p300/CBP activity? In other words,
how does a nonspeciﬁc HAT speciﬁcally catalyze lactylation? First,
dynamic changes in intracellular acyl-CoA concentrations are
clearly involved100. However, since the concentration of acetyl-
CoA is higher than that of other acyl-CoAs in most cases, more
studies are needed to clarify the regulatory mechanisms. Second,
acyltransferase activity differs by organelle, and this preference is
an important factor. For example, recently identiﬁed Kbhb
substrates are more highly concentrated in the nucleus; therefore,
acyltransferases in the nucleus seem to interact preferentially with
Kbhb326. Another interesting question that has yet to be answered
is: what is the relationships among simultaneous different PTMs?
Acylation is realized through cellular metabolites that are acyl
donors, such as acetyl-CoA, succinyl-CoA and lactyl-CoA, and
histone acylation can usually activate transcription and regulate
gene expression327. Previous studies have shown that acetylation
and succinylation show a preference for lysine residues at
different locations in the same protein. However, two or more
different PTMs can often be observed at some of the same lysine
residues, and different modiﬁcations have also been found at
certain sites of proteins in the central metabolic pathway328. For
example, in Glis1-induced histone modiﬁcation, p300 has been
shown to increase both the acetylation of H3K27 and the
lactylation of H3K18 in a second wave of PTMs at pluripotent
gene promoters, which activates gene expression and facilitates
somatic reprogramming98. Moreover, studies of Kla in rice have
found other types of acylation simultaneously with lactylation on
the same lysine residues of the same proteins, suggesting the
potential for crosstalk between these modiﬁcations329. These
results indicate coordinated interactions between different PTMs
in cells. In fact, it has been proposed that two different types of
PTMs target different lysine residues or that PTM machineries
compete to modify the same lysine. However, the mechanism
through
which
different
acyl
modiﬁcations
coordinate
and
coregulate cell physiology and biochemistry has not been clariﬁed
in vivo or in vitro. In some cases, PTMs can be established in a
nonenzymatic manner330. Notably, the enzymatic and none-
nzymatic deposition of the same PTM is coordinated. Organelles
may play
a
decisive
role
in
the
way
in which
different
modiﬁcations are rendered, and nonenzymatic regulation has
been
proposed
as
the
main
mechanism
of
mitochondrial
acetylation331.
Interestingly,
the
regulation
of
cell
function
through the same modiﬁcation may involve a division of labor
between enzymatic and nonenzymatic regulators. Nonenzymatic
lactylation is enriched through the glycolysis pathway, which can
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
16
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 17 (native) -----
inhibit enzymatic activity and reduce glycolysis metabolites102,
while enzyme-regulated lactylation is enriched in inﬂammatory
pathways and can regulate inﬂammatory homeostasis16. Unfortu-
nately, it remains unknown whether this division of labor is an
accurate description or whether the limited number of related
studies has led to an inaccurate understanding. In general, the
complexity of PTMs is far beyond our current understanding, and
researchers’ knowledge of PTMs is currently limited. However,
recent studies have provided insight into some aspects of PTMs
and suggested worthwhile future directions of exploration in the
ﬁeld of life science.
Kla in tumor tissues generally promotes tumor immune
evasion by inducing the anti-inﬂammatory phenotype of TAMs.
Moreover, it may directly regulate oncogene expression to
promote tumor growth, metastasis, and invasion. Lactylation also
regulates gene expression in macrophages, maintains immune
homeostasis, and plays a vital role in inﬂammation, repair, and
wound healing. Therefore, lactylation holds great potential as a
therapeutic target in inﬂammation, cancer, and systemic diseases
caused by immunosuppression. Furthermore, lactylation also
plays a potential role in regulating neuronal excitation. However,
the speciﬁc underlying mechanism leading to such neuronal
excitation
remains
unexplored.
The
function
and
speciﬁc
mechanisms of lactylation and its regulatory enzymes in exercise,
lipolysis, neuroprotection, angiogenesis, and other aspects also
need to be investigated, and these data will provide new
diagnostic and treatment strategies for many chronic diseases,
such as atherosclerosis and AD. Speciﬁcally, studies have
revealed the existence and function of nonhistone Kla in
plants329,332, and Kla has considerable potential as a target for
development in agriculture.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Jingjie Biotechnology Co., LTD., for providing technical support for the
manuscript. This work was supported by The National Natural Science Foundation of
China (grant no. 81870331), The Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province
(grant no. ZR2020MH045), and The Qingdao Municipal Science and Technology
Bureau Project (grant no. 21-1-4-rkjk-12-nsh).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
T.Y., Z.W., and Y.Y. designed the study. X.L., X.L., and X.X. collated the data, carried out
the data analyses, and wrote the initial draft of the manuscript. X.L. and Y.Y.
contributed to drafting the manuscript. T.Y., X.L., Y.Y., T.Z., Y.Z., P.L., B.Z., and Z.W.
reviewed and approved the manuscript. All authors read and approved the ﬁnal
manuscript.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
REFERENCES
1. Ferguson, B. S. et al. Lactate metabolism: Historical context, prior mis-
interpretations, and current understanding. Eur. J. Appl Physiol. 118, 691–728
(2018).
2. Brooks, G. A. Lactate shuttles in nature. Biochem Soc. Trans. 30, 258–264 (2002).
3. Brooks, G. A. Cell-cell and intracellular lactate shuttles. J. Physiol. 587, 5591–5600
(2009).
4. Daw, C. C. et al. Lactate elicits ER-mitochondrial Mg(2+) dynamics to integrate
cellular metabolism. Cell 183, 474–489.e417 (2020).
5. Zhao, Y. et al. HCAR1/MCT1 regulates tumor ferroptosis through the lactate-
mediated AMPK-SCD1 activity and its therapeutic implications. Cell Rep. 33,
108487 (2020).
6. Brown, T. P. & Ganapathy, V. Lactate/GPR81 signaling and proton motive force in
cancer: Role in angiogenesis, immune escape, nutrition, and Warburg phe-
nomenon. Pharm. Ther. 206, 107451 (2020).
7. Felmlee, M. A. et al. Monocarboxylate transporters (SLC16): Function, regulation,
and role in health and disease. Pharm. Rev. 72, 466–485 (2020).
8. Liberti, M. V. & Locasale, J. W. The Warburg effect: How does it beneﬁt cancer
cells? Trends Biochem. Sci. 41, 211–218 (2016).
9. Vaupel, P. & Multhoff, G. Revisiting the Warburg effect: Historical dogma versus
current understanding. J. Physiol. 599, 1745–1757 (2021).
10. Li, X. et al. Mitochondria-translocated PGK1 functions as a protein kinase to
coordinate glycolysis and the TCA cycle in tumorigenesis. Mol. Cell 61, 705–719
(2016).
11. Li, M. et al. DDIT3 directs a dual mechanism to balance glycolysis and oxidative
phosphorylation during glutamine deprivation. Adv. Sci. 8, e2003732 (2021).
12. Teng, R. et al. HSP60 silencing promotes Warburg-like phenotypes and switches
the mitochondrial function from ATP production to biosynthesis in ccRCC cells.
Redox Biol. 24, 101218 (2019).
13. Certo, M. et al. Lactate modulation of immune responses in inﬂammatory versus
tumour microenvironments. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 21, 151–161 (2021).
14. Chen, Z., Liu, M., Li, L. & Chen, L. Involvement of the Warburg effect in non-
tumor diseases processes. J. Cell Physiol. 233, 2839–2849 (2018).
15. Dabral, S. et al. A RASSF1A-HIF1alpha loop drives Warburg effect in cancer and
pulmonary hypertension. Nat. Commun. 10, 2130 (2019).
16. Zhang, D. et al. Metabolic regulation of gene expression by histone lactylation.
Nature 574, 575–580 (2019).
17. Tong, Y. et al. SUCLA2-coupled regulation of GLS succinylation and activity
counteracts oxidative stress in tumor cells. Mol. Cell 81, 2303–2316 e2308
(2021).
18. Guo, Y. et al. NF- kappa B/HDAC1/SREBP1c pathway mediates the inﬂammation
signal in progression of hepatic steatosis. Acta Pharm. Sin. B 10, 825–836 (2020).
19. Lv, L. et al. Acetylation targets the M2 isoform of pyruvate kinase for degra-
dation through chaperone-mediated autophagy and promotes tumor growth.
Mol. Cell 42, 719–730 (2011).
20. Galvan-Pena, S. et al. Malonylation of GAPDH is an inﬂammatory signal in
macrophages. Nat. Commun. 10, 338 (2019).
21. Harmer, A. R. et al. Sprint training increases muscle oxidative metabolism during
high-intensity exercise in patients with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 31,
2097–2102 (2008).
22. Levy, B. et al. Relation between muscle Na+K+ATPase activity and raised lactate
concentrations in septic shock: a prospective study. Lancet 365, 871–875 (2005).
23. Fantin, V., St-Pierre, J. & Leder, P. Attenuation of LDH-A expression uncovers a
link between glycolysis, mitochondrial physiology, and tumor maintenance.
Cancer Cell 9, 425–434 (2006).
24. Bennis, Y. et al. A study of associations between plasma metformin con-
centration, lactic acidosis, and mortality in an emergency hospitalization con-
text. Crit. Care Med. 48, e1194–e1202 (2020).
25. Jha, M., Lee, I. & Suk, K. Metabolic reprogramming by the pyruvate dehy-
drogenase kinase-lactic acid axis: Linking metabolism and diverse neuro-
pathophysiologies. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 68, 1–19 (2016).
26. Soreze, Y. et al. Mutations in human lipoyltransferase gene LIPT1 cause a Leigh
disease with secondary deﬁciency for pyruvate and alpha-ketoglutarate dehy-
drogenase. Orphanet J. Rare Dis. 8, 192 (2013).
27. Luengo, A. et al. Increased demand for NAD relative to ATP drives aerobic
glycolysis. Mol. Cell 81, 691–707.e696 (2021).
28. Emhoff, C. et al. Gluconeogenesis and hepatic glycogenolysis during exercise at
the lactate threshold. J. Appl. Physiol. 114, 297–306 (2013).
29. DeBerardinis, R. J. et al. Beyond aerobic glycolysis: Transformed cells can engage
in glutamine metabolism that exceeds the requirement for protein and
nucleotide synthesis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 19345–19350 (2007).
30. Halestrap, A. P. The SLC16 gene family-structure, role, and regulation in health
and disease. Mol. Asp. Med. 34, 337–349 (2013).
31. Madaan, A. et al. Lactate produced during labor modulates uterine inﬂamma-
tion via GPR81 (HCA). Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 216, 60.e61–60.e17 (2017).
32. Sun, Z. et al. Activation of GPR81 by lactate inhibits oscillatory shear stress-
induced endothelial inﬂammation by activating the expression of KLF2. IUBMB
Life 71, 2010–2019 (2019).
33. Wu, G. et al. The lactate receptor GPR81 mediates hepatic lipid metabolism and
the therapeutic effect of metformin on experimental NAFLDs. Eur. J. Pharmacol.
924, 174959 (2022).
34. Laroche, S. et al. Participation of L-lactate and its receptor HCAR1/GPR81 in
neurovisual development. Cells 10, 1640 (2021).
35. Lu, J., Tan, M. & Cai, Q. The Warburg effect in tumor progression: Mitochondrial
oxidative metabolism as an anti-metastasis mechanism. Cancer Lett. 356,
156–164 (2015).
36. Rabinowitz, J. & Enerbäck, S. Lactate: The ugly duckling of energy metabolism.
Nat. Metab. 2, 566–571 (2020).
37. Dienel, G. A. Brain glucose metabolism: Integration of energetics with function.
Physiol. Rev. 99, 949–1045 (2019).
38. Schurr, A., West, C. A. & Rigor, B. M. Lactate-supported synaptic function in the
rat hippocampal slice preparation. Science 240, 1326–1328 (1988).
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
17
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 18 (native) -----
39. Lhomme, T. et al. Tanycytic networks mediate energy balance by feeding lactate
to glucose-insensitive POMC neurons. J. Clin. Invest. 131, e140521 (2021).
40. Gomez-Valades, A. G. et al. Mitochondrial cristae-remodeling protein OPA1 in
POMC neurons couples Ca(2+) homeostasis with adipose tissue lipolysis. Cell
Metab. 33, 1820–1835.e1829 (2021).
41. Hui, S. et al. Glucose feeds the TCA cycle via circulating lactate. Nature 551,
115–118 (2017).
42. Faubert, B. et al. Lactate metabolism in human lung tumors. Cell 171, 358–371
e359 (2017).
43. Titov, D. V. et al. Complementation of mitochondrial electron transport chain by
manipulation of the NAD+/NADH ratio. Science 352, 231–235 (2016).
44. Ying, W. NAD+/NADH and NADP+/NADPH in cellular functions and cell death:
regulation and biological consequences. Antioxid. Redox Signal 10, 179–206
(2008).
45. Tilton, W. M., Seaman, C., Carriero, D. & Piomelli, S. Regulation of glycolysis in the
erythrocyte: Role of the lactate/pyruvate and NAD/NADH ratios. J. Lab Clin. Med.
118, 146–152 (1991).
46. Quinn, W. J. 3rd et al. Lactate limits T cell proliferation via the NAD(H) redox
state. Cell Rep. 33, 108500 (2020).
47. Wang, C. et al. Malate-aspartate shuttle inhibitor aminooxyacetic acid leads to
decreased intracellular ATP levels and altered cell cycle of C6 glioma cells by
inhibiting glycolysis. Cancer Lett. 378, 1–7 (2016).
48. Luengo, A. et al. Increased demand for NAD(+) relative to ATP drives aerobic
glycolysis. Mol. Cell 81, 691–707 e696 (2021).
49. Patgiri, A. et al. An engineered enzyme that targets circulating lactate to alle-
viate intracellular NADH:NAD(+) imbalance. Nat. Biotechnol. 38, 309–313 (2020).
50. Perry, J. J., Shin, D. S., Getzoff, E. D. & Tainer, J. A. The structural biochemistry of
the superoxide dismutases. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1804, 245–262 (2010).
51. Shadel, G. S. & Horvath, T. L. Mitochondrial ROS signaling in organismal
homeostasis. Cell 163, 560–569 (2015).
52. Corkey, B. E. & Deeney, J. T. The redox communication network as a regulator of
metabolism. Front. Physiol. 11, 567796 (2020).
53. Yang, S. & Lian, G. ROS and diseases: Role in metabolism and energy supply. Mol.
Cell Biochem. 467, 1–12 (2020).
54. Jia, L. et al. Rheb-regulated mitochondrial pyruvate metabolism of Schwann
cells linked to axon stability. Dev. Cell 56, 2980–2994 e2986 (2021).
55. Benjamin, D. et al. Dual inhibition of the lactate transporters MCT1 and MCT4 is
synthetic lethal with metformin due to NAD+depletion in cancer cells. Cell Rep.
25, 3047–3058 e3044 (2018).
56. Hoy, A. J., Nagarajan, S. R. & Butler, L. M. Tumour fatty acid metabolism in the
context of therapy resistance and obesity. Nat. Rev. Cancer 21, 753–766 (2021).
57. Pucino, V., Bombardieri, M., Pitzalis, C. & Mauro, C. Lactate at the crossroads of
metabolism, inﬂammation, and autoimmunity. Eur. J. Immunol. 47, 14–21 (2017).
58. Pucino, V. et al. Lactate buildup at the site of chronic inﬂammation promotes
disease by inducing CD4(+) T cell metabolic rewiring. Cell Metab. 30, 1055–1074
e1058 (2019).
59. Liu, L. et al. The Glia-neuron lactate shuttle and elevated ROS promote lipid
synthesis in neurons and lipid droplet accumulation in glia via APOE/D. Cell
Metab. 26, 719–737.e716 (2017).
60. Jin, E. S., Sherry, A. D. & Malloy, C. R. Lactate contributes to glyceroneogenesis
and glyconeogenesis in skeletal muscle by reversal of pyruvate kinase. J. Biol.
Chem. 290, 30486–30497 (2015).
61. Lund, J. et al. Utilization of lactic acid in human myotubes and interplay with
glucose and fatty acid metabolism. Sci. Rep. 8, 9814 (2018).
62. San-Millan, I. & Brooks, G. A. Assessment of metabolic ﬂexibility by means of
measuring blood lactate, fat, and carbohydrate oxidation responses to exercise
in professional endurance athletes and less-ﬁt individuals. Sports Med. 48,
467–479 (2018).
63. de Boer, E. et al. Decreased fatty acid oxidation and altered lactate production
during exercise in patients with post-acute COVID-19 syndrome. Am. J. Respir.
Crit. Care Med. 205, 126–129 (2022).
64. Fritzen, A. M., Lundsgaard, A. M. & Kiens, B. Tuning fatty acid oxidation in
skeletal muscle with dietary fat and exercise. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 16, 683–696
(2020).
65. Wang, T. et al. Acetyl-CoA from inﬂammation-induced fatty acids oxidation
promotes hepatic malate-aspartate shuttle activity and glycolysis. Am. J. Physiol.
Endocrinol. Metab. 315, E496–E510, (2018).
66. Brooks, G. A. The science and translation of lactate shuttle theory. Cell Metab. 27,
757–785 (2018).
67. Wasserman, K. et al. Lactate, pyruvate, and lactate-to-pyruvate ratio during
exercise and recovery. J. Appl Physiol. 59, 935–940 (1985).
68. Brooks, G. J. C. M. The science and translation of lactate shuttle theory. Cell
Metab. 27, 757–785, (2018).
69. Sahlin, K., Fernstrom, M., Svensson, M. & Tonkonogi, M. No evidence of an
intracellular lactate shuttle in rat skeletal muscle. J. Physiol. 541, 569–574 (2002).
70. Hashimoto, T. et al. Evidence for the mitochondrial lactate oxidation complex in
rat neurons: demonstration of an essential component of brain lactate shuttles.
PLoS One 3, e2915 (2008).
71. Hashimoto, T. & Brooks, G. A. Mitochondrial lactate oxidation complex and an
adaptive role for lactate production. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 40, 486–494
(2008).
72. Hashimoto, T., Hussien, R. & Brooks, G. A. Colocalization of MCT1, CD147, and
LDH in mitochondrial inner membrane of L6 muscle cells: evidence of a mito-
chondrial lactate oxidation complex. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 290,
E1237–E1244 (2006).
73. Brooks, G. A. et al. Decreased reliance on lactate during exercise after accli-
matization to 4300 m. J. Appl Physiol. 71, 333–341 (1991).
74. Brooks, G. A. & Gaesser, G. A. End points of lactate and glucose metabolism after
exhausting exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. Respir. Environ. Exerc Physiol. 49, 1057–1069
(1980).
75. Brooks, G. A. Mammalian fuel utilization during sustained exercise. Comp. Bio-
chem. Physiol. B Biochem. Mol. Biol. 120, 89–107 (1998).
76. Brooks, G. A. Role of the heart in lactate shuttling. Front. Nutr. 8, 663560 (2021).
77. Gizak, A., McCubrey, J. A. & Rakus, D. Cell-to-cell lactate shuttle operates in heart
and is important in age-related heart failure. Aging 12, 3388–3406 (2020).
78. Sun, Y. et al. Modulation of the astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle system con-
tributes to neuroprotective action of ﬁbroblast growth factor 21. Theranostics
10, 8430–8445 (2020).
79. Bisetto, S. et al. New insights into the lactate shuttle: Role of MCT4 in the
modulation of the exercise capacity. iScience 22, 507–518 (2019).
80. Sheikh-Hamad, D. Hints for a kidney lactate shuttle and lactomone. Am. J.
Physiol. Ren. Physiol. 320, F1028–F1029 (2021).
81. Brooks, G. A. The tortuous path of lactate shuttle discovery: From cinders and
boards to the lab and ICU. J. Sport Health Sci. 9, 446–460 (2020).
82. Irizarry-Caro, R. A. et al. TLR signaling adapter BCAP regulates inﬂammatory to
reparatory macrophage transition by promoting histone lactylation. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 117, 30628–30638 (2020).
83. Troutman, T. D. et al. Role for B-cell adapter for PI3K (BCAP) as a signaling
adapter linking Toll-like receptors (TLRs) to serine/threonine kinases PI3K/Akt.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 273–278 (2012).
84. Matsumura, T. et al. Identiﬁcation of BCAP-(L) as a negative regulator of the TLR
signaling-induced production of IL-6 and IL-10 in macrophages by tyrosine
phosphoproteomics. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 400, 265–270 (2010).
85. Sun, S. et al. Lactic acid-producing probiotic saccharomyces cerevisiae attenu-
ates ulcerative colitis via suppressing macrophage pyroptosis and modulating
gut microbiota. Front. Immunol. 12, 777665 (2021).
86. Cui, H. et al. Lung myoﬁbroblasts promote macrophage proﬁbrotic activity
through lactate-induced histone lactylation. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 64,
115–125 (2021).
87. Pan, R. Y. et al. Positive feedback regulation of microglial glucose metabolism by
histone H4 lysine 12 lactylation in Alzheimer’s disease. Cell Metab. 34, 634–648
e636 (2022).
88. Yu, J. et al. Histone lactylation drives oncogenesis by facilitating m(6)A reader
protein YTHDF2 expression in ocular melanoma. Genome Biol. 22, 85 (2021).
89. Smith, E. A. & Hodges, H. C. The spatial and genomic hierarchy of tumor eco-
systems revealed by single-cell technologies. Trends Cancer 5, 411–425 (2019).
90. Jiang, J. et al. Lactate modulates cellular metabolism through histone
lactylation-mediated gene expression in non-small cell lung cancer. Front. Oncol.
11, 647559 (2021).
91. Yang, K. et al. Lactate promotes macrophage HMGB1 lactylation, acetylation,
and exosomal release in polymicrobial sepsis. Cell Death Differ. 29, 133–146
(2022).
92. Xiong, J. et al. Lactylation-driven METTL3-mediated RNA m(6)A modiﬁcation
promotes immunosuppression of tumor-inﬁltrating myeloid cells. Mol. Cell 82,
1660–1677 e1610 (2022).
93. Caielli, S. et al. Erythroid mitochondrial retention triggers myeloid-dependent
type I interferon in human SLE. Cell 184, 4464–4479 e4419 (2021).
94. Hagihara, H. et al. Protein lactylation induced by neural excitation. Cell Rep. 37,
109820 (2021).
95. Xu, X. et al. Autophagic feedback-mediated degradation of IKKalpha requires
CHK1- and p300/CBP-dependent acetylation of p53. J. Cell Sci. 133, jcs246868
(2020).
96. Manickavinayaham, S. et al. E2F1 acetylation directs p300/CBP-mediated histone
acetylation at DNA double-strand breaks to facilitate repair. Nat. Commun. 10,
4951 (2019).
97. Waddell, A. et al. Pharmacological inhibition of CBP/p300 blocks estrogen
receptor alpha (ERalpha) function through suppressing enhancer H3K27 acet-
ylation in luminal breast cancer. Cancers 13, 2799 (2021).
98. Li, L. et al. Glis1 facilitates induction of pluripotency via an epigenome-
metabolome-epigenome signalling cascade. Nat. Metab. 2, 882–892 (2020).
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
18
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 19 (native) -----
99. Moreno-Yruela, C. et al. Class I histone deacetylases (HDAC1-3) are histone lysine
delactylases. Sci. Adv. 8, eabi6696 (2022).
100. Mews, P. et al. Acetyl-CoA synthetase regulates histone acetylation and hip-
pocampal memory. Nature 546, 381–386 (2017).
101. Zhou, W. et al. TIGAR promotes neural stem cell differentiation through acetyl-
CoA-mediated histone acetylation. Cell Death Dis. 10, 198 (2019).
102. Gaffney, D. O. et al. Non-enzymatic lysine lactoylation of glycolytic enzymes. Cell
Chem. Biol. 27, 206–213.e206 (2020).
103. Rose, I. A. & Nowick, J. S. Methylglyoxal synthetase, enol-pyruvaldehyde,
glutathione, and the glyoxalase system. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124, 13047–13052
(2002).
104. Rabbani, N., Xue, M. & Thornalley, P. J. Activity, regulation, copy number and
function in the glyoxalase system. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 42, 419–424 (2014).
105. Pasti, A. P. et al. Human lactate dehydrogenase A undergoes allosteric transi-
tions under pH conditions inducing the dissociation of the tetrameric enzyme.
Biosci. Rep. 42, BSR20212654 (2022).
106. Stolberg, L. et al. d-Lactic acidosis due to abnormal gut ﬂora: Diagnosis and
treatment of two cases. N. Engl. J. Med. 306, 1344–1348 (1982).
107. Ewaschuk, J. B., Naylor, J. M. & Zello, G. A. D-lactate in human and ruminant
metabolism. J. Nutr. 135, 1619–1625 (2005).
108. de Bari, L. et al. D-Lactate transport and metabolism in rat liver mitochondria.
Biochem. J. 365, 391–403 (2002).
109. Flick, M. J. & Konieczny, S. F. Identiﬁcation of putative mammalian D-lactate
dehydrogenase enzymes. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 295, 910–916
(2002).
110. de Vrese, M., Koppenhoefer, B. & Barth, C. A. D-lactic acid metabolism after an
oral load of DL-lactate. Clin. Nutr. 9, 23–28 (1990).
111. Oh, M. S. et al. Metabolic utilization and renal handling of D-lactate in men.
Metabolism 34, 621–625 (1985).
112. Schmitt, M. & Greten, F. R. The inﬂammatory pathogenesis of colorectal cancer.
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 21, 653–667 (2021).
113. Rowley, A. H. Understanding SARS-CoV-2-related multisystem inﬂammatory
syndrome in children. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 20, 453–454 (2020).
114. Frangogiannis, N. G. The inﬂammatory response in myocardial injury, repair, and
remodelling. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 11, 255–265 (2014).
115. Querol, L., Devaux, J., Rojas-Garcia, R. & Illa, I. Autoantibodies in chronic
inﬂammatory neuropathies: Diagnostic and therapeutic implications. Nat. Rev.
Neurol. 13, 533–547 (2017).
116. Gao, B., Ahmad, M. F., Nagy, L. E. & Tsukamoto, H. Inﬂammatory pathways in
alcoholic steatohepatitis. J. Hepatol. 70, 249–259 (2019).
117. Afonina, I. S., Zhong, Z., Karin, M. & Beyaert, R. Limiting inﬂammation-the
negative regulation of NF-kappaB and the NLRP3 inﬂammasome. Nat. Immunol.
18, 861–869 (2017).
118. Wullaert, A., Bonnet, M. C. & Pasparakis, M. NF-kappaB in the regulation of
epithelial homeostasis and inﬂammation. Cell Res. 21, 146–158 (2011).
119. Hinz, M., Arslan, S. C. & Scheidereit, C. It takes two to tango: IkappaBs, the
multifunctional partners of NF-kappaB. Immunol. Rev. 246, 59–76 (2012).
120. Miao, F., Shan, C. & Ning, D. Walnut oil alleviates LPS-induced intestinal epithelial
cells injury by inhibiting TLR4/MyD88/NF-kappaB pathway activation. J. Food
Biochem. 45, e13955 (2021).
121. Qi, S. et al. Silencing of PTX3 alleviates LPS-induced inﬂammatory pain by
regulating TLR4/NF-kappaB signaling pathway in mice. Biosci. Rep. 40,
BSR20194208 (2020).
122. Abebayehu, D. et al. Lactic acid suppresses IgE-mediated mast cell function
in vitro and in vivo. Cell Immunol. 341, 103918 (2019).
123. Peter, K. et al. Lactic acid delays the inﬂammatory response of human mono-
cytes. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 457, 412–418 (2015).
124. Yang, K. et al. Lactate suppresses macrophage pro-inﬂammatory response to
LPS stimulation by inhibition of YAP and NF-kappaB activation via GPR81-
mediated signaling. Front. Immunol. 11, 587913 (2020).
125. Arango Duque, G. & Descoteaux, A. Macrophage cytokines: Involvement in
immunity and infectious diseases. Front. Immunol. 5, 491 (2014).
126. Ubil, E. et al. Tumor-secreted Pros1 inhibits macrophage M1 polarization to
reduce antitumor immune response. J. Clin. Invest. 128, 2356–2369 (2018).
127. Sharif, O., Brunner, J. S., Vogel, A. & Schabbauer, G. Macrophage rewiring by
nutrient associated PI3K dependent pathways. Front. Immunol. 10, 2002 (2019).
128. Galvan-Pena, S. & O’Neill, L. A. Metabolic reprograming in macrophage polar-
ization. Front. Immunol. 5, 420 (2014).
129. Gharib, S. A. et al. Transcriptional and functional diversity of human macrophage
repolarization. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 143, 1536–1548 (2019).
130. Kumar, V. Targeting macrophage immunometabolism: Dawn in the darkness of
sepsis. Int. Immunopharmacol. 58, 173–185 (2018).
131. Costa Leite, T. et al. Lactate favours the dissociation of skeletal muscle 6-
phosphofructo-1-kinase tetramers down-regulating the enzyme and muscle
glycolysis. Biochem. J. 408, 123–130 (2007).
132. Zhang, J. et al. Endothelial lactate controls muscle regeneration from ischemia
by inducing M2-like macrophage polarization. Cell Metab. 31, 1136–1153 e1137
(2020).
133. Selleri, S. et al. Human mesenchymal stromal cell-secreted lactate induces M2-
macrophage
differentiation
by metabolic
reprogramming.
Oncotarget
7,
30193–30210 (2016).
134. Kolkhir, P. et al. Understanding human mast cells: Lesson from therapies for
allergic and non-allergic diseases. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 22, 294–308 (2022).
135. Syed, M. et al. Lactic acid suppresses MRGPRX2 mediated mast cell responses.
Cell Immunol. 368, 104422 (2021).
136. Ranganathan, P. et al. GPR81, a cell-surface receptor for lactate, regulates
intestinal homeostasis and protects mice from experimental colitis. J. Immunol.
200, 1781–1789 (2018).
137. Xu, J. et al. Lactate up-regulates the expression of PD-L1 in kidney and causes
immunosuppression in septic Acute Renal Injury. J. Microbiol. Immunol. Infect.
54, 404–410 (2021).
138. Shan, T. et al. M2TAM subsets altered by lactic acid promote Tcell apoptosis
through the PDL1/PD1 pathway. Oncol. Rep. 44, 1885–1894 (2020).
139. Hoque, R. et al. Lactate reduces liver and pancreatic injury in Toll-like receptor-
and inﬂammasome-mediated inﬂammation via GPR81-mediated suppression of
innate immunity. Gastroenterology 146, 1763–1774 (2014).
140. Caslin, H. L. et al. Lactic acid inhibits lipopolysaccharide-induced mast cell
function by limiting glycolysis and ATP availability. J. Immunol. 203, 453–464
(2019).
141. Rajendran, P. et al. The multifaceted link between inﬂammation and human
diseases. J. Cell Physiol. 233, 6458–6471 (2018).
142. Droge, W., Roth, S., Altmann, A. & Mihm, S. Regulation of T-cell functions by
L-lactate. Cell Immunol. 108, 405–416 (1987).
143. Haas, R. et al. Lactate regulates metabolic and pro-inﬂammatory circuits in
control of T cell migration and effector functions. PLoS Biol. 13, e1002202
(2015).
144. Souto-Carneiro, M. M. et al. Effect of increased lactate dehydrogenase A activity
and aerobic glycolysis
on the proinﬂammatory proﬁle of autoimmune
CD8+T cells in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheumatol. 72, 2050–2064 (2020).
145. Xie, N. et al. Metabolic characterization and RNA proﬁling reveal glycolytic
dependence of proﬁbrotic phenotype of alveolar macrophages in lung ﬁbrosis.
Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol. 313, L834–L844 (2017).
146. Reyfman, P. A. et al. Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of human lung provides
insights into the pathobiology of pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med.
199, 1517–1536 (2019).
147. Imtiyaz, H. Z. et al. Hypoxia-inducible factor 2alpha regulates macrophage
function in mouse models of acute and tumor inﬂammation. J. Clin. Invest. 120,
2699–2714 (2010).
148. Carmona-Fontaine, C. et al. Metabolic origins of spatial organization in the
tumor microenvironment. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 2934–2939 (2017).
149. De Vlaeminck, Y. et al. Single-domain antibody fusion proteins can target and
shuttle functional proteins into macrophage mannose receptor expressing
macrophages. J. Control Release 299, 107–120 (2019).
150. Guo, L. et al. Induction of breast cancer stem cells by M1 macrophages through
Lin-28B-let-7-HMGA2 axis. Cancer Lett. 452, 213–225 (2019).
151. Jackute, J. et al. Distribution of M1 and M2 macrophages in tumor islets and stroma
in relation to prognosis of non-small cell lung cancer. BMC Immunol. 19, 3 (2018).
152. Chen, Y., Zhang, S., Wang, Q. & Zhang, X. Tumor-recruited M2 macrophages
promote gastric and breast cancer metastasis via M2 macrophage-secreted
CHI3L1 protein. J. Hematol. Oncol. 10, 36 (2017).
153. Li, W. et al. Gastric cancer-derived mesenchymal stromal cells trigger M2 mac-
rophage polarization that promotes metastasis and EMT in gastric cancer. Cell
Death Dis. 10, 918 (2019).
154. Zhao, S. et al. Tumor-derived exosomal miR-934 induces macrophage M2
polarization to promote liver metastasis of colorectal cancer. J. Hematol. Oncol.
13, 156 (2020).
155. Mu, X. et al. Tumor-derived lactate induces M2 macrophage polarization via the
activation of the ERK/STAT3 signaling pathway in breast cancer. Cell Cycle 17,
428–438 (2018).
156. Colegio, O. R. et al. Functional polarization of tumour-associated macrophages
by tumour-derived lactic acid. Nature 513, 559–563 (2014).
157. Peters, A. et al. Th17 cells induce ectopic lymphoid follicles in central nervous
system tissue inﬂammation. Immunity 35, 986–996 (2011).
158. Angelin, A. et al. Foxp3 reprograms T cell metabolism to function in low-glucose,
high-lactate environments. Cell Metab. 25, 1282–1293 e1287 (2017).
159. Ivashkiv, L. B. The hypoxia-lactate axis tempers inﬂammation. Nat. Rev. Immunol.
20, 85–86 (2020).
160. Errea, A. et al. Lactate inhibits the pro-inﬂammatory response and metabolic
reprogramming in murine macrophages in a GPR81-independent manner. PLoS
One 11, e0163694 (2016).
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
19
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 20 (native) -----
161. Samuvel, D. J. et al. Lactate boosts TLR4 signaling and NF-kappaB pathway-
mediated gene transcription in macrophages via monocarboxylate transporters
and MD-2 up-regulation. J. Immunol. 182, 2476–2484 (2009).
162. Fischbeck, A. J. et al. Tumor lactic acidosis: Protecting tumor by inhibiting
cytotoxic activity through motility arrest and bioenergetic silencing. Front.
Oncol. 10, 589434 (2020).
163. Watson, M. J. et al. Metabolic support of tumour-inﬁltrating regulatory T cells by
lactic acid. Nature 591, 645–651 (2021).
164. Paolini, L. et al. Lactic acidosis together with GM-CSF and M-CSF induces human
macrophages toward an inﬂammatory protumor phenotype. Cancer Immunol.
Res. 8, 383–395 (2020).
165. Fernandez, S. F. et al. Low pH environmental stress inhibits LPS and LTA-
stimulated proinﬂammatory cytokine production in rat alveolar macrophages.
Biomed. Res. Int. 2013, 742184 (2013).
166. Gottfried, E. et al. Tumor-derived lactic acid modulates dendritic cell activation
and antigen expression. Blood 107, 2013–2021 (2006).
167. Noormandi, A., Khalili, H., Mohammadi, M. & Abdollahi, A. Effect of magnesium
supplementation on lactate clearance in critically ill patients with severe sepsis:
A randomized clinical trial. Eur. J. Clin. Pharm. 76, 175–184 (2020).
168. Wani, S. J. et al. Combination of vitamin C, thiamine and hydrocortisone added
to standard treatment in the management of sepsis: Results from an open label
randomised controlled clinical trial and a review of the literature. Infect. Dis. 52,
271–278 (2020).
169. Zhang, Y. et al. Efﬁcacy of continuous renal replacement on acute renal injury
developed in severe sepsis. J. Biol. Regul. Homeost. Agents 33, 525–530 (2019).
170. Jones, A. E. et al. Lactate clearance vs central venous oxygen saturation as
goals of early sepsis therapy: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 303, 739–746
(2010).
171. Lee, S. M. et al. Lactate clearance and vasopressor seem to be predictors for
mortality in severe sepsis patients with lactic acidosis supplementing sodium
bicarbonate: A retrospective analysis. PLoS One 10, e0145181 (2015).
172. Zhou, X. et al. Use of stepwise lactate kinetics-oriented hemodynamic therapy
could improve the clinical outcomes of patients with sepsis-associated hyper-
lactatemia. Crit. Care 21, 33 (2017).
173. Chen, H. et al. Early lactate-guided resuscitation of elderly septic patients. J.
Intensive Care Med. 37, 686–692 (2022).
174. During, J. et al. Lactate, lactate clearance and outcome after cardiac arrest: A
post-hoc analysis of the TTM-Trial. Acta Anaesthesiol. Scand. 62, 1436–1442
(2018).
175. Besnier, E. et al. Hypertonic sodium lactate improves microcirculation, cardiac
function, and inﬂammation in a rat model of sepsis. Crit. Care 24, 354 (2020).
176. van Hall, G. Lactate kinetics in human tissues at rest and during exercise. Acta
Physiol. 199, 499–508 (2010).
177. Dienel, G. A. Brain lactate metabolism: The discoveries and the controversies. J.
Cereb. Blood Flow. Metab. 32, 1107–1138 (2012).
178. Halestrap, A. P. The monocarboxylate transporter family-Structure and func-
tional characterization. IUBMB Life 64, 1–9 (2012).
179. Descalzi, G. et al. Lactate from astrocytes fuels learning-induced mRNA trans-
lation in excitatory and inhibitory neurons. Commun. Biol. 2, 247 (2019).
180. Veloz Castillo, M. F., Magistretti, P. J. & Cali, C. l-Lactate: Food for thoughts,
memory, and behavior. Metabolites 11, 548 (2021).
181. Yang, J. et al. Lactate promotes plasticity gene expression by potentiating
NMDA signaling in neurons. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 12228–12233 (2014).
182. Wang, J. et al. Brain endothelial cells maintain lactate homeostasis and control
adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Cell Stem Cell 25, 754–767 e759 (2019).
183. Alberini, C. M. et al. Astrocyte glycogen and lactate: New insights into learning
and memory mechanisms. Glia 66, 1244–1262 (2018).
184. Lu, W. T. et al. Curcumin ameliorates memory deﬁcits by enhancing lactate
content and MCT2 expression in APP/PS1 transgenic mouse model of Alzhei-
mer’s disease. Anat. Rec. 302, 332–338 (2019).
185. El Hayek, L. et al. Lactate mediates the effects of exercise on learning and
memory through SIRT1-dependent activation of hippocampal brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF). J. Neurosci. 39, 2369–2382 (2019).
186. Morland, C. et al. The lactate receptor, G-protein-coupled receptor 81/hydro-
xycarboxylic acid receptor 1: Expression and action in brain. J. Neurosci. Res. 93,
1045–1055 (2015).
187. Wilkinson, H. N. & Hardman, M. J. Wound healing: Cellular mechanisms and
pathological outcomes. Open Biol. 10, 200223 (2020).
188. Haller, H. L. et al. Oxygen, pH, lactate, and metabolism—How old knowledge
and new insights might be combined for new wound treatment. Medicina 57,
1190 (2021).
189. DeBerardinis, R. J. & Chandel, N. S. We need to talk about the Warburg effect.
Nat. Metab. 2, 127–129 (2020).
190. Trabold, O. et al. Lactate and oxygen constitute a fundamental regulatory
mechanism in wound healing. Wound Repair Regen. 11, 504–509 (2003).
191. Hunt, T. K., Aslam, R., Hussain, Z. & Beckert, S. Lactate, with oxygen, incites
angiogenesis. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 614, 73–80 (2008).
192. Hunt, T. K. et al. Aerobically derived lactate stimulates revascularization
and tissue repair via redox mechanisms. Antioxid. Redox Signal 9, 1115–1124
(2007).
193. Hunt, T. K., Conolly, W. B., Aronson, S. B. & Goldstein, P. Anaerobic metabolism
and wound healing: an hypothesis for the initiation and cessation of collagen
synthesis in wounds. Am. J. Surg. 135, 328–332 (1978).
194. Milovanova, T. N. et al. Lactate stimulates vasculogenic stem cells via the
thioredoxin system and engages an autocrine activation loop involving
hypoxia-inducible factor 1. Mol. Cell Biol. 28, 6248–6261 (2008).
195. Liu, Q. et al. A Fenton reaction at the endoplasmic reticulum is involved in the
redox control of hypoxia-inducible gene expression. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
101, 4302–4307 (2004).
196. Vural, E. et al. Skin graft take rates, granulation, and epithelialization: Depen-
dence on myeloid cell hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha. Arch. Otolaryngol. Head.
Neck Surg. 136, 720–723 (2010).
197. Savitri, C. et al. M2 macrophage-derived concentrated conditioned media sig-
niﬁcantly improves skin wound healing. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 19, 617–628
(2022).
198. Zhang, S. M. et al. M2-polarized macrophages mediate wound healing by reg-
ulating connective tissue growth factor via AKT, ERK1/2, and STAT3 signaling
pathways. Mol. Biol. Rep. 48, 6443–6456 (2021).
199. Gu, S. et al. AKT3 deﬁciency in M2 macrophages impairs cutaneous wound
healing by disrupting tissue remodeling. Aging 12, 6928–6946 (2020).
200. Fu, J. et al. Quercetin promotes diabetic wound healing via switching macro-
phages from M1 to M2 polarization. J. Surg. Res. 246, 213–223 (2020).
201. Vagesjo, E. et al. Accelerated wound healing in mice by on-site production and
delivery of CXCL12 by transformed lactic acid bacteria. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
115, 1895–1900 (2018).
202. Ohnstedt, E. et al. Accelerated wound healing in minipigs by on-site production
and delivery of CXCL12 by transformed lactic acid bacteria. Pharmaceutics 14,
229 (2022).
203. Davis, F. M. & Gallagher, K. Time heals all wounds… but wounds heal faster with
lactobacillus. Cell Host Microbe 23, 432–434 (2018).
204. Kinney, H. C. et al. Hypoxic-ischemic brain injury in infants with congenital heart
disease dying after cardiac surgery. Acta Neuropathol. 110, 563–578 (2005).
205. Baartscheer, A. et al. Increased Na+/H+-exchange activity is the cause of
increased [Na+]i and underlies disturbed calcium handling in the rabbit pres-
sure and volume overload heart failure model. Cardiovasc. Res. 57, 1015–1024
(2003).
206. Slepkov, E. R., Rainey, J. K., Sykes, B. D. & Fliegel, L. Structural and functional
analysis of the Na+/H+exchanger. Biochem. J. 401, 623–633 (2007).
207. Andersson, A. K., Ronnback, L. & Hansson, E. Lactate induces tumour necrosis
factor-alpha, interleukin-6 and interleukin-1beta release in microglial and
astroglial-enriched primary cultures. J. Neurochem. 93, 1327–1333 (2005).
208. Shen, Z. et al. Inhibition of G protein-coupled receptor 81 (GPR81) protects
against ischemic brain injury. CNS Neurosci. Ther. 21, 271–279 (2015).
209. Berthet, C., Castillo, X., Magistretti, P. J. & Hirt, L. New evidence of neuropro-
tection by lactate after transient focal cerebral ischaemia: Extended beneﬁt after
intracerebroventricular injection and efﬁcacy of intravenous administration.
Cerebrovasc. Dis. 34, 329–335 (2012).
210. Tassinari, I. D. et al. Lactate administration reduces brain injury and ameliorates
behavioral outcomes following neonatal hypoxia-ischemia. Neuroscience 448,
191–205 (2020).
211. Haege, E. R., Huang, H. C. & Huang, C. C. Identiﬁcation of lactate as a cardiac
protectant by inhibiting inﬂammation and cardiac hypertrophy using a zebra-
ﬁsh acute heart failure model. Pharmaceuticals 14, 261 (2021).
212. Molstrom, S. et al. Bedside microdialysis for detection of early brain injury after
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. Sci. Rep. 11, 15871 (2021).
213. Theodoraki, K. et al. Transhepatic lactate gradient in relation to liver ischemia/
reperfusion injury during major hepatectomies. Liver Transpl. 12, 1825–1831
(2006).
214. Marion, D. W. et al. Effect of hyperventilation on extracellular concentrations of
glutamate, lactate, pyruvate, and local cerebral blood ﬂow in patients with
severe traumatic brain injury. Crit. Care Med. 30, 2619–2625 (2002).
215. Frydland, M. et al. Lactate is a prognostic factor in patients admitted with
suspected ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Shock 51, 321–327 (2019).
216. Hajjar, L. A. et al. High lactate levels are predictors of major complications after
cardiac surgery. J. Thorac. Cardiovasc. Surg. 146, 455–460 (2013).
217. Li, B., Chen, R., Huang, R. & Luo, W. Clinical beneﬁt of cardiac ischemic post-
conditioning in corrections of tetralogy of Fallot. Interact. Cardiovasc. Thorac.
Surg. 8, 17–21 (2009).
218. Li, L. et al. TAp73-induced phosphofructokinase-1 transcription promotes the
Warburg effect and enhances cell proliferation. Nat. Commun. 9, 4683 (2018).
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
20
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 21 (native) -----
219. Lunt, S. Y. & Vander Heiden, M. G. Aerobic glycolysis: Meeting the metabolic
requirements of cell proliferation. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 27, 441–464 (2011).
220. Roland, C. L. et al. Cell surface lactate receptor GPR81 is crucial for cancer cell
survival. Cancer Res. 74, 5301–5310 (2014).
221. Brown, T. P. et al. The lactate receptor GPR81 promotes breast cancer growth via
a paracrine mechanism involving antigen-presenting cells in the tumor micro-
environment. Oncogene 39, 3292–3304 (2020).
222. Feng, J. et al. Tumor cell-derived lactate induces TAZ-dependent upregulation of
PD-L1 through GPR81 in human lung cancer cells. Oncogene 36, 5829–5839
(2017).
223. Estrella, V. et al. Acidity generated by the tumor microenvironment drives local
invasion. Cancer Res. 73, 1524–1535 (2013).
224. Parks, S. K., Chiche, J. & Pouyssegur, J. Disrupting proton dynamics and energy
metabolism for cancer therapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer 13, 611–623 (2013).
225. Martinez-Zaguilan, R. et al. pH and drug resistance. I. Functional expression of
plasmalemmal V-type H+-ATPase in drug-resistant human breast carcinoma cell
lines. Biochem. Pharm. 57, 1037–1046 (1999).
226. Wang, H. et al. LAMC2 modulates the acidity of microenvironments to promote
invasion and migration of pancreatic cancer cells via regulating AKT-dependent
NHE1 activity. Exp. Cell Res. 391, 111984 (2020).
227. Mo, L. et al. Shikonin suppresses the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition by
downregulating NHE1 in bladder cancer cells. J. Cancer 12, 6814–6824 (2021).
228. Sun, Z. et al. NHE1 mediates 5-Fu resistance in gastric cancer via STAT3 signaling
pathway. Onco Targets Ther. 13, 8521–8532 (2020).
229. Xie, R. et al. NHE1 is upregulated in gastric cancer and regulates gastric cancer
cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. Oncol. Rep. 37, 1451–1460 (2017).
230. Lee, S. et al. Na(+),HCO3(-)-cotransporter NBCn1 (Slc4a7) accelerates ErbB2-
induced breast cancer development and tumor growth in mice. Oncogene 37,
5569–5584 (2018).
231. Lee, S. et al. Disrupting Na(+), HCO(3)(-)-cotransporter NBCn1 (Slc4a7) delays
murine breast cancer development. Oncogene 35, 2112–2122 (2016).
232. Lauritzen, G. et al. The Na+/H+exchanger NHE1, but not the Na+, HCO3(-)
cotransporter NBCn1, regulates motility of MCF7 breast cancer cells expressing
constitutively active ErbB2. Cancer Lett. 317, 172–183 (2012).
233. De Milito, A. & Fais, S. Tumor acidity, chemoresistance, and proton pump inhi-
bitors. Future Oncol. 1, 779–786 (2005).
234. Flinck, M. et al. The acid-base transport proteins NHE1 and NBCn1 regulate cell
cycle progression in human breast cancer cells. Cell Cycle 17, 1056–1067 (2018).
235. Andersen, A. P. et al. The net acid extruders NHE1, NBCn1, and MCT4 promote
mammary tumor growth through distinct but overlapping mechanisms. Int. J.
Cancer 142, 2529–2542 (2018).
236. Vegran, F. et al. Lactate inﬂux through the endothelial cell monocarboxylate
transporter MCT1 supports an NF-kappaB/IL-8 pathway that drives tumor
angiogenesis. Cancer Res. 71, 2550–2560 (2011).
237. Lee, D. C. et al. A lactate-induced response to hypoxia. Cell 161, 595–609 (2015).
238. Li, L. et al. Hypoxia-induced GBE1 expression promotes tumor progression
through metabolic reprogramming in lung adenocarcinoma. Signal Transduct.
Target Ther. 5, 54 (2020).
239. Park, M. J. et al. HIF1-alpha regulates acinar cell function and response to injury
in mouse pancreas. Gastroenterology 154, 1630–1634.e1633 (2018).
240. Lu, H. et al. Reversible inactivation of HIF-1 prolyl hydroxylases allows cell
metabolism to control basal HIF-1. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 41928–41939 (2005).
241. Vollmann-Zwerenz, A. et al. Tumor cell invasion in glioblastoma. Int. J. Mol. Sci.
21, 1932 (2020).
242. Savagner, P. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions: From cell plasticity to concept
elasticity. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 112, 273–300 (2015).
243. Sahai, E. et al. A framework for advancing our understanding of cancer-
associated ﬁbroblasts. Nat. Rev. Cancer 20, 174–186 (2020).
244. Schulz, M. C., Wagenbrett, L., Schwerdt, G. & Gekle, M. Inﬂuence of extracellular
acidosis on matrix protein homeostasis in tumour cells and ﬁbroblasts. Adv. Exp.
Med. Biol. 1072, 213–217 (2018).
245. Ogunwobi, O. O., Wang, T., Zhang, L. & Liu, C. Cyclooxygenase-2 and Akt
mediate multiple growth-factor-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
human hepatocellular carcinoma. J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 27, 566–578 (2012).
246. Ahn, J. H., Choi, Y. S. & Choi, J. H. Leptin promotes human endometriotic cell
migration
and
invasion
by
up-regulating
MMP-2
through
the
JAK2/
STAT3 signaling pathway. Mol. Hum. Reprod. 21, 792–802 (2015).
247. Ohno, Y. et al. Lactate increases myotube diameter via activation of MEK/ERK
pathway in C2C12 cells. Acta Physiol. 223, e13042 (2018).
248. Lagares-Tena, L. et al. Caveolin-1 promotes Ewing sarcoma metastasis regulat-
ing MMP-9 expression through MAPK/ERK pathway. Oncotarget 7, 56889–56903
(2016).
249. Niu, D. et al. Lactic acid in tumor invasion. Clin. Chim. Acta 522, 61–69 (2021).
250. Boedtkjer, E. & Pedersen, S. F. The acidic tumor microenvironment as a driver of
cancer. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 82, 103–126 (2020).
251. Nakagawa, Y. et al. Effects of extracellular pH and hypoxia on the function and
development of antigen-speciﬁc cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Immunol. Lett. 167,
72–86 (2015).
252. Fischer, K. et al. Inhibitory effect of tumor cell-derived lactic acid on human
T cells. Blood 109, 3812–3819 (2007).
253. Almeida, L. et al. CD4(+) T-cell differentiation and function: Unifying glycolysis,
fatty acid oxidation, polyamines NAD mitochondria. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 148,
16–32 (2021).
254. Peng, M. et al. Aerobic glycolysis promotes T helper 1 cell differentiation
through an epigenetic mechanism. Science 354, 481–484 (2016).
255. Frauwirth, K. A. et al. The CD28 signaling pathway regulates glucose metabo-
lism. Immunity 16, 769–777 (2002).
256. Teijeira, A. et al. Metabolic consequences of T-cell costimulation in anticancer
immunity. Cancer Immunol. Res. 7, 1564–1569 (2019).
257. Xu, K. et al. Glycolysis fuels phosphoinositide 3-kinase signaling to bolster T cell
immunity. Science 371, 405–410 (2021).
258. Mendler, A. N. et al. Tumor lactic acidosis suppresses CTL function by inhibition
of p38 and JNK/c-Jun activation. Int. J. Cancer 131, 633–640 (2012).
259. Calcinotto, A. et al. Modulation of microenvironment acidity reverses anergy in
human and murine tumor-inﬁltrating T lymphocytes. Cancer Res. 72, 2746–2756
(2012).
260. Navarro, F. et al. Overcoming T cell dysfunction in acidic pH to enhance
adoptive T cell transfer immunotherapy. Oncoimmunology 11, 2070337 (2022).
261. Noman, M. Z. et al. PD-L1 is a novel direct target of HIF-1alpha, and its blockade
under hypoxia enhanced MDSC-mediated T cell activation. J. Exp. Med. 211,
781–790 (2014).
262. Bian, Y. et al. Cancer SLC43A2 alters T cell methionine metabolism and histone
methylation. Nature 585, 277–282 (2020).
263. Brand, A. et al. LDHA-associated lactic acid production blunts tumor immuno-
surveillance by T and NK cells. Cell Metab. 24, 657–671 (2016).
264. Chi, H. Regulation and function of mTOR signalling in T cell fate decisions. Nat.
Rev. Immunol. 12, 325–338 (2012).
265. Erra Diaz, F., Dantas, E. & Geffner, J. Unravelling the interplay between extra-
cellular acidosis and immune cells. Mediators Inﬂamm. 2018, 1218297 (2018).
266. Gu, J. et al. Tumor metabolite lactate promotes tumorigenesis by modulating
MOESIN lactylation and enhancing TGF-beta signaling in regulatory T cells. Cell
Rep. 39, 110986 (2022).
267. Gabrilovich, D. I., Ostrand-Rosenberg, S. & Bronte, V. Coordinated regulation of
myeloid cells by tumours. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12, 253–268 (2012).
268. Wang, R. et al. Increased IL-10 mRNA expression in tumor-associated macrophage
correlated with late stage of lung cancer. J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 30, 62 (2011).
269. Pollari, M. et al. PD-L1(+) tumor-associated macrophages and PD-1(+) tumor-
inﬁltrating lymphocytes predict survival in primary testicular lymphoma. Hae-
matologica 103, 1908–1914 (2018).
270. Rodriguez, P. C. et al. Arginase I production in the tumor microenvironment by
mature myeloid cells inhibits T-cell receptor expression and antigen-speciﬁc T-
cell responses. Cancer Res. 64, 5839–5849 (2004).
271. Yang, L. et al. PKM2 regulates the Warburg effect and promotes HMGB1 release
in sepsis. Nat. Commun. 5, 4436 (2014).
272. Wang, S. & Zhang, Y. HMGB1 in inﬂammation and cancer. J. Hematol. Oncol. 13,
116 (2020).
273. Zhang, Q. Y. et al. Autophagy-mediated HMGB1 release promotes gastric cancer
cell survival via RAGE activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2.
Oncol. Rep. 33, 1630–1638 (2015).
274. Pistoia, V. & Pezzolo, A. Involvement of HMGB1 in resistance to tumor vessel-
targeted, monoclonal antibody-based immunotherapy. J. Immunol. Res. 2016,
3142365 (2016).
275. Guan, X., Rodriguez-Cruz, V. & Morris, M. E. Cellular uptake of MCT1 inhibitors
AR-C155858 and AZD3965 and their effects on MCT-mediated transport of
L-lactate in murine 4T1 breast tumor cancer cells. AAPS J. 21, 13 (2019).
276. Vlachostergios, P. J., Oikonomou, K. G., Gibilaro, E. & Apergis, G. Elevated lactic
acid is a negative prognostic factor in metastatic lung cancer. Cancer Biomark.
15, 725–734 (2015).
277. Wei, Y. et al. Prognostic signiﬁcance of serum lactic acid, lactate dehydrogenase,
and albumin levels in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Biomed. Res.
Int. 2018, 1804086 (2018).
278. Walenta, S. et al. High lactate levels predict likelihood of metastases, tumor
recurrence, and restricted patient survival in human cervical cancers. Cancer Res.
60, 916–921 (2000).
279. Matsumura, A. et al. Non-invasive quantiﬁcation of lactate by proton MR
spectroscopy and its clinical applications. Clin. Neurol. Neurosurg. 107, 379–384
(2005).
280. Charles-Edwards, G. D. et al. Non-invasive detection and quantiﬁcation of
human foetal brain lactate in utero by magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Pre-
nat. Diagn. 30, 260–266 (2010).
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
21
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305

----- Page 22 (native) -----
281. Isobe, T. et al. Lactate quantiﬁcation by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy
using a clinical MRI machine: a basic study. Australas. Radio. 51, 330–333 (2007).
282. Wang, Z. J. et al. Hyperpolarized (13)C MRI: State of the art and future directions.
Radiology 291, 273–284 (2019).
283. Cheung, S. M. et al. Lactate concentration in breast cancer using advanced
magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Br. J. Cancer 123, 261–267 (2020).
284. Giskeodegard, G. F. et al. Lactate and glycine-potential MR biomarkers of
prognosis in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancers. NMR Biomed. 25,
1271–1279 (2012).
285. Xu, H. N. et al. Is higher lactate an indicator of tumor metastatic risk? A pilot MRS
study using hyperpolarized (13)C-pyruvate. Acad. Radio. 21, 223–231 (2014).
286. Wolpaw, A. J. & Dang, C. V. Exploiting metabolic vulnerabilities of cancer with
precision and accuracy. Trends Cell Biol. 28, 201–212 (2018).
287. Miao, P. et al. Lactate dehydrogenase A in cancer: A promising target for
diagnosis and therapy. IUBMB Life 65, 904–910 (2013).
288. Ippolito, L., Morandi, A., Giannoni, E. & Chiarugi, P. Lactate: A metabolic driver in
the tumour landscape. Trends Biochem. Sci. 44, 153–166 (2019).
289. Maekawa, M. et al. Promoter hypermethylation in cancer silences LDHB,
eliminating lactate dehydrogenase isoenzymes 1–4. Clin. Chem. 49, 1518–1520
(2003).
290. Leiblich, A. et al. Lactate dehydrogenase-B is silenced by promoter hyper-
methylation in human prostate cancer. Oncogene 25, 2953–2960 (2006).
291. Brown, N. J. et al. Lactate dehydrogenase-B is silenced by promoter methylation
in a high frequency of human breast cancers. PLoS One 8, e57697 (2013).
292. Cui, J. et al. Suppressed expression of LDHB promotes pancreatic cancer pro-
gression via inducing glycolytic phenotype. Med. Oncol. 32, 143 (2015).
293. Wu, H. et al. Lactate dehydrogenases amplify reactive oxygen species in cancer
cells in response to oxidative stimuli. Signal Transduct. Target Ther. 6, 242 (2021).
294. Maeda, M. et al. Genetic and drug inhibition of LDH-A: Effects on murine glio-
mas. Cancers 14, 2306 (2022).
295. Zhang, W. et al. Inhibition of LDHA suppresses cell proliferation and increases
mitochondrial apoptosis via the JNK signaling pathway in cervical cancer cells.
Oncol Rep. 47, 77 (2022).
296. Jin, L. et al. Phosphorylation-mediated activation of LDHA promotes cancer cell
invasion and tumour metastasis. Oncogene 36, 3797–3806 (2017).
297. Hou, X. et al. LDHA induces EMT gene transcription and regulates autophagy to
promote the metastasis and tumorigenesis of papillary thyroid carcinoma. Cell
Death Dis. 12, 347 (2021).
298. Le, A. et al. Inhibition of lactate dehydrogenase A induces oxidative stress and
inhibits tumor progression. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 2037–2042 (2010).
299. Mohammad, G. H. et al. Targeting pyruvate kinase M2 and lactate dehy-
drogenase A is an effective combination strategy for the treatment of pan-
creatic cancer. Cancers 11, 1372 (2019).
300. Manerba, M. et al. Galloﬂavin (CAS 568-80-9): A novel inhibitor of lactate
dehydrogenase. ChemMedChem 7, 311–317 (2012).
301. Vettraino, M., Manerba, M., Govoni, M. & Di Stefano, G. Galloﬂavin suppresses
lactate dehydrogenase activity and causes MYC downregulation in Burkitt
lymphoma cells through NAD/NADH-dependent inhibition of sirtuin-1. Antic-
ancer Drugs 24, 862–870 (2013).
302. Cui, B. et al. Stress-induced epinephrine enhances lactate dehydrogenase A and
promotes breast cancer stem-like cells. J. Clin. Invest. 129, 1030–1046 (2019).
303. Maekawa, M., Sudo, K., Kanno, T. & Li, S. S. Molecular characterization of genetic
mutation in human lactate dehydrogenase-A (M) deﬁciency. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 168, 677–682 (1990).
304. Kanno, T. et al. Lactate dehydrogenase M-subunit deﬁciency: A new type of
hereditary exertional myopathy. Clin. Chim. Acta 173, 89–98 (1988).
305. Elia, I. et al. Breast cancer cells rely on environmental pyruvate to shape the
metastatic niche. Nature 568, 117–121 (2019).
306. Doherty, J. et al. Blocking lactate export by inhibiting the Myc target MCT1
Disables glycolysis and glutathione synthesis. Cancer Res. 74, 908–920 (2014).
307. Gan, L. et al. Metabolic targeting of oncogene MYC by selective activation of the
proton-coupled
monocarboxylate
family
of
transporters.
Oncogene
35,
3037–3048 (2016).
308. Khan, A. et al. Targeting metabolic activity in high-risk neuroblastoma through
Monocarboxylate Transporter 1 (MCT1) inhibition. Oncogene 39, 3555–3570
(2020).
309. Huang, H. K. et al. Isoorientin decreases cell migration via decreasing functional
activity and molecular expression of proton-linked monocarboxylate transpor-
ters in human lung cancer cells. Am. J. Chin. Med. 48, 201–222 (2020).
310. Wang, N. et al. Structural basis of human monocarboxylate transporter 1 inhi-
bition by anti-cancer drug candidates. Cell 184, 370–383 e313 (2021).
311. Buyse, C. et al. Evaluation of syrosingopine, an MCT inhibitor, as potential
modulator of tumor metabolism and extracellular acidiﬁcation. Metabolites. 12,
557 (2022).
312. Benjamin, D. et al. Syrosingopine sensitizes cancer cells to killing by metformin.
Sci. Adv. 2, e1601756 (2016).
313. Benyahia, Z. et al. In vitro and in vivo characterization of MCT1 inhibitor
AZD3965 conﬁrms preclinical safety compatible with breast cancer treatment.
Cancers 13, 569 (2021).
314. Dana, P. et al. CD147 augmented monocarboxylate transporter-1/4 expression
through modulation of the Akt-FoxO3-NF-kappaB pathway promotes cho-
langiocarcinoma migration and invasion. Cell Oncol. 43, 211–222 (2020).
315. Zhang, D. et al. 2-Deoxy-D-glucose targeting of glucose metabolism in cancer
cells as a potential therapy. Cancer Lett. 355, 176–183 (2014).
316. Raez, L. E. et al. A phase I dose-escalation trial of 2-deoxy-D-glucose alone or
combined with docetaxel in patients with advanced solid tumors. Cancer Che-
mother. Pharm. 71, 523–530 (2013).
317. Bizjak, M. et al. Combined treatment with Metformin and 2-deoxy glucose
induces detachment of viable MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells in vitro. Sci. Rep.
7, 1761 (2017).
318. Sukumar, M. et al. Inhibiting glycolytic metabolism enhances CD8+T cell
memory and antitumor function. J. Clin. Invest. 123, 4479–4488 (2013).
319. Dunbar, E. M. et al. Phase 1 trial of dichloroacetate (DCA) in adults with recurrent
malignant brain tumors. Invest. N. Drugs 32, 452–464 (2014).
320. Powell, S. F. et al. Phase II study of dichloroacetate, an inhibitor of pyruvate
dehydrogenase, in combination with chemoradiotherapy for unresected, locally
advanced head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Invest. N. Drugs 40, 622–633
(2022).
321. Li, M. et al. miR-564: A potential regulator of vascular smooth muscle cells and
therapeutic target for aortic dissection. J. Mol. Cell Cardiol. 170, 100–114 (2022).
322. Yang, Y. et al. The lncRNA punisher regulates apoptosis and mitochondrial
homeostasis of vascular smooth muscle cells via targeting miR-664a-5p and
OPA1. Oxid. Med. Cell Longev. 2022, 5477024 (2022).
323. Li, X. et al. Multistage-responsive nanocomplexes attenuate ulcerative colitis by
improving the accumulation and distribution of oral nucleic acid drugs in the
colon. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 14, 2058–2070 (2022).
324. Qi, H. Y. et al. Glucose-responsive nanogels efﬁciently maintain the stability and
activity of therapeutic enzymes. Nanotechnol. Rev. 11, 1511–1524 (2022).
325. Dancy, B. M. & Cole, P. A. Protein lysine acetylation by p300/CBP. Chem. Rev. 115,
2419–2452 (2015).
326. Huang, H. et al. The regulatory enzymes and protein substrates for the lysine
beta-hydroxybutyrylation pathway. Sci Adv. 7, eabe2771 (2021).
327. Sabari, B. R., Zhang, D., Allis, C. D. & Zhao, Y. Metabolic regulation of gene
expression through histone acylations. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 90–101 (2017).
328. Yang, Y. et al. Global insights into lysine acylomes reveal crosstalk between
lysine acetylation and succinylation in streptomyces coelicolor metabolic
pathways. Mol. Cell Proteom. 20, 100148 (2021).
329. Meng, X., Baine, J. M., Yan, T. & Wang, S. Comprehensive analysis of lysine
lactylation in rice (Oryza sativa) grains. J. Agric Food Chem. 69, 8287–8297 (2021).
330. Shvedunova, M. & Akhtar, A. Modulation of cellular processes by histone and
non-histone protein acetylation. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 23, 329–349 (2022).
331. James, A. M. et al. Non-enzymatic N-acetylation of lysine residues by acetylCoA
often occurs via a proximal S-acetylated thiol intermediate sensitive to glyox-
alase II. Cell Rep. 18, 2105–2112 (2017).
332. Gao, M., Zhang, N. & Liang, W. Systematic analysis of lysine lactylation in the
plant fungal pathogen Botrytis cinerea. Front. Microbiol. 11, 594743 (2020).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from
the
copyright
holder.
To
view
a
copy
of
this
license,
visit
http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2022, corrected publication 2022
Lactate metabolism in human health and disease
Li et al.
22
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:305