

----- Page 1 (native) -----
23
vol. 10 • no. 1
American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine
Analytic
Amber L. Mosher, MPH, RD, Katrina L. Piercy, PhD, RD, ACSM-CES, 
Bryant J. Webber, MD, MPH, Stephanie K. Goodwin, PhD, MPH, RD, 
Kellie O. Casavale, PhD, RD, and Richard D. Olson, MD, MPH
Abstract: In the United States, high 
rates of obesity and chronic disease 
impose serious consequences on the 
population’s health and health care 
system. Primary care providers are 
critical to broad prevention efforts 
aiming to reduce the burden of 
chronic disease in the nation and 
play an important role in addressing 
lifestyle behaviors that can result 
in illness and premature death. 
Unhealthy dietary behaviors largely 
contribute to morbidity and mortality 
in the United States despite national 
efforts to improve the nutritional 
quality of the typical American diet. 
This article discusses a comprehensive 
set of national evidence-based 
recommendations known as the 
Dietary Guidelines for Americans that 
can support primary care providers’ 
efforts to improve patient outcomes 
through optimal nutrition and healthy 
lifestyle behaviors. This article also 
describes basic behavioral counseling 
techniques primary care providers can 
incorporate into time-limited patient 
encounters to help improve the dietary 
and physical activity behaviors of 
their patients.
Keywords: dietary guidelines; 
primary care; dietary counseling; 
preventive medicine; obesity
A
s the foundation of the nation’s 
health care delivery system, 
primary care serves as a first point 
of contact for most individuals seeking 
treatment or guidance on health-related 
issues.1 Today, primary care providers 
(PCPs) are critical to broad prevention 
efforts to reduce the burden of chronic 
disease in the United States, where high 
rates of obesity and lifestyle-related 
chronic disease impose serious 
consequences on the population’s health 
and health care system.
In the United States, approximately 
68% of adults and 34% of children and 
adolescents are considered overweight or 
obese,2 with an estimated 7 in 10 
premature deaths each year resulting 
from chronic diseases.3 Both the US 
economy and the health care system 
struggle to withstand the impact of 
current levels of medical spending, 
which represent the highest of any 
nation in the world4 and yield far poorer 
health outcomes than most other 
industrialized countries.5
Unhealthy dietary behaviors largely 
contribute to overweight and obesity and 
are associated with major causes of poor 
health outcomes and premature death 
even in the absence of excess body 
weight.6 The incidence of many diet-
related chronic diseases, including type 2 
diabetes and cardiovascular disease as 
well as their associated morbidity and 
mortality, can be minimized and even 
prevented with timely, effective dietary 
and lifestyle intervention strategies.7
521755 AJLXXX10.1177/1559827614521755American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine / MONTH MONTH XXXXvol. XX no. X / American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine
research-articleXXXX
Dietary Guidelines for Americans: 
Implications for Primary Care 
Providers
Today, primary care providers  
(PCPs) are critical to broad prevention 
efforts to reduce the burden of chronic 
disease in the United States.
DOI: 10.1177/1559827614521755.  Manuscript received October 17, 2013; revised December 4, 2013; accepted December 6, 2013. From the Office of Disease Prevention 
and Health Promotion, US Department of Health and Human Services, Rockville, Maryland (ALM, KLP, SKG, KOC, RDO); Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 
Bethesda, Maryland (BJW). Address correspondence to Amber L. Mosher, MPH, RD, Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, US Department of Health and Human 
Services, 1101 Wootton Parkway, Tower Oaks Bldg, Suite LL 100, Rockville, MD 20852; e-mail: Amber.Mosher@hhs.gov.
For reprints and permissions queries, please visit SAGE’s Web site at http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav.
Copyright © 2014 The Author(s)

----- Page 2 (native) -----
24
Jan • Feb 2016
American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine
Promoting healthful, science-based 
dietary behaviors is an important 
prevention strategy for all sectors of 
society. The Dietary Guidelines for 
Americans (Dietary Guidelines or the 
Guidelines) provides a comprehensive 
set of evidence-based recommendations 
for healthy eating and physical activity 
patterns Americans can adopt to help 
reduce their risk for many chronic 
illnesses.8 The Dietary Guidelines 
communicate nutrition information and 
dietary guidance that supports health 
care professionals and clinicians 
addressing dietary behaviors in a variety 
of settings, including primary care.
Today primary care and public health 
professionals face many challenges in 
helping Americans achieve their highest 
standard of health. This shared 
responsibility necessitates collaboration 
within and across fields as well as a 
willingness to alter long-held practices 
and roles regarding disease prevention 
and health promotion. Addressing 
unhealthy lifestyle behaviors such as 
poor diet and physical inactivity falls 
within the scope of both public health 
and clinical practice; however, PCPs are 
now challenged to tackle these complex 
issues more frequently in the primary 
care setting.1
As the US health care system evolves, 
PCPs will have new and expanded 
opportunities to address diet-related and 
lifestyle-related behaviors in clinical 
practice. The purpose of this article is to 
discuss applications of the Dietary 
Guidelines for Americans in primary care 
and describe basic behavioral counseling 
techniques PCPs can incorporate into 
time-limited patient encounters to help 
improve the dietary and physical activity 
behaviors of their patients.
Dietary Guidelines 
for Americans
Background
The Dietary Guidelines is a national 
health promotion and chronic disease 
prevention initiative that provides food-
based guidance and nutrition information 
for Americans ages 2 years and older.8 As 
the foundational nutrition policy for all 
federal food and nutrition programs, this 
set of evidence-based recommendations 
is intended to help policymakers, 
nutrition professionals, and health care 
providers guide the food choices and 
physical activity behaviors of healthy 
individuals as well as those at increased 
risk for developing chronic diseases.
Along with the key recommendations 
of the Physical Activity Guidelines for 
Americans, the Dietary Guidelines helps 
focus national, state, and local prevention 
efforts on diet and physical activity, both 
of which are critical to improving 
individual and population health. Eating 
patterns and physical activity behaviors 
based on the Dietary Guidelines can lead 
to a healthy body weight and should be 
flexible, individualized, and achieved 
over time.
The federal government published 
the first edition of the Guidelines in 
1980 and has released a new edition 
every five years since. Prior to 1990, 
the Dietary Guidelines was released on 
a voluntary basis (ie, 1980, 1985, 
1990); however, following the passage 
of the National Nutrition Monitoring 
and Related Research Act of 1990 (P.L. 
101-445), Congress required the US 
Department of Health and Human 
Services (HHS) and the US Department 
of Agriculture (USDA) jointly publish 
the Dietary Guidelines at least every  
five years.9
Each 5-year cycle, the HHS and USDA 
Secretaries appoint a group of 
independent scientific experts to the 
Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee, 
a Federal Advisory Committee that 
advises the Secretaries on the 
development of the Dietary Guidelines 
recommendations. Committee members 
serve voluntarily for 2 years and 
thoroughly review current scientific 
evidence on the relationships between 
diet, nutrition, physical activity, and 
health to inform their recommendations 
to the government on national dietary 
guidance. The Committee synthesizes 
current knowledge and describes their 
evidence-based recommendations in a 
comprehensive report submitted to the 
HHS and USDA Secretaries at the 
conclusion of their work.
The Report of the Dietary Guidelines 
Advisory Committee provides the 
scientific basis for the government’s 
Dietary Guidelines recommendations, 
which are ultimately determined by the 
two Departments. The Guidelines are 
presented as actionable food-based 
recommendations and nutrition 
information for the general population 
and various large subpopulations, such 
as pregnant women and older adults. 
HHS and USDA describe the Dietary 
Guidelines in a policy document 
intended for health professionals and 
policymakers who then translate the key 
recommendations into practice through 
food and nutrition programs, education, 
and intervention strategies.
Since the first edition of the Dietary 
Guidelines, scientific and medical 
knowledge related to diet, physical 
activity, and health has grown 
tremendously. As this body of literature 
has expanded, researchers and scientists 
have developed and refined systematic 
approaches for synthesizing large 
volumes of evidence to facilitate 
translation into practice. The 2010 
Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee 
was the first to use a systematic 
approach for reviewing and synthesizing 
the scientific evidence and developing its 
conclusions. To facilitate this laborious 
process, the USDA created the Nutrition 
Evidence Library (NEL), a Web-based 
electronic system that supports rigorous 
systematic reviews to inform federal food 
and nutrition policy and programs.10 The 
NEL improves efficiency and reduces the 
risk of biases during the systematic 
literature review process, and increases 
transparency with the public by 
providing the Committees’ 
methodologies and conclusions on the 
NEL Web site (the USDA’s Nutrition 
Evidence Library is publically available at 
http://www.nel.gov/).
Impact on Federal Food 
and Nutrition Initiatives
Federal programs have far-reaching 
effects on individuals, families, and 
communities across the country. As the 
primary basis for the federal 
government’s food and nutrition

----- Page 3 (native) -----
25
vol. 10 • no. 1
American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine
initiatives, the Dietary Guidelines inform 
a range of activities in agencies and 
offices across HHS, USDA, and other 
Departments. These recommendations 
support the government in providing 
consistent, science-based resources to 
the public and affect policies, 
educational programs, food purchasing, 
grant opportunities, research, and data 
collection nationwide.
For example, the Healthy, Hunger-Free 
Kids Act of 2010 was passed to help 
ensure children and other at-risk 
Americans have greater access to healthy 
foods and meals.11,12 This law authorizes 
funding and sets policy for several USDA 
national food assistance programs and 
helps to better align critical initiatives 
with current Dietary Guidelines. Because 
of this law, the government can better 
address some of the nation’s nutritional 
needs through the National School 
Lunch Program, School Breakfast 
Program, and Summer Food Service 
Program; the Special Supplemental 
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants 
and Children (WIC); and the Child and 
Adult Care Food Program.12
National Disease 
Prevention and Health 
Promotion Initiatives 
for Primary Care
Affordable Care Act
In 2010, the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act (Affordable Care Act 
or ACA) was signed into law to help 
improve the nation’s health care delivery 
system and the nation’s health. At that 
time, national health care spending 
accounted for approximately 18% of the 
country’s gross domestic product (GDP), 
and has grown at a rate five times faster 
than the GDP since 1960.5 The ACA 
provisions aim to control health care 
expenditures, expand access to 
affordable health coverage for 
Americans, and improve the efficiency 
and effectiveness of the US health care 
system.1,13
When fully implemented, the ACA will 
have a considerable impact on the 
delivery of primary care and the role of 
PCPs in addressing the underlying causes 
of obesity and lifestyle-related chronic 
diseases. The ACA removes substantial 
cost and coverage barriers that prevent 
many Americans from accessing 
preventive care and will increase the 
delivery of these services in primary 
care. In 2011, an estimated 54 million 
Americans received expanded coverage 
of clinical preventive services as a result 
of the ACA.14
Optimal delivery and utilization of 
clinical preventive services, such as 
screening, counseling, and use of 
preventive medications, can improve 
health and longevity of individuals and 
populations.15,16 Under the ACA, 
qualifying individuals can now receive 
many of these services with no out-of-
pocket costs, including preventive care 
for infants, children, adolescents; 
preventive care and screenings for 
women; recommended immunizations; 
and certain clinical preventive services 
recommended by the US Preventive 
Services Task Force (USPSTF or the Task 
Force).13 Table 1 summarizes select Task 
Force recommendations relevant to the 
Dietary Guidelines and covered by the 
ACA.17-20
National Prevention Strategy
The ACA also established a National 
Prevention Council led by the US 
Surgeon General to develop and 
coordinate a National Prevention Strategy 
and Action Plan to help guide the 
implementation of effective and 
achievable prevention efforts in the 
United States. The National Prevention 
Strategy was released in 2011 and 
provides strategic directions and targeted 
priorities for improving Americans’ health 
through chronic disease prevention.21 
Their healthy eating recommendations, 
in particular, rely on implementation of 
Dietary Guidelines recommendations as 
the cornerstone for federal nutrition 
programs and education initiatives.
The National Prevention Strategy also 
details specific action items for health 
care providers.21 According to the 
Strategy, clinicians should:
••
Assess dietary patterns (both quality 
and quantity of food consumed), 
provide nutrition education and 
counseling, and refer people to 
community resources (eg, WIC, Head 
Start, County Extension Services, and 
nutrition programs for older 
Americans);
••
Screen for obesity by measuring body 
mass index and deliver appropriate 
care according to clinical practice 
guidelines for obesity; and
••
Use maternity care practices that 
empower new mothers to breastfeed, 
such as the Baby-Friendly Hospital 
standards.
US Preventive Services Task 
Force Recommendations
Since 1984, the USPSTF has established 
and maintained evidence-based 
recommendations on clinical preventive 
services for their application in the 
primary care setting.16 The Task Force is 
an independent panel of experts in 
preventive medicine and primary care 
and has recommendations on over 100 
clinical preventive services. Each Task 
Force recommendation is assigned a 
letter grade (A, B, C, D, or I) based on 
the magnitude of net benefit and the 
strength of evidence regarding the 
clinical service.16 Table 1 provides 
descriptions of the Task Force’s evidence 
grades.
At this time, the Task Force 
recommends providers screen patients 
ages 6 years and older for obesity and 
offer or refer those with obesity to 
intensive counseling and behavioral 
interventions (grade B). The Task Force 
also recommends intensive behavioral 
dietary counseling for adults with 
hyperlipidemia and other known risk 
factors for cardiovascular and diet-related 
chronic disease (grade B); this 
recommendation is currently under 
revision.
For adults without a known diagnosis 
of hypertension, diabetes, 
hyperlipidemia, or cardiovascular 
disease, the Task Force makes no 
recommendation for or against dietary 
counseling to promote a healthy diet 
(grade C). Instead, the Task Force 
encourages selective, rather than 
comprehensive, counseling of patients

----- Page 4 (native) -----
26
Jan • Feb 2016
American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine
Table 1.
Summary of Select Task Force Recommendations and Grade Definitions17-20.
Population
Recommendation
Intervention
Screening for and management of obesity in adults
  Adults 18 years and 
older
 
 
 
 
 
Screen for obesity. Patients with a body mass index 
(BMI) of 30 kg/m2 or higher should be offered or 
referred to intensive, multicomponent behavioral 
interventions. (Grade B)
Intensive, multicomponent behavioral 
interventions for obese adults include the 
following components:
••
Behavioral management activities, such as 
setting weight-loss goals
••
Improving diet or nutrition and increasing 
physical activity
••
Addressing barriers to change
••
Self-monitoring
••
Strategizing how to maintain lifestyle changes
Screening for obesity in children and adolescents
  Children 6 years and 
older
Screen children ages 6 years and older for obesity. 
Offer or refer for intensive counseling and behavioral 
interventions. (Grade B)
Refer patients to comprehensive moderate- to 
high-intensity programs that include dietary, 
physical activity, and behavioral counseling 
components.
Behavioral counseling to promote a healthful diet and physical activity for cardiovascular disease prevention in adults
  General adult 
population without a 
known diagnosis of 
hypertension, diabetes, 
hyperlipidemia, or 
cardiovascular disease
Although the correlation among healthful diet, physical 
activity, and the incidence of cardiovascular disease 
is strong, existing evidence indicates that the health 
benefit of initiating behavioral counseling in the 
primary care setting to promote a healthful diet and 
physical activity is small. Clinicians may choose to 
selectively counsel patients rather than incorporate 
counseling into the care of all adults in the general 
population. (Grade C)
Medium- or high-intensity behavioral interventions 
to promote a healthful diet and physical activity 
may be provided to individual patients in 
primary care settings or in other sectors of the 
health care system after referral from a primary 
care clinician. In addition, clinicians may offer 
healthful diet and physical activity interventions 
by referring the patient to community-based 
organizations. Strong linkages between the 
primary care setting and community-based 
resources may improve the delivery of these 
services.
Behavioral counseling in primary care to promote a healthy diet in adults
  Adults with increased 
risk for diet-related 
chronic disease
The USPSTF recommends intensive behavioral dietary 
counseling for adult patients with hyperlipidemia and 
other known risk factors for cardiovascular and diet-
related chronic disease. Intensive counseling can be 
delivered by primary care clinicians or by referral to 
other specialists, such as nutritionists or dietitians. 
(Grade Ba)
Medium- to high-intensity counseling interventions 
can produce medium-to-large changes in 
average daily intake of core components of 
a healthy diet (including saturated fat, fiber, 
fruit, and vegetables) among adult patients at 
increased risk for diet-related chronic disease. 
Intensive counseling interventions that have 
been examined in controlled trials among at-risk 
adult patients have combined nutrition education 
with behavioral dietary counseling provided by a 
nutritionist, dietitian, or specially trained primary 
care clinician (eg, physician, nurse, or nurse 
practitioner).
(continued)

----- Page 5 (native) -----
27
vol. 10 • no. 1
American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine
based on professional judgment and 
other considerations, such as readiness 
to change, social support, community 
resources, patient preference, and other 
clinical priorities.18
The Role of Dietary 
Counseling in 
Primary Care
Quality of Typical 
American Diets
Despite national efforts to improve the 
nutritional quality of diets in the United 
States, the average American diet 
continues to be inconsistent with 
healthy eating patterns. As seen in 
Figure 1, Americans consume too many 
refined grains, too many calories from 
solid fats and added sugars, and too 
much sodium and saturated fat. 
Conversely, Americans consume 
inadequate amounts of important 
nutrients such as dietary fiber, 
potassium, vitamin D, and calcium.
The Healthy Eating Index (HEI) is a 
scoring system used to measure the 
nutritional quality of American diets 
compared to the Dietary Guidelines. 
The HEI is considered an indicator of 
diet quality for the US population, 
where higher HEI scores indicate diets 
more consistent with recommended 
eating patterns.22 The HEI has a range 
of applications, including monitoring 
population diet quality over time, 
determining the effectiveness of 
nutrition intervention programs, and 
assessing the quality of food assistance 
packages, menus, and the US food 
supply.
Similar to other national data sources, 
analyses using the recently updated 
HEI-2010 have not shown substantial 
improvements in the quality of typical 
American diets over the last decade.23 
Diet quality and adherence to the 
Dietary Guidelines can be improved in 
the United States by increasing 
Americans’ intakes of fruits and 
vegetables, especially dark-green 
vegetables (eg, broccoli, spinach, and 
romaine) and beans (eg, kidney, pinto, 
and black beans) and peas (eg, black-
eyed and split peas, chickpeas, and 
lentils) and substituting fat-free or 
low-fat dairy for higher-fat dairy 
products, whole-grain for refined-grain 
products, and seafood for some meat 
and poultry.
Improving the Quality 
of American Diets With 
Dietary Counseling
PCPs have a unique opportunity to 
promote a healthy diet in patients 
throughout the population using various 
types of behavioral strategies. Dietary 
counseling is a behavioral approach 
aimed at optimizing an individual’s 
nutrient intake by helping them identify 
and adopt healthy food choices over 
time. Effective dietary counseling may 
help decrease the burden of disease in 
patient populations, reduce preventable 
expenditures, and improve patient 
satisfaction.24,25 This strategy has been 
shown to help patients consume less 
total fat, saturated fat, and sodium and 
more fruits and vegetables,20 thus better 
aligning dietary patterns with Dietary 
Guidelines recommendations.8
Reimbursement for Diet-
Related and Nutrition-Related 
Preventive Services
Despite increasing rates of obesity and 
chronic disease, weight-related lifestyle 
counseling has declined in primary care 
settings since the mid-1990s and remains 
low in both adults and children.26-28 
Population
Recommendation
Intervention
Description of recommendation grades
  A—Strongly Recommended: The USPSTF strongly recommends that clinicians provide [the service] to eligible patients. The USPSTF 
found good evidence that [the service] improves important health outcomes and concludes that benefits substantially outweigh harms.
  B—Recommended: The USPSTF recommends that clinicians provide [the service] to eligible patients. The USPSTF found at least fair 
evidence that [the service] improves important health outcomes and concludes that benefits outweigh harms.
  C—No Recommendation: The USPSTF makes no recommendation for or against routine provision of [the service]. The USPSTF found 
at least fair evidence that [the service] can improve health outcomes but concludes that the balance of benefits and harms is too close to 
justify a general recommendation.
  D—Not Recommended: The USPSTF recommends against routinely providing [the service] to asymptomatic patients. The USPSTF 
found at least fair evidence that [the service] is ineffective or that harms outweigh benefits.
  I—Insufficient Evidence to Make a Recommendation: The USPSTF concludes that the evidence is insufficient to recommend 
for or against routinely providing [the service]. Evidence that the [service] is effective is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting and the 
balance of benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Abbreviation: USPSTF, US Preventive Services Task Force.
aUpdate in progress.
Table 1 (continued)

----- Page 6 (native) -----
28
Jan • Feb 2016
American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine
Many factors contribute to low rates of 
diet-related preventive services in 
primary care, including barriers created 
by reimbursement structures in the 
health care system. The ACA helps 
address this issue in part by increasing 
coverage of clinical preventive services 
recommended by the Task Force with 
grades of A or B.29
Still, reimbursement for diet-related and 
nutrition-related clinical preventive 
services is often dependent on the 
frequency in which these services are 
provided. For example, Medicare waives 
the copayment for intensive behavioral 
therapy for obese adults,30 a grade B 
Task Force recommendation, whereas 
Medicaid coverage varies by state.31 The 
Center for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services states that Medicare beneficiaries 
diagnosed as obese are entitled to a 
certain number of intensive behavioral 
counseling sessions in the primary care 
setting according to the following 
schedule:
••
One face-to-face visit every week for 
the first month of treatment;
••
One face-to-face visit every other 
week for months 2 to 6; and
••
One face-to-face visit every month for 
months 7 to 12 if the individual has 
achieved a documented weight loss 
of at least 3 kg.
For those who have not achieved this 
weight loss, additional counseling will only 
be reimbursed after a reassessment of their 
readiness to change and documentation of 
a current body mass index.30
Techniques for Dietary 
Counseling in the 
Primary Care Setting
Basic Dietary Messaging
The Dietary Guidelines emphasize that 
a healthy eating pattern is not a rigid 
prescription and should provide 
individualization and flexibility to 
accommodate cultural, ethnic, traditional, 
and personal preferences as well as 
various income levels. PCPs can help 
patients understand basic nutrition 
concepts and some of the many ways to 
consume a healthy diet using simple, 
targeted messages based on the Dietary 
Guidelines.
With the necessary resources and 
knowledge, PCPs can integrate basic 
dietary messages into their regular 
Figure 1.
Typical American Diets Compared to Recommended Intake Levels8.
*SoFAS, solid fats and added sugars.
Note: Bars show average intakes for all individuals (ages 1 or 2 years or older, depending on the data source) as a percentage of the recommended intake 
level or limit. Recommended intakes for food groups and limits for refined grains and solid fats and added sugars are based on amounts in the USDA 
2000-calorie food pattern. Recommended intakes for fiber, potassium, vitamin D, and calcium are based on the highest AI or RDA for ages 14 to 70 years. 
Limits for sodium are based on the UL and for saturated fat on 10% of calories. The protein foods group is not shown here because, on average, intake is 
close to recommended levels.
Based on data from: US Department of Agricultural, Agricultural Research Service and US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention. What We Eat in America, NHANES 2001-2001 or 2005-2006.

----- Page 7 (native) -----
29
vol. 10 • no. 1
American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine
interactions with patients. PCPs should 
understand how to communicate two 
important overarching concepts about a 
healthy diet to patients: (a) balancing 
calories over time with appropriate food 
choices and physical activity to achieve 
and maintain a healthy weight, and (b) 
selecting nutrient-rich foods and 
beverages to receive the most health 
benefits from the diet.
Patients should also be encouraged to 
understand their individual nutrient 
needs and become comfortable making 
food choices that help them meet these 
needs over time. PCPs can play a role in 
teaching patients to account for the 
calorie and nutrient contribution of foods 
and beverages in their diet, determine 
how certain foods fit within a total 
healthy eating pattern, and follow safe 
food practices when handling, preparing, 
and eating foods. Table 2 outlines key 
messages based on the Dietary 
Guidelines and strategies PCPs can use 
to initiate nutrition dialogue during 
patient encounters. Messages and dietary 
counseling strategies should be targeted 
to meet the needs and desired health 
outcomes of individual patients.
A Simplified Framework 
for Dietary Counseling
All dietary counseling strategies should 
incorporate the 5As Behavior Change 
Model approach recommended by both 
the Task Force and the Center for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services.30,33 This 
approach combines several evidence-
based intervention strategies, including 
motivational interviewing, goal-setting, 
and modeling, into five steps: (a) 
assessing, (b) advising, (c) agreeing, (d) 
assisting, and (e) arranging for follow up.33
A provider using the 5As approach for 
dietary counseling would begin by 
assessing the patient’s diet-related risk 
factors and nutritional goals. Next the 
PCP would provide clear, specific, and 
personalized advice, attempting to 
collaborate with the patient based on 
interest and willingness. Once the PCP 
and patient agree on appropriate 
treatment goals and potential approaches 
for reaching those goals, self-help 
resources such as those discussed in this 
article can be offered to the patient to 
support his or her planned behavior 
change. Finally, PCPs should develop a 
follow-up plan for the patient based on 
his or her treatment plan and goals that 
includes future clinical appointments and 
other relevant interventions strategies, 
and emphasizes the iterative nature of 
goal setting and achievement.34
Motivational Interviewing
Motivational interviewing is a patient-
based approach to counseling that draws 
from constructs embedded in various 
health promotion theories, including the 
Health Belief Model and Stages of Change 
(or Transtheoretical) Model.33,35 
Recognizing a patient’s perception of 
illness susceptibility, facilitators and barriers 
to change, and self-confidence in his or 
her ability to change helps PCPs determine 
the most appropriate approaches for 
improving a patient’s dietary behaviors.
For example, a patient with a family 
history of stroke may be particularly 
concerned about preventing 
cardiovascular disease. In this case, a 
provider could potentially engage the 
patient in a meaningful discussion of the 
Dietary Approach to Stop Hypertension 
(DASH) diet, a dietary pattern 
recommended in the Dietary Guidelines 
for prevention and reduction of high 
blood pressure.
PCPs can incorporate motivational 
interviewing into dietary counseling by 
applying three basic principles: ask 
open-ended questions, listen to patients 
describe their experiences, and inform 
patients within the context of those 
experiences.36 A dietary counseling 
session that incorporates these 
techniques, therefore, may begin with 
an open-ended question such as, “How 
important is it for you to eat a 
nutritious diet?” This could be followed 
with a series of questions on past 
diet-related experiences: “Have you 
tried changing something in your diet 
before? What changes did you make? 
How did it go? What helped or 
hindered you in eating more or less of 
that particular food?” The provider may 
then use those responses as a 
springboard for discussing 
recommendations or messages from 
Dietary Guidelines that are most 
relevant to the patient based on his or 
her experiences and health status.
In addition, providers can use 
information obtained during motivational 
interviewing to assess a patient’s 
readiness to change a particular dietary 
behavior or pattern. For example, a 
highly motivated patient who is already 
making successful changes may require 
more nuanced nutrition guidance, while 
a less motivated patient may require 
rudimentary nutrition advice and a 
discussion of overcoming barriers to 
change. Table 2 provides examples of 
basic and advanced strategies for 
improving various dietary behaviors and 
health outcomes. Finally, PCPs should 
address realistic approaches for 
anticipating and avoiding relapses with 
all patients who express a desire to 
implement behavior change strategies.
Goal Setting
Goal setting is an important component 
of effective dietary counseling, both 
during the counseling encounter and 
thereafter. Behavior change goals can be 
established by either the patient or 
provider; however, goals are often more 
meaningful and achievable when 
developed by patients themselves or in 
collaboration with the PCP.34 During a 
counseling session, the process of 
establishing goals helps clarify patient 
expectations and priorities, and the 
process of working toward and achieving 
those goals helps boost patient 
confidence.35
Effective goal setting can be distilled to 
a few basic principles: goals should be 
specific, measurable, achievable, 
realistic, and time-bound (SMART).37 In 
addition, the American Heart Association 
recommends nutritional goals focused 
on behaviors within the patient’s control 
rather than physiological endpoints.34 An 
example of a SMART goal related to 
dietary behaviors is reduce calories from 
added sugar by replacing one sugar-
sweetened beverage with a glass of water 
at least once a day. A vague goal based 
on a physiological endpoint, such as 
decrease fasting blood glucose by 
consuming fewer sugar-sweetened 
beverages, may be less achievable and 
more difficult to measure.

----- Page 8 (native) -----
30
Jan • Feb 2016
American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine
Table 2.
Key Messages Based on the Dietary Guidelines for Americans8,32.
Key Message
Strategies
Potential Prevention Outcome
Enjoy your food, but eat less
Avoid oversized portions
 
 
 
 
Basic strategies
••
Use a smaller plate to help with portion 
control
••
When eating out, choose smaller portions or 
lower calorie options
Advanced strategies
••
Get to know the foods you eat. Read 
Nutrition Facts labels on food packages to 
find out how many servings are in the foods 
you eat
••
Use an electronic or paper food diary to 
track what, when, why, and how much 
you eat
Weight loss or maintenance
 
 
  May reduce risk of many chronic diseases
 
Compare sodium in foods like soup, 
bread, and frozen meals—and choose 
foods with lower numbers
 
Basic strategies
••
Eat more foods at home
••
Use herbs, spices, garlic, vinegar, or lemon 
juice to season foods
Advanced strategies
••
When purchasing canned foods—choose 
“reduced sodium,” “low sodium,” or “no 
salt added”
••
Think fresh—eat more fresh foods and 
fewer processed foods
Reduce risk for high blood pressure
 
  Keeping blood pressure in the normal 
range reduces an individual’s risk of 
cardiovascular disease
 
 
Drink water instead of sugary drinks
 
 
Basic strategies
••
Choose water, fat-free milk, 100% fruit 
juice, or unsweetened tea or coffee as 
drinks rather than sugar-sweetened drinks
••
When drinking sugary beverages, select 
smaller cans, cups, or glasses instead of 
large and supersized options
May be associated with lower body weight 
or weight maintenance
 
 
Make half your plate fruits and vegetables
 
 
 
 
 
Basic strategies
••
Make your plate colorful. Try to add fruits 
and vegetables to your plate that are red, 
orange, and dark green
••
Cook fresh or frozen vegetables in the 
microwave for a quick-and-easy dish to add 
to any meal
Advanced strategies
••
Cut up your veggies ahead of time. Put 
them in small snack bags to grab on the go
••
Buy fruits and vegetables in season when 
they may be less expensive and at their 
peak flavor
May reduce risk of many chronic diseases
May reduce risk of cardiovascular disease, 
including heart attack and stroke
May be protective against certain types of 
cancer     
(continued)

----- Page 9 (native) -----
31
vol. 10 • no. 1
American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine
Key Message
Strategies
Potential Prevention Outcome
Choose a variety of protein foods
Eat seafood in place of some meat or 
poultry twice a week
 
 
 
 
Basic strategies
••
Try main dishes made with beans or peas, 
nuts, soy, and seafood
••
Choose lean or low-fat cuts of meat like 
round or sirloin and ground beef that is at 
least 90% lean
Advanced strategies
••
When cooking meats, trim or drain fat from 
meat and remove poultry skin, and try 
grilling, broiling, roasting, or baking
••
Select a variety of seafood sources that are 
higher in oils and low in mercury, such as 
salmon and trout
May reduce risk factors for cardiovascular 
disease
May support optimal fetal growth and 
development
 
 
 
 
Make at least half your grains whole 
grains
   
   
 
Basic strategies
••
Switch from white rice to brown rice
••
Mix half regular pasta with 100% whole 
wheat pasta
Advanced strategies
••
Choose 100% whole grain cereals, breads, 
crackers, rice, and pasta
••
Check the ingredients list on product labels 
for the words “whole” or “whole grain” 
before the grain ingredient’s name
May reduce the risk of cardiovascular 
disease
May be associated with lower body weight
May reduce incidence of type 2 diabetes   
 
Switch to fat-free or low-fat (1%) milk
 
 
 
 
 
Basic strategies
••
Use fat-free or low-fat (1%) milk on cereal 
and oatmeal
••
Substitute higher-fat milks with fat-free or 
low-fat (1%) milk when cooking or baking
Advanced strategies
••
Gradually switch from whole milk to lower 
fat versions. Mix half whole milk with a 
lower fat version to start
••
When drinking coffee beverages, such as 
cappuccino or latte, request fat-free or 
low-fat (1%) milk
Supports optimal bone health
Reduce risk of osteoporosis and bone 
fractures
 
 
 
 
Some physical activity is better than none
Aim for at least 2 hours and 30 minutes 
(150 minutes) a week of moderate-
intensity physical activity, such as brisk 
walking, and 2 days a week of muscle 
strengthening   
 
 
 
Basic strategies
••
For health benefits, be active in episodes of 
10 minutes or more
••
Include 2 days a week of muscle 
strengthening activities, including push-
ups, lifting weights, etc
Advanced strategies
••
Once you are doing some activity, add more 
time, number of days of the week that you 
are doing physical activity, or increase how 
hard you are doing the activity
••
Include some vigorous physical activity 
such as jogging, biking or swimming fast
Weight loss or maintenance
May reduce risk of many chronic diseases
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2 (continued)

----- Page 10 (native) -----
32
Jan • Feb 2016
American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine
Once a patient’s behavioral goals are 
established, a system of monitoring and 
positive reinforcement is critical for 
continuous progress and sustained 
dietary behavior change.35 Examples of 
dietary self-monitoring include regularly 
checking and recording body weight, 
weekly menu planning to support 
informed decision-making and help 
prevent impulse purchases of unhealthy 
foods in the grocery store, recording 
food choices in a paper- or technology-
based food diary to track dietary 
behaviors and determine nutrient intakes, 
or wearing a pedometer to help estimate 
typical physical activity behaviors.
Even with appropriate counseling, goal 
setting, and monitoring—and despite a 
patient’s best intentions—relapses can and 
will occur. PCPs can help patients 
normalize these experiences while also 
teaching them to recognize the contextual 
factors that influence these relapses.34,35 If a 
patient is attempting to reduce sodium 
intake, for example, strategies for 
preventing relapses may include identifying 
foods in the diet that are high in sodium, 
recognizing triggers for consuming those 
foods, and learning about suitable 
alternatives that are lower in sodium.
Delivery Mechanisms for 
Dietary Counseling in the 
Primary Care Setting
Team-Based Approaches 
and Referrals
Extensive one-on-one dietary 
counseling is likely unrealistic for many 
PCPs who practice within the constraints 
of limited time and resources. In these 
situations, team-based approaches and 
referrals are particularly important and 
allow the PCP to collaborate with other 
providers with expertise in nutrition 
science, behavioral counseling, or other 
professional skill sets useful for 
addressing lifestyle behaviors. Referrals 
for additional guidance on dietary and 
nutrition-related issues can be made 
internally or externally to nutrition 
professionals such as a registered dietitian 
(RD) or discussed with other members of 
the multidisciplinary team such as 
registered nurses and social workers.
In primary care, RDs are essential to 
the multidisciplinary team where they 
support PCPs by providing individualized 
medical nutrition therapy to improve 
patient outcomes.38 RDs are experts in 
the translation of food and nutrition 
science into dietary and lifestyle behavior 
change strategies for individuals and 
populations, and often work in clinical 
practice. In addition to extensive training 
in complex food and nutrition concepts, 
some RDs are certified in specialized 
areas of practice, such as weight 
management, diabetes education, and 
sports nutrition.38 PCPs can use the 
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics’ free, 
online national referral service to locate 
an RD in their community (The Academy 
of Dietetics’ Find an RD online referral 
service can be accessed online at http://
www.eatright.org/programs/rdfinder/).
Social workers may offer important 
assistance in identifying state and 
community resources available to help 
meet patient needs. For example, there are 
a number of food-related assistance 
programs available to Americans, 
including the Supplemental Nutrition 
Assistance Program (SNAP) and WIC, 
which are briefly described in Table 3. 
PCPs and social workers can assist patients 
by providing the contact phone numbers 
for their local SNAP and WIC offices.39,40
Group Sessions
Group-based sessions may also improve 
efficiency and effectiveness of dietary 
counseling in primary care. These sessions 
can occur either alone or in combination 
with individual-based sessions, and are 
often conducted by RDs. Group sessions 
may incorporate a variety of techniques, 
including skill-building exercises, 
traditional didactics, and coaching, and 
may take place at the health care facility 
or within the community, such as in the 
workplace or in a church setting.34
Modeling techniques can be applied 
during shared medical appointments or 
group counseling settings to facilitate 
observational learning and reinforce 
positive behaviors among multiple 
patients. This approach helps individuals 
learn how to apply dietary behavior 
changes by observing and replicating the 
positive behavior of others. Examples of 
dietary modeling techniques include the 
use of online cooking tutorials or 
in-person demonstrations of healthy food 
preparation, as well as educational trips 
to grocery stores to increase a patient’s 
confidence in selecting affordable, 
healthy foods.34
Community-based programs can also 
be considered in the context of group-
based interventions. A number of large 
community-based initiatives have been 
implemented nationwide, including “We 
Can!” and the “Eat Healthy, Be Active 
Community Workshops.” RDs may be 
available to assist in maintaining a 
comprehensive list of community or local 
programs to distribute to patients as 
necessary. Table 4 provides a list of 
Table 3.
Overview of SNAP and WIC Programs.
Program
Population
Eligibility
Application
SNAP
 
Open to everyone
Income, deduction, employment, and 
immigrant eligibility requirements
By phone: state SNAP hotline
In-person: at local SNAP office
WIC
Pregnant women, children 
from birth to 5 years of age
Categorical, residential, income, and 
nutrition risk eligibility requirements
By phone: state or local WIC 
agency

----- Page 11 (native) -----
33
vol. 10 • no. 1
American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine
Table 4.
Select Federal Nutrition and Physical Activity Resources Within the Public Domain.
Title
Description
Web Site URL
Consumer Resources
  Eat Healthy • Be Active Community 
Workshops
Series of six, 1-hour lesson plans based on the 
DGA and PAG, includes talking points, activities, 
video vignettes, handoutsa
www.health.gov/dietaryguidelines/
workshops
  Be Active Your Way (Physical Activity 
Guidelines)
Brochures, fact sheetsa, infographica, blog
www.health.gov/paguidelines/adultguide/
  Choose MyPlate
Ten tips series, daily meal plans, videos, menus, 
recipes; SuperTracker (ie, diet and physical 
activity tracking tool)
www.choosemyplate.gov
  10 Tips Nutrition and Physical 
Activity Series
One-page tip sheets on a variety of nutrition and 
physical activity topics
www.choosemyplate.gov/healthy-eating-
tips/ten-tips.html
  Presidential Active Lifestyle Award 
(PALA+)
Six-week program based on the DGA and PAG 
to track individual eating and physical activity 
levelsa
www.presidentschallenge.org/
  Let’s Move!
Tips, tools, resources for parents, children, schools 
on nutrition and physical activity
www.letsmove.gov
  We Can!
Information, toolkits, worksheets, tips for youth 
ages 8-13 to maintain a healthy body weight, 
portion distortion information, and quiz 
comparing portions from 20 years ago
www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/public/heart/
obesity/wecan/
  Healthfinder.gov
Information, resources, and tools on a variety of 
health topics
www.healthfinder.gov
  Fruit & Veggies—More Matters
Recipes, meal planning, tips
www.fruitsandveggiesmorematters.org/
  Bright Futures
Tips, resources, handouts, newsletters to improve 
children’s health care needs
www.brightfutures.aap.org
  BodyWorks
Tools and resources for parents and caregivers 
of adolescents to improve family eating and 
physical activity habitsa
www.womenshealth.gov/index.html
  Dietary Approaches to Stop 
Hypertension Eating (DASH) Plan
DASH eating plan, daily nutrient goals
www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health-topics/
topics/dash/
  Body Mass Index (BMI) Calculator
Input height and weight to determine BMI
www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/obesity/
BMI/bmicalc.htm
Government Reports and Resources
  Dietary Guidelines for Americans 
(DGA)
Policy document, Advisory Committee Report, key 
messages, previous versions of the DGA
www.dietaryguidelines.gov
  Physical Activity Guidelines 
for Americans (PAG) and PAG 
Midcourse Report
Policy document, Advisory Committee Report, key 
messages
www.health.gov/paguidelines
  Healthy People
Ten-year health objectives for the nation
www.healthypeople.gov
aDenotes materials are available in Spanish.

----- Page 12 (native) -----
34
Jan • Feb 2016
American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine
select federal resources related to the 
Dietary Guidelines that are within the 
public domain and available for public 
use and distribution.
Technology-Based 
Interventions and Printed 
Education Materials
Additional alternatives to one-on-one 
dietary counseling may involve 
engaging patients through technology-
based strategies or interventions. 
Interactive behavior change 
technologies allow delivery of behavior-
change interventions strategies via 
telephone, e-mail, or the Internet.41 
Although the specifics of these 
interventions are beyond the scope of 
this article, successful examples using 
telephone42 and Web-based43,44 
approaches have had similar 
methodologies: counselors made 
periodic contact with patients and used 
cognitive-behavioral strategies to help 
them track progress toward goals.
Technology-based interventions are 
less suitable for patients with limited 
access to technology or those unfamiliar 
with the use or application of certain 
technologies. In these cases, printed 
materials such as those listed in Table 4 
can also provide a helpful supplement 
to in-office counseling. Like their 
technological equivalents, print-only 
strategies should be tailored to the 
individual patient, taking into account 
eyesight, reading level, understanding of 
health concepts, and cultural 
background.34 Depending on the patient 
population they serve, clinics may 
consider keeping large-print and 
non-English language handouts.
Conclusion
As the US health care system evolves, 
PCPs have new and expanded 
opportunities to address diet-related and 
lifestyle-related behaviors in clinical 
practice to reduce the burden of chronic 
disease in the population. In the United 
States, patients often consider PCPs’ 
advice to be authoritative and credible, 
and look to them for guidance on 
individual food choices and physical 
activity behaviors.
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans 
provide food-based guidance for the 
general public and specific 
subpopulations to help all Americans 
achieve their highest standard of health 
through optimal nutrition and regular 
physical activity. These national 
recommendations help health care 
professionals and clinicians address 
dietary behaviors efficiently and 
effectively in a variety of settings, 
including primary care.
Patient–provider encounters are 
valuable opportunities to engage 
individuals in dialogue about their 
lifestyle behaviors. Even with limited 
time, PCPs can address unhealthy 
dietary behaviors and physical inactivity 
with patients using targeted, easy-to-
understand messages based on Dietary 
Guidelines recommendations and 
individualized dietary counseling. In 
addition to one-on-one behavioral 
counseling, PCPs can use electronic and 
print resources to encourage healthy 
food choices in patients through 
education, goal setting, and monitoring; 
encourage patients to access appropriate 
existing community resources such as 
WIC and SNAP programs; and refer 
patients to another member of the 
multidisciplinary health care team such 
as a registered dietitian.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the following individuals for their valuable 
contributions to the development of this article: Subhashini 
Katumuluwa, MD, at Stony Brook University Medical Center, 
and Gene Donovan, MD, and Mary Donovan, MD. The 
authors also acknowledge the following individuals for their 
review of this article: Don Wright, MD, MPH, Angela Hutson, 
RN, and Holly McPeak, MS, at the Office of Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion at the US Department of 
Health and Human Services; Eve Essery Stoody, PhD, at the 
Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion at the US 
Department of Agriculture; Derek Mazique, MD, at the 
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine; and 
Daniel Burnett, MD, at the Uniformed Services University of 
the Health Sciences.
The findings and conclusions of this article are those of 
the authors and do not necessarily represent the official 
positions of the Office of Disease Prevention and Health 
Promotion, the US Department of Health and Human Services, 
or the US Department of Defense. AJLM
References
	 1.	 Institute of Medicine. Primary Care and 
Public Health: Exploring Integration to 
Improve Population Health. Washington, 
DC: National Academies Press; 2012.
	 2.	 Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, et al. 
Heart disease and stroke statistics—2013 
update: a report from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2013;127:e6-e245.
	 3.	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Chronic diseases and health promotion. 
http://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/
overview/index.htm#ref1. Published 2010. 
Accessed July 2013.
	 4.	 Heidenreich PA, Trogdon JG, Khavjou 
OA, et al. Forecasting the future of 
cardiovascular disease in the United States: 
a policy statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2011;123:933-944.
	 5.	 Center for Public Health Policy, American 
Public Health Association. The Prevention 
and Public Health Fund: a critical 
investment in our nation’s physical and 
fiscal health. http://www.apha.org/NR/
rdonlyres/8FA13774-AA47-43F2-838B-
1B0757D111C6/0/APHA_PrevFundBrief_
June2012.pdf. Published June 2012. 
Accessed June 2013.
	 6.	 US Department of Agriculture, US 
Department of Health and Human Services. 
Report of the Dietary Guidelines Advisory 
Committee on the Dietary Guidelines 
for Americans, 2010, to the Secretary of 
Agriculture and the Secretary of Health 
and Human Services. Washington, DC: US 
Department of Agriculture, Agricultural 
Research Service; 2010.
	 7.	 Slawson DL, Fitzgerald N, Morgan KT. 
Position of the academy of nutrition and 
dietetics: the role of nutrition in health 
promotion and chronic disease prevention. 
J Acad Nutr Diet. 2013;113:972-979.
	 8.	 US Department of Agriculture, United 
States Department of Health and Human 
Services. Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 
2010. 7th ed. Washington, DC: US 
Government Printing Office; 2010.
	 9.	 Watts ML, Hager MH, Toner CD, Weber 
JA. The art of translating nutritional science 
into dietary guidance: history and evolution 
of the Dietary Guidelines for Americans. 
Nutr Rev. 2011;69:404-412.
	10.	 Spahn JM, Lyon JM, Altman JM, et al. 
The systematic review methodology used 
to support the 2010 Dietary Guidelines 
Advisory Committee. J Am Diet Assoc. 
2011;111:520-523.
	11.	 Food and Nutrition Service, US Department 
of Agriculture. Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids 
Act of 2010. http://www.fns.usda.gov/

----- Page 13 (native) -----
35
vol. 10 • no. 1
American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine
cnd/governance/legislation/cnr_2010.htm. 
Accessed May 1, 2013.
	12.	 Food and Nutrition Service, US Department 
of Agriculture. Summary of the Healthy, 
Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010 (By 
program). http://www.fns.usda.gov/
cnd/governance/legislation/PL111-296_
Summary.pdf. Accessed August 17, 2013.
	13.	 The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. 
Focus on Health Reform: summary 
of the Affordable Care Act. http://
kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.
com/2011/04/8061-021.pdf. Accessed  
May 3, 2013.
	14.	 Benjamin D, Sommers LW. ASPE Issue 
Brief: Fifty-four million additional 
Americans are receiving preventive services 
coverage without cost-sharing under the 
Affordable Care Act. http://aspe.hhs.gov/
health/reports/2012/PreventiveServices/
ib.shtml. Published 2012. Accessed June 
2013.
	15.	 Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Use of selected clinical 
preventive services among adults—United 
States, 2007-2010. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep. 2012;61(suppl):1-84.
	16.	 US Preventive Services Task Force. The 
Guide to Clinical Preventive Services, 2012. 
Washington, DC: Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality, US Department of 
Health and Human Services; 2012.
	17.	 US Preventive Services Task Force. 
Behavioral counseling in primary care to 
promote a healthy diet: recommendations 
and rationale. Am J Prev Med. 2003;24: 
93-100.
	18.	 Moyer VA. Behavioral counseling 
interventions to promote a healthful diet 
and physical activity for cardiovascular 
disease prevention in adults: U.S. 
Preventive Services Task Force 
recommendation statement. Ann Intern 
Med. 2012;157:367-371.
	19.	 Moyer VA. Screening for and management 
of obesity in adults: U.S. Preventive 
Services Task Force recommendation 
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157: 
373-378.
	20.	 Lin JS, O’Connor E, Whitlock EP, et 
al. Behavioral Counseling to Promote 
Physical Activity and a Healthful Diet 
to Prevent Cardiovascular Disease in 
Adults: Update of the Evidence for the U.S. 
Preventive Services Task Force. Rockville, 
MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality; 2010.
	21.	 National Prevention Council. National 
Prevention Strategy. Washington, DC: 
Office of the Surgeon General, US 
Department of Health and Human Services; 
2011.
	22.	 Guenther PM, Casavale KO, Reedy J, et 
al. Update of the Healthy Eating Index: 
HEI-2010. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2013;113: 
569-580.
	23.	 Hiza HAB, Guenther PM, Rihane CI, 
Diet quality of children age 2-17 years 
as measured by the Healthy Eating 
Index-2010. Nutr Insight. 2013;52. http://
www.cnpp.usda.gov/Publications/
NutritionInsights/Insight52.pdf. Accessed 
January 21, 2014.
	24.	 Post RE, Mainous AG 3rd, Gregorie SH, 
Knoll ME, Diaz VA, Saxena SK. The 
influence of physician acknowledgment 
of patients’ weight status on patient 
perceptions of overweight and obesity 
in the United States. Arch Intern Med. 
2011;171:316-321.
	25.	 Potter MB, Vu JD, Croughan-Minihane M. 
Weight management: what patients want 
from their primary care physicians. J Fam 
Pract. 2001;50:513-518.
	26.	 Kraschnewski JL, Sciamanna CN, Stuckey 
HL, et al. A silent response to the obesity 
epidemic: decline in US physician weight 
counseling. Med Care. 2013;51:186-192.
	27.	 Smith AW, Borowski LA, Liu B, et al. U.S. 
primary care physicians’ diet-, physical 
activity-, and weight-related care of adult 
patients. Am J Prev Med. 2011;41:33-42.
	28.	 Huang TT, Borowski LA, Liu B, et al. 
Pediatricians’ and family physicians’ 
weight-related care of children in the U.S. 
Am J Prev Med. 2011;41:24-32.
	29.	 US Preventive Services Task Force. USPSTF 
A and B recommendations. http://www.
uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/
uspsabrecs.htm. Accessed August 17, 2013.
	30.	 Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services, US Department of Health 
and Human Services. Decision Memo 
for Intensive Behavioral Therapy 
for Obesity (CAG-00423N). http://
www.cms.gov/medicare-coverage-
database/details/nca-decision-memo.
aspx?&NcaName=Intensive%20
Behavioral%20Therapy%20for%20Obesi
ty&bc=ACAAAAAAIAAA&NCAId=253&. 
Published 2011. Accessed August 2, 2013.
	31.	 Lee JS, Sheer JL, Lopez N, Rosenbaum 
S. Coverage of obesity treatment: a 
state-by-state analysis of Medicaid and 
state insurance laws. Public Health Rep. 
2010;125:596-604.
	32.	 US Department of Agriculture. Healthy 
eating tips. http://www.choosemyplate.
gov/healthy-eating-tips.html. Accessed 
August 2013.
	33.	 Whitlock EP, Orleans CT, Pender N, Allan 
J. Evaluating primary care behavioral 
counseling interventions: an evidence-
based approach. Am J Prev Med. 
2002;22:267-284.
	34.	 Artinian NT, Fletcher GF, Mozaffarian D, 
et al. Interventions to promote physical 
activity and dietary lifestyle changes for 
cardiovascular risk factor reduction in 
adults: a scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2010;122:406-441.
	35.	 Rimer BK, Glanz K. Theory at a Glance: 
A Guide for Health Promotion Practice. 
Washington, DC: US Department of Health 
and Human Services, National Institutes of 
Health, National Cancer Institute; 2005.
	36.	 Rollnick S, Butler CC, Kinnersley 
P, Gregory J, Mash B. Motivational 
interviewing. BMJ. 2010;340:c1900.
	37.	 Doran G. There’s a S.M.A.R.T. way to 
write management’s goals and objectives. 
Manage Rev. 1981;70:35-36.
	38.	 Academy Quality Management Committee, 
Scope of Practice Subcommittee of Quality 
Management Committee. Academy of 
Nutrition and Dietetics: scope of practice 
for the registered dietitian. J Acad Nutr 
Diet. 2013;113(6 suppl):S17-S28.
	39.	 Food and Nutrition Service, US Department 
of Agriculture. Supplemental Nutrition 
Assistance Program (SNAP) state 
information/hotline numbers. http://www.
fns.usda.gov/snap/contact_info/hotlines.
htm. Accessed May 1, 2013.
	40.	 US Department of Agriculture, Food and 
Nutrition Service. Women, Infants, and 
Children (WIC) toll-free numbers for WIC 
state agencies. http://www.fns.usda.gov/
wic/Contacts/tollfreenumbers.htm. Accessed 
May 1, 2013.
	41.	 Glasgow RE, Bull SS, Piette JD, Steiner JF. 
Interactive behavior change technology. A 
partial solution to the competing demands 
of primary care. Am J Prev Med. 2004;27(2 
suppl):80-87.
	42.	 Newman VA, Flatt SW, Pierce JP. 
Telephone counseling promotes dietary 
change in healthy adults: results of a pilot 
trial. J Am Diet Assoc. 2008;108:1350-1354.
	43.	 Alexander GL, McClure JB, Calvi JH, et 
al. A randomized clinical trial evaluating 
online interventions to improve fruit 
and vegetable consumption. Am J Public 
Health. 2010;100:319-326.
	44.	 van Wier MF, Dekkers JC, Hendriksen IJ, 
et al. Effectiveness of phone and e-mail 
lifestyle counseling for long term weight 
control among overweight employees. J 
Occup Environ Med. 2011;53:680-686.