

----- Page 1 (native) -----
A large-area, flexible pressure sensor matrix with
organic field-effect transistors for artificial
skin applications
Takao Someya*†, Tsuyoshi Sekitani*, Shingo Iba*, Yusaku Kato*, Hiroshi Kawaguchi‡, and Takayasu Sakurai‡
*Quantum-Phase Electronics Center, School of Engineering, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan; and ‡Center of Collaborative Research, University
of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan
Edited by George M. Whitesides, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, and approved May 25, 2004 (received for review March 18, 2004)
It is now widely accepted that skin sensitivity will be very impor-
tant for future robots used by humans in daily life for housekeep-
ing and entertainment purposes. Despite this fact, relatively little
progress has been made in the ﬁeld of pressure recognition
compared to the areas of sight and voice recognition, mainly
because good artiﬁcial ‘‘electronic skin’’ with a large area and
mechanical ﬂexibility is not yet available. The fabrication of a
sensitive skin consisting of thousands of pressure sensors would
require a ﬂexible switching matrix that cannot be realized with
present silicon-based electronics. Organic ﬁeld-effect transistors
can substitute for such conventional electronics because organic
circuits are inherently ﬂexible and potentially ultralow in cost even
for a large area. Thus, integration of organic transistors and rubber
pressure sensors, both of which can be produced by low-cost
processing technology such as large-area printing technology, will
provide an ideal solution to realize a practical artiﬁcial skin, whose
feasibility has been demonstrated in this paper. Pressure images
have been taken by ﬂexible active matrix drivers with organic
transistors whose mobility reaches as high as 1.4 cm2Vs. The
device is electrically functional even when it is wrapped around a
cylindrical bar with a 2-mm radius.
R
ecognition of tactile information will be very important for
future generations of robots used by humans in daily life
for housekeeping and entertainment purposes (1, 2). An
important step to obtain good artificial ‘‘electronic skin’’ is to
fabricate large-area pressure sensors with mechanical flexi-
bility. Despite this fact, relatively little progress has been made
in the field of pressure recognition compared to the areas of
sight and voice recognition (1, 2). Even though flexible
materials such as polymers and rubbers have been used to
make sensing components, the fabrication of a sensitive skin
consisting of thousands of pressure sensors would also require
a flexible switching matrix that cannot be realized with
present-day silicon-based electronics.
Organic field-effect transistors (3–13) are inherently flexi-
ble and very inexpensive to fabricate even for large areas (9,
10), and hence are adequate for use as a switching matrix in a
pressure sensor. The minimum bending diameter reported so
far, however, has been only 30 mm (11) because inorganic
materials were still used in many previous transistors for some
components such as gate insulators (SiO2, Al2O3) and base
films (glass, silicon). Moreover, the highest mobilities reported
so far for plastic transistors have been around 0.1 cm2Vs (5),
much lower than the best values around 2–5 cm2Vs obtained
with hard substrates (13). The above two points have been
major hurdles to the application of organic transistors to
large-area flexible electronics.
In this article, we demonstrate an application of organic transis-
tors in which all of the materials are soft except the electrodes. The
organic transistors are integrated with a graphite-containing rub-
ber pressure sensor layer to form a very wide area structure
providing an ideal solution to realize artificial skin with low-cost
processing technology. The device is illustrated in Fig. 1 and is
electrically functional even when it is wrapped around a cylin-
drical bar with a 2-mm radius. The mobility of the organic
transistors reaches values as high as 1.4 cm2Vs, which is
comparable to amorphous silicon on glass (1 cm2Vs) (14) and
beyond values obtained on plastic films (0.4–0.6 cm2Vs) (15,
16). The maximum effective device area is 8  8 cm2 and
contains a 32  32 array of pressure sensors. The periodicity is
2.54 mm, which corresponds to 10 dots per inch (dpi).
Device Fabrication
The manufacturing process is shown in Fig. 2 A–D. The base film
(substrate) is an ultra-high heat-resistant poly(ethylene naph-
thalate) (PEN) film with a thickness of 100 m (Teonex, Q83 and
Q65 from Teijin DuPont Films, Gitu, Japan).
The first step (Fig. 2A) is to drill holes through the base film.
The laser-drilling process of polyimide sometimes results in holes
with poor edge geometry, which causes poor yield of organic
transistors. To avoid this problem, we first sandwiched the base
film between two poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) films by a
pouch laminator, then laser-drilled holes, and finally removed
the two PET films with an organic solvent.
Then both sides are coated with 150-nm-thick gold layers with
5-nm-thick chromium adhesion layers in the vacuum evaporator
with shadow masks. These layers are used to make an electronic
connection between electrodes on the two sides of the base film;
one side works as gate electrodes of transistors. For the pattern-
ing of gate electrodes, conventional photolithography is an
alternative to use of shadow masks. Our experience is, however,
that residual materials sticking to the base film during photoli-
thography often degrade transistor performance, particularly off
current. Thus we prefer to manufacture the entire device with
minimum exposure to chemical solvents or water.
In the second step (Fig. 2B), polyimide precursors (Kemitite
CT4112A, Kyocera Chemical, Kawasaki, Japan) are spin-coated
and cured at 180°C to form 500-nm-thick gate dielectric layers
(17). Then spots of polyimide gate dielectric layers are removed
by laser drilling to make contact via holes.
A 50-nm-thick pentacene layer is deposited to form a channel
layer (13, 18, 19) in the third step (Fig. 2C), and a 50-nm-thick
gold layer is evaporated through shadow masks to form the
source and drain electrodes of the transistors. The channel
length L and width W are 120 m and 2.8 mm, respectively. To
prevent mechanical damage to the transistors during mechanical
testing, a poly(dimethyl siloxane) (PDMS)-coated poly(ethylene
terephthalate) film (not shown in Fig. 2) was also laminated.
This paper was submitted directly (Track II) to the PNAS ofﬁce.
Abbreviation: SENCEL, sensor cell.
†To whom correspondence should be addressed at: Quantum-Phase Electronics Center,
School of Engineering, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656,
Japan. E-mail: someya@ap.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp.
© 2004 by The National Academy of Sciences of the USA
9966–9970 
PNAS 
July 6, 2004 
vol. 101 
no. 27
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0401918101

----- Page 2 (native) -----
In the last step (Fig. 2D), a pressure-sensitive rubber sheet and
a copper electrode suspended by a polyimide film are laminated
on the bottom of the base film to integrate pressure sensors with
transistors. The pressure-sensitive flexible layer is 0.5-mm-thick
PDMS containing electrically conductive graphite particles. The
resistance of the rubber sheet changes when the pressure is
applied on the device. Because no patterning is needed on the
rubber sheet and copper electrodes, no alignment is required for
this last lamination process and it would be very inexpensive to
implement on a large scale. Fig. 2 E and F are top views of the
entire device and of a single sensor cell (SENCEL), respectively.
Some of the processing techniques used in the second step
described above (Fig. 2B) are innovative and critical to fabricate
high-performance organic transistors. A high-quality, pinhole-
free, 500-nm-thick gate insulator made of polyimide was depos-
ited on an ultrasmooth poly(ethylene naphthalate) film. Al-
though polyimide is not an ordered material, the surface
smoothness measured by atomic force microscopy is found to be
0.2 nm rms, resulting in the formation of a highly ordered
pentacene thin film. Moreover, the contact holes were made by
a CO2 laser drill machine after the formation of the polyimide
layer, and as a result the surface of the polyimide gate dielectric
layer remained clean, and better device performance was
achieved.
Device Performance
The characteristics of the organic transistors were measured in
ambient environment before the application of the rubber
pressure sensor film by using a semiconductor parameter ana-
lyzer. The manufactured pentacene transistors exhibit p-type
conduction, and typical dc characteristics are shown in Fig. 3A.
The field-effect mobility reaches values as high as 1.4 cm2Vs in
the saturation regime when a 100-V operating bias is applied.
The onoff ratio is 106 if the off current is defined as the
minimum drain current at VGS  40 V, whereas it is 104 if the
off current is measured at VGS  0 V. We have also obtained a
result showing that the off current at VGS  0 V can be reduced
drastically when transistors are manufactured without exposure
to air.
The mobility of the present device is comparable to or slightly
larger than that of amorphous silicon (1.0 cm2Vs) and is, to
the best of our knowledge, the highest ever reported for flexible
organic transistors prepared on plastic films with polymeric gate
insulators. A 100-V operation voltage is not realistic for artificial
skin applications, but the device is still functioning and the
mobility is still large (0.3 cm2Vs) when a 20-V operating bias
is applied. The initial yields of transistors exceed 99% and device
failure occurs mainly because of leakage current through the
gate dielectric layers. The measured drain current variation over
the entire processed area is 10%. We speculate that the origin
of the variations should be attributed mainly to the thickness
fluctuation of polyimide gate dielectric layers. Polyimide pre-
cursors do not wet easily when they are spin-coated on gold
electrodes. Thus, it is important to minimize the interval be-
tween the end of spin coating and the start of baking to avoid the
formation of droplets of polyimide precursors, which degrade
the uniformity of the thickness of polyimide gate dielectric
layers.
The complete devices including the rubber pressure sensors
are characterized by applying a pressure by using a square block
made of rubber to avoid scratching. The circuit diagram of an
individual SENCEL is shown in the Inset of Fig. 3B and the
overall configuration is similar to a memory cell and pixel of a
charge-coupled device (CCD): gate electrodes of each line are
connected to a word line (VWL), whereas drain electrodes of
each line are connected to a bit line (VBL). Typical results of the
measured change in the drain current (IDS) dependence of the
gate voltage (VGS) are shown in Fig. 3B. As the pressure is
applied on the device and varies from 0 to 30 kPa (300 gram
forcecm2), the resistance of the rubbery sheet varies from 10
Fig. 1.
Image of an electronic artiﬁcial skin. Organic transistors are used to
realize a ﬂexible active matrix, which is used to read out pressure images from
the sensors. The device is bendable because all of the layers with the exception
of the electrodes are made of soft materials.
Fig. 2.
Manufacturing process ﬂow. (A) Through holes are drilled through a
poly(ethylene naphthalate) (PEN) base ﬁlm by a CO2 laser drill machine. Then
both sides of the base ﬁlm are coated by 150-nm-thick gold with 5-nm-thick
chromium adhesion layers in the vacuum evaporator with shadow masks. One
side of the gold layer is also used as the gate electrodes of organic transistors.
(B) A 500-nm-thick polyimide layer is prepared by spin coating as a gate
dielectric layer. Then some areas of the polyimide layer are removed by the
CO2 laser drill machine to make contact via holes. (C) A 50-nm-thick pentacene
layer is deposited in the vacuum sublimation system. Then a 50-nm-thick gold
layer is deposited through a shadow mask for the source and drain electrodes.
(D) A pressure-sensitive rubber sheet and a copper electrode suspended by a
polyimide ﬁlm are laminated to the bottom of the PEN ﬁlm with the transis-
tors. (E) A picture of a 32  32 array of sensor cells (SENCELs). The pitch is 2.54
mm. (Scale bar  2 cm.) (F) A magniﬁed image of a SENCEL (2.54  2.54 mm2).
(Scale bar  0.5 mm.)
Someya et al.
PNAS 
July 6, 2004 
vol. 101 
no. 27 
9967
ENGINEERING

----- Page 3 (native) -----
M to 1 k and the transconductance as well as the measured
current increases.
A pressure spatial map was obtained by applying individually
to each SENCEL voltages VDS  20 V for each bit line and VGS
 20 V for each word line under pressure from a rubber block.
Fig. 3C shows results of the current level obtained for each
SENCEL. One of the transistor devices at the upper left corner
of the square is not functioning because of a deformation of the
gate layer leading to open circuits. The observed pressure
gradient toward the center of the rubber block is due to its finite
size, which causes a nonuniform deformation of the pressure
sensor rubber layer beneath it.
To perform bending tests, individual transistors with larger
channel length and width (L  50 m and W  16 mm) were
processed and characterized as schematically described in the
Inset of Fig. 3D. The 60-m-thick base film with organic tran-
sistors was rolled on bars with radius R varying from 50 to 2 mm,
which corresponds to tensile strain from 0.1% to 1.5%, respec-
tively, induced parallel to the current flow. IDS was monitored as
a function of the gate voltage VGS at a drain source voltage VDS 
40 V.
The magnitude of the drain current IDS remains practically
unchanged when the bending radius decreases from 50 to 10
mm, whereas a slight decrease by only 3% is measured for R 
5 mm. The organic transistors were still functional even with
a 2-mm bending radius and the mobility was decreased by only
20%, demonstrating that we have achieved much mechanically
flexibility and high mobility simultaneously for organic transis-
tors with polyimide gate insulators. In previous related work,
inorganic gate insulators such as SiO2 and SiN andor indium-tin
oxide (ITO) gate electrodes were used and tensile failure
occurred at bending diameter above 30 mm (11). In our case,
bending was limited by necking of gold electrodes for radius R 
1 mm. No significant damage or residual effect due to bending
stress was observed in the devices, and the current level in the
saturation regime measured in a flat position after bending down
to R  4 mm remained unchanged. However, a slight increase of
the off current (IDS at VGS  0 V) was observed, which is not
surprising because a time-dependent drift of the threshold
voltage due to air exposure was also independently observed.
For integrated devices, performance variation induced by
strains is mainly due to the performance variation of transistors
because the pressure sensors are made of silicone rubber, which
is very resistant to strain induced by bending. When the pressure-
sensitive rubber sheet is wrapped around a bar with a 10-mm
radius, this strain is estimated to be 6 kPa pressure, which is
below the sensitivity of pressure sensors (30 kPa), and does not
influence electronic performance. We assume Poisson’s ratio of
0.46 and Young’s modulus of 0.3 MPa for estimation of strain
effects in the silicone rubber sheet (20). The strain effects in the
rubber sheet would be easily reduced by thinning its thickness.
Discussion
It should be noted that the design of the device described in this
work is completely different from the one of previous pressure
sensor arrays because a flexible active matrix structure is used.
Readers may be aware of the development of liquid crystal
displays (LCDs), which used to be operated by static or simple
matrix drivers and have now evolved to an active matrix design.
Similarly, the first area sensors were assembled with discrete
devices, operated by static drivers and required individual wires
to each cell. More recently, a simple matrix design (with no
access transistors) has been used for large-area pressure sensors
(21) requiring high power consumption and expensive additional
driving electronics to compensate roundabout current routes or
cross talks. In the active matrix driving method presented here
only one transistor needs to be in an ‘‘on’’ state for each
SENCEL where pressure is applied so that it is the only design
suitable for low-power applications where a high number of
SENCELs is required over large areas, such as electronic skin.
Moreover, with an active matrix design the sensor array could
easily become ‘‘smart’’ to realize functions such as a progressive
scan, SENCEL skipping, and others.
It is well known that the mobility of organic semiconductors
is about three orders of magnitude lower than that of silicon
(22) and a major disadvantage for applications such as video-
rate display (18, 23) and radio frequency (rf) identification
Fig. 3.
Device characteristics. (A) Drain current (IDS) measured for the tran-
sistors with pentacene as a channel layer, showing p-type conduction. The
source–drain voltage (VDS) is swept from 0 V to 20 V under gate bias (VGS)
from 0 V to 20 V with 5-V steps. (B) Transfer curves (IDS vs. VGS) are measured
for a SENCEL under application of various pressures from 0 to 30 kPa. VDS 
20 V is applied. The resistance of the pressure-sensitive conductive rubber
changes between 10 M and 1 k when it is off and on. (Inset) The circuit
diagram of each SENCEL is shown. VBL, bit line; VWL, word line; VDD, supply
voltage. (C) The fabricated sensor matrix is pressed with a rectangular rubber
block. The position dependence of the drain current is monitored with ap-
plying voltage bias of VDS  20 V and VGS  20 V. The solid square indicates
where the rubber block was positioned. (D) The transfer curves (IDS vs. VGS) are
measured for a pentacene transistor rolled around cylindrical bars with vari-
ous radii as schematically shown in the Inset. S, source; D, drain; G, gate. The
channel length (L) and width (W) are 50 m and 16 mm, respectively. The
electronic performance does not change when the bending radius (R) is
changed from 50 to 10 mm. Further reduction of R causes decrease of drain
current IDS, but the transistor is still functional even at R  2 mm.
9968 
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0401918101
Someya et al.

----- Page 4 (native) -----
tags (13, 24–26), which have been recognized so far as the main
motivations for the development of organic transistors. In the
case of area sensors, however, the slower speed is tolerable for
most applications. For artificial skin in particular, the inte-
gration of pressure sensors and organic peripheral electronics
allows one to take advantage of the many benefits of organic
transistors such as mechanical flexibility, large area, low cost,
and relative ease of fabrication without suffering from their
drawbacks. Similar functions may be achieved by amorphous
silicon on plastic films (15, 16), and the present study dem-
onstrates the general feasibility of large-area electronics from
the context of sensor applications.
The accuracy of the pressure intensity reading over large areas
(pressure gradation) is limited mainly by the uniformity of the
performance of organic transistors, whereas the sensitivity itself
is limited by the performance of the pressure-sensitive conduct-
ing rubber. The present device can detect a few tens of kilo-
pascals, which is comparable to the sensitivity of discrete pres-
sure sensors. The integration of organic transistors with more
sophisticated pressure sensors, such as poly(vinylidene difluo-
ride) (PVDF)-based strainpressure sensors or sensors with
pressure-sensitive ink, would be helpful to improve the perfor-
mance of artificial skin devices.
It should also be relatively straightforward to improve the
density of the sensor matrix because in the manufacturing
scheme used in this work, it is limited by the resolution of metal
shadow masks. The pitch is 2.54 mm in the present device, which
is sufficient for most artificial skin applications, but a much
higher density could easily be obtained by reducing device
dimensions or using a shorter channel length. The current
channel length is relatively large (120 m), leaving plenty of
room for down-scaling with no major technical obstacles. The
use of shadow masks with a 20-m resolution has been reported
recently for large-area organic circuits (13, 24). An increase of
the SENCEL density would allow one to easily reach a high
spatial resolution, and the integration of artificial sensors for
other somatic senses located in the skin (temperature and
humidity, for example) to better emulate real human skin would
also be feasible. Furthermore, an important feature that would
be desirable in artificial skin is stretching capability, because real
human skin can be stretched.
The time response of the pressure-sensitive rubber is typically
of the order of hundreds of milliseconds, and the individual
sensor does not respond to the higher frequency. It should be
noted, however, that the readout time of an entire 16  16 sensor
cell array is not the response time of individual transistors
multiplied by 16  16 because an active matrix scheme is used.
The scan speed of the entire sensor cell array is limited by the
performance of individual transistors and is independent of the
frequency response of the pressure sensors. The cycle time of
each transistor was measured to be around 30 ms in this study,
from which the total time to access 16  16 transistors is
estimated to be 480 ms if one word line is read at the same time.
This total access time is comparable to the response time of the
pressure sensor, so that for a larger device with a large number
of sensor cells, the organic transistors will be the limiting factor
of the frequency response.
One additional, playful experiment performed consisted in
applying to one of the sensors we fabricated a rubber structure
shaped as human lips. The image obtained by using the pressure
sensor is shown in Fig. 4 along with a photograph of the ‘‘rubber
lips’’ used to apply pressure. Even though the resolution of the
present device is too low for the sensor to identify whose lips it
is touching, the experience is conclusive enough to fuel one’s
imagination.
We thank Profs. Yasuhiko Arakawa, Hiroyuki Sakaki, Makoto Gono-
kami, and Tadashi Kobayashi for fruitful discussions, and Dr. Jean
Benoit He´roux for critical reading of the manuscript. This study was
partially supported by the New Energy and Industrial Technology
Development Organization, the Ministry of Public Management,
Home Affairs, Posts and Telecommunications, and the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology Information
Technology and Center-of-Excellence programs.
1. Nicholls, H. R. & Lee, M. H. (1989) Int. J. Robotics Res. 8, 3–30.
2. Lee, M. H. & Nicholls, H. R. (1999) Mechatronics 9, 1–31.
3. Tsumura, A., Koezuka, H. & Ando, T. (1986) Appl. Phys. Lett. 49, 1210–
1212.
4. Burroughes, J. H., Jones, C. A. & Friend, R. H. (1988) Nature 335, 137–141.
5. Sirringhaus, H., Tessler, N. & Friend, R. H. (1998) Science 280, 1741–1744.
6. Dimitrakopoulos, C. D., Purushothaman, S., Kymissis, J., Callegari, A. & Shaw,
J. M. (1999) Science 283, 822–824.
7. Katz, H. E., Lovinger, A. J., Johnson, J., Kloc, C., Siegrist, T., Li, W., Lin, Y.-Y.
& Dodabalapur, A. (2000) Nature 404, 478–481.
8. Sirringhaus, H., Kawase, T., Friend, R. H., Shimoda, T., Inbasekaran, M., Wu,
W. & Woo, E. P. (2000) Science 290, 2123–2126.
9. Mirkin, C. A. & Rogers, J. A. (2001) MRS Bull. 26, 506–508.
10. Dimitrakopoulos, C. D. & Malenfant, P. R. L. (2002) Adv. Mater. 14, 99–117.
11. Loo, Y.–L., Someya, T., Baldwin, K. W., Bao, Z., Ho, P., Dodabalapur, A.,
Katz, H. E. & Rogers, J. A. (2002) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99,
10252–10256.
12. Stutzmann, N., Friend, R. H. & Sirringhaus, H. (2003) Science 299, 1881–1884.
13. Kelley, T. W., Muyres, D. V., Baude, P. F., Smith, T. P. & Jones, T. D. (2003)
Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. 771, 169–179.
14. Kuo, Y., ed. (2004) Thin Film Transistors: Materials and Processes (Kluwer,
Dordrecht, The Netherlands).
15. Won, S. H., Chung, J. K., Lee, C. B., Nam, H. C., Hur, J. H. & Jang, J. (2004)
J. Electrochem. Soc. 151, G167–G170.
Fig. 4.
A pressure image of a kiss mark is taken by using the present sensors. The device, consisting of 16  16 SENCELs, is pressed with a lip-shaped rubber
replica (A) and the pressure image (B) is compared with the print on paper (C). The current of each SENCEL is measured with a 20-V operating bias. The two
bright spots at the bottom of B are due not to a failure of transistors but to a failure of sensors around those two spots (low local resistance of the
pressure-sensitive rubber). (Scale bar  1 cm.)
Someya et al.
PNAS 
July 6, 2004 
vol. 101 
no. 27 
9969
ENGINEERING

----- Page 5 (native) -----
16. Gleskova, H. & Wagner, S. (1999) IEEE Electron Device Lett. 20, 473–
475.
17. Kato, Y., Iba, S., Teramoto, R., Sekitani, T., Someya, T., Kawaguchi, H. &
Sakurai, T. (2004) Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 3789–3791.
18. Klauk, H., Gundlach, D. J. & Jackson, T. N. (1999) IEEE Electron Device Lett.
20, 289–291.
19. Klauk, H., Halik, M., Zschieschang, U., Schmid, G., Radlik, W. & Weber, W.
(2002) J. Appl. Phys. 92, 5259–5263.
20. Mark, J., ed. (1999) Polymer Data Handbook (Oxford Univ. Press, New
York).
21. Azuma, T. (2001) Sens. Mater. 13, 107.
22. Crone, B., Dodabalapur, A., Lin, Y.-Y., Filas, R. W., Bao, Z., LaDuca, A.,
Sarpeshkar, R., Katz, H. E. & Li, W. (2000) Nature 403, 521–523.
23. Rogers, J. A., Bao, Z., Baldwin, K., Dodabalapur, A., Crone, B., Raju, V. R.,
Kuck, V., Katz, H., Amundson, K., Ewing, J. & Drzaic, P. (2001) Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 98, 4835–4840.
24. Baude, P. F., Ender, D. A., Haase, M. A., Kelley, T. W., Muyres, D. V. & Theiss,
S. D. (2003) Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 3964–3966.
25. Gelinck, G. H., Geuns, T. C. T. & de Leeuw, D. M. (2000) Appl. Phys. Lett. 77,
1487–1489.
26. Drury, C. J., Mutsaers, C. M. J., Hart, C. M., Matters, M. & de Leeuw, D. M.
(1998) Appl. Phys. Lett. 73, 108–110.
9970 
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0401918101
Someya et al.