

----- Page 1 (native) -----
REVIEW ARTICLE
Monitoring Training Load to Understand Fatigue in Athletes
Shona L. Halson
 The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract
Many athletes, coaches, and support staff are
taking an increasingly scientiﬁc approach to both designing
and monitoring training programs. Appropriate load mon-
itoring can aid in determining whether an athlete is
adapting to a training program and in minimizing the risk
of developing non-functional overreaching, illness, and/or
injury. In order to gain an understanding of the training
load and its effect on the athlete, a number of potential
markers are available for use. However, very few of these
markers have strong scientiﬁc evidence supporting their
use, and there is yet to be a single, deﬁnitive marker
described in the literature. Research has investigated a
number of external load quantifying and monitoring tools,
such as power output measuring devices, time-motion
analysis, as well as internal load unit measures, including
perception of effort, heart rate, blood lactate, and training
impulse. Dissociation between external and internal load
units may reveal the state of fatigue of an athlete. Other
monitoring tools used by high-performance programs
include heart rate recovery, neuromuscular function, bio-
chemical/hormonal/immunological assessments, question-
naires and diaries, psychomotor speed, and sleep quality
and quantity. The monitoring approach taken with athletes
may depend on whether the athlete is engaging in indi-
vidual or team sport activity; however, the importance of
individualization of load monitoring cannot be over
emphasized. Detecting meaningful changes with scientiﬁc
and statistical approaches can provide conﬁdence and
certainty when implementing change. Appropriate moni-
toring of training load can provide important information to
athletes and coaches; however, monitoring systems should
be intuitive, provide efﬁcient data analysis and interpreta-
tion, and enable efﬁcient reporting of simple, yet scientif-
ically valid, feedback.
1 Background
As athletes strive to improve their performance, modiﬁ-
cations in training load are required, particularly increases
in frequency, duration, and intensity. Training loads are
adjusted at various times during the training cycle to either
increase or decrease fatigue depending on the phase of
training (i.e. baseline or competition phase). Ensuring that
fatigue is titrated appropriately is important for both
adaptations to training as well as for competition perfor-
mance [1].
Fatigue is a complex and multifaceted phenomenon that
has a variety of possible mechanisms. Indeed, a number of
different deﬁnitions of fatigue exist, often dependent upon
the experimental model employed and/or the conditions
under which they occur. One of the most common deﬁni-
tions of fatigue was proposed by Edwards [2], and states
that fatigue is a ‘‘failure to maintain the required or
expected force (or power output).’’ Fatigue can also be
inﬂuenced by the type of stimulus (voluntary or electrical),
type of contraction (isometric, isotonic, and intermittent or
continual), duration, frequency and intensity of exercise,
and type of muscle [3]. Further, the physiological and
training status of the athlete and the environmental con-
ditions may also signiﬁcantly inﬂuence fatigue. The deﬁ-
nitions and caveats mentioned above highlight both the
multi-factorial nature of fatigue and the inherent com-
plexities of trying to monitor or measure fatigue in the
athlete. For the purpose of this review, and to reﬂect a
S. L. Halson (&)
AIS Physiology, Australian Institute of Sport,
PO Box 176, Belconnen, ACT 2616, Australia
e-mail: Shona.halson@ausport.gov.au
123
Sports Med (2014) 44 (Suppl 2):S139–S147
DOI 10.1007/s40279-014-0253-z

----- Page 2 (native) -----
practical perspective, fatigue will be deﬁned as ‘‘an
inability to complete a task that was once achievable within
a recent time frame’’ [1].
Monitoring the training load of an athlete is viewed by
many as important to determine whether an athlete is
adapting to the training program and to minimize the risk
of non-functional overreaching (fatigue lasting weeks to
months), injury, and illness. To date, research in this area is
limited and much of what we know about monitoring
comes from personal experience and anecdotal informa-
tion. While monitoring within elite and professional sport
is often extensive, much of these data remain protected and
unpublished.
The objective of this article is to describe the current
scientiﬁc information available relating to tools for moni-
toring training load in athletes and to outline some of the
practical considerations when both planning and imple-
menting monitoring in athletes.
2 Reasons For and Against Monitoring Training Load
As mentioned above, there are a number of reasons why
monitoring training load has become a modern, scientiﬁc
approach to understanding athletes training responses and
competition readiness. Monitoring training load can pro-
vide a scientiﬁc explanation for changes in performance.
This can aid in enhancing the clarity and conﬁdence
regarding possible reasons for changes in performance and
minimizing the degree of uncertainty associated with the
changes. From these data, it is not only possible to retro-
spectively examine load–performance relationships, but
also to enable appropriate planning for training loads and
competitions. Importantly, load monitoring is also imple-
mented to try to reduce the risk of injury, illness, and non-
functional overreaching. Data may also be useful for team
selection and determining which athletes are ready for the
demands of competition.
There are also a number of beneﬁts related to commu-
nication and relationship building with athletes, support
staff, and coaches. When athletes are involved in moni-
toring, this can enhance their feeling of involvement in the
training program, empower them, and increase their sense
of ownership. Data collected from training monitoring can
also be useful to facilitate communication between the
support staff and coaching staff. When combined, these
beneﬁts can help enhance the belief and conﬁdence asso-
ciated with the training program.
However, not all coaches and scientists engage in athlete
monitoring. For some athletes/teams/squads, insufﬁcient
resources can be a major reason for not including a system
of training monitoring. Resources may be in the form of
time, money, or the human resources needed to collect,
process, and analyze the data. Further, there are no guar-
antees that monitoring training load will result in suc-
cessful performances, therefore the resources required may
not be provided. A lack of knowledge or experience with
monitoring techniques can result in an inability to imple-
ment a practical and sustainable system and/or an inability
to interpret the data collected. In addition, a clear rationale
identifying why the monitoring is occurring, what will be
monitored, how often monitoring will occur, and how the
data are interpreted and presented back to the coaching
staff is required. Finally, the ability and opportunity to
implement change and provide feedback is critical to a
successful monitoring system, and, if this does not occur,
many attempts at monitoring are not sustainable [1].
3 Potential Load Monitoring Measures
In order to gain an understanding of the training load and
its effect on the athlete, a number of potential markers are
available to athletes, coaches, and scientists. However,
very few of these markers have strong scientiﬁc evidence
supporting their use, and there is yet to be a single,
deﬁnitive marker of fatigue described in the literature.
Given the deﬁnition described in Sect. 1, it would appear
that the best test of fatigue in terms of ecological validity
would be a maximal performance test replicating the ath-
lete’s event/competition. However, there are numerous
difﬁculties regarding maximal testing in athletes. Maximal
tests may add to existing fatigue in an athlete, which may
be problematic around competition phases [4]. A taper may
also be required to determine true performance capabilities,
which is often impractical. When fatigued, athletes may
also lack motivation to produce a maximal effort that is not
for competitive purposes. For many sports, particularly
team sports, it is extremely difﬁcult to replicate or even
deﬁne maximal performance [5]. Finally, if only maximal
performance is assessed, little information can be gained
regarding the potential mechanism/s of fatigue.
Table 1 outlines a number of variables that can be used
to monitor training load and the resultant fatigue.
4 Internal versus External Load
When monitoring training load, the load units can be
thought of as either external or internal. Traditionally,
external load has been the foundation of most monitoring
systems. External load is deﬁned as the work completed by
the athlete, measured independently of his or her internal
characteristics [6]. An example of external load in road
cycling would be the mean power output sustained for a
given duration of time (i.e. 400 W for 30 min). While
S140
S. L. Halson
123

----- Page 3 (native) -----
external load is important in understanding work com-
pleted and capabilities and capacities of the athlete, the
internal load, or the relative physiological and psycholog-
ical stress imposed is also critical in determining the
training load and subsequent adaptation. As both external
and internal loads have merit for understanding the ath-
lete’s training load, a combination of both may be impor-
tant for training monitoring. Indeed, it may be the
relationship between external and internal loads that may
aid in revealing fatigue. For example, using the cycling
external load mentioned above, the power output may be
maintained for the same duration; however, depending on
the fatigue state of the athlete, this may be achieved with a
high or low heart rate or a high or low perception of effort.
It is this uncoupling or divergence of external and internal
loads that may aid in differentiating between a fresh and a
fatigued athlete [1].
5 Methods for Monitoring External Load
5.1 Power Output, Speed, and Acceleration
To gain an understanding of external training load, a
number of technologies are available to athletes and coa-
ches. In the sport of cycling, power output-measuring
devices such as SRMTM and PowerTapTM allow the con-
tinuous measurement of work rate (power output) [7].
Training and competition can be recorded and data can be
analyzed to provide information on a number of parameters,
including average power, normalized power, speed, and
accelerations. Cycling power output can be converted into a
Training Stress ScoreTM (TSSTM) via commercially avail-
able software [1] and allows the quantiﬁcation of training
based on relative intensity, duration, and frequency.
5.2 Time–Motion Analysis
In team sports, time–motion analysis (TMA), including
global positioning system (GPS) tracking and movement
pattern analysis via digital video (such as ProZoneTM) are
becoming increasingly popular to monitor athletes [5], par-
ticularly during competition. The reliability of GPS for
monitoring movement is inﬂuenced by factors such as sam-
ple rate, velocity, and duration and type of task [8]. From the
available literature, it appears that the higher the velocity of
movement, the lower the GPS reliability [8]. Further, the
reliability is also reduced when assessing tasks that require a
change of direction and GPS does not quantify the load of
jumping, kicking the ball, and tackling actions [8]. Typically,
when using TMA for monitoring, arbitrary speed thresholds
are set [9]. These categories may include walking, jogging,
running, striding, sprinting, etc. [8]. It is becoming increas-
ingly popular to associate TMA data with arbitrary and
individualized speed thresholds. Lovell and Abt [9] com-
pared TMA data from video analysis as arbitrary units with
units expressed as individual speed thresholds (from pre-
determined maximal treadmill running speeds). While this
approach may be time-consuming, recent data suggest that
individualized speed thresholds may provide practically
signiﬁcant information regarding training loads [9].
5.3 Neuromuscular Function
Measures of neuromuscular function such as the jump test
(countermovement/squat jump), sprint performance, and is-
okinetic and isoinertial dynamometry are often utilized in the
team sport environment [10]. These assessments have become
popular due to the simplicity of administration and the min-
imal amount of additional fatigue induced [10]. Common
variables from jump test measurements include mean power,
peak velocity, peak force, jump height, ﬂight time, contact
time, and rate of force development [5, 10]. Equipment
requirements for jump testing may include contact mats,
portable or non-portable force platforms, and rotary encoders.
As isokinetic and isoinertial dynamometry requires special-
ized and often expensive equipment and does not replicate
sport-speciﬁc movements, they are often not utilized in
applied settings for strictly monitoring purposes [10].
Table 1 Variables that can be used to monitor training load and
subsequent fatigue
Variable
Units/descriptors
Frequency
Sessions per day, week, month
Time
Seconds, minutes, hours
Intensity
Absolute, relative
Type
Modality, environment
Maximal effort
Maximum mean power, jump height
Repeat efforts
Number of efforts, quality of efforts
Training volume
Time, intensity
Perception of effort
RPE
Perception of fatigue
and recovery
Questionnaires; REST-Q, VAS
Illness
Incidence, duration
Injury
Type, duration
Biochemistry and hormone
analysis
Baseline, response to exercise
Technique
Movement deviations
Body composition
Total body weight, fat mass,
fat-free mass
Sleep
Quality, quantity, routine
Psychology
Stress, anxiety, motivation
Sensations
Hopeful, neutral, hopeless
REST-Q Recovery Stress Questionnaire, RPE rating of perceived
exertion, VAS visual analog scale
Monitoring Load in Athletes
S141
123

----- Page 4 (native) -----
6 Methods of Monitoring Internal Load
6.1 Perception of Effort
The rating of perceived exertion (RPE) is one of the most
common means of assessing internal load. The use of RPE
is based on the notion that an athlete can monitor their
physiological stress during exercise as well as retrospec-
tively provide information regarding their perceived effort
post training or competition. Evidence suggests that RPE
correlates well with heart rate during steady-state exercise
and high-intensity interval cycling training, but not as well
during short-duration high-intensity soccer drills [11].
Further, a meta-analysis of the literature reported that while
RPE is a valid means of assessing exercise intensity, the
validity may not be as high as previously thought [12]. For
example, weighted mean validity coefﬁcients for heart rate
(HR), blood lactate, and percent of maximal oxygen uptake
(VO2max) were 0.62, 0.57, and 0.64, respectively [12]. RPE
is also often combined with other variables such as session
duration, HR, and blood lactate to provide additional
insights into the internal load experienced by the athlete.
6.2 Session Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE)
Foster [13] developed the session RPE method of quanti-
fying training load, which involves multiplying the ath-
lete’s RPE (on a 1–10 scale) by the duration of the session
(in minutes). This simple method has been shown to be
valid and reliable, with individual correlations between
session RPE and summated HR zone scores ranging
between r = 0.75 and r = 0.90 [13]. Subsequent research
in soccer training has identiﬁed individual correlations
between RPE and HR zones (range from r = 0.54 to
r = 0.78) and a correlation of r = 0.84 has also been
reported in endurance athletes [14]. The session RPE
method was developed to eliminate the need to utilize HR
monitors or other methods of assessing exercise intensity.
While the session RPE method may be simple, valid, and
reliable, the addition of HR monitoring may aid in under-
standing some of the variance that it does not explain.
6.3 Heart Rate (HR)
Monitoring HR is one of the most common means of
assessing internal load in athletes. The use of HR monitoring
during exercise is based on the linear relationship between
HR and the rate of oxygen consumption during steady-state
exercise [15]; however, percentage of maximum HR is often
used to both prescribe and monitor intensity [14]. Due to the
daily variation in HR, which may be up to 6.5 % for sub-
maximal HR [16], controlling for factors such as hydration,
environment, and medication is important.
6.4 HR to RPE Ratio
Examination of physiological and perceptual indicators of
load at a ﬁxed submaximal intensity can provide infor-
mation on the state of fatigue of the athlete. The com-
bination of HR and perception of effort measures (HR–
RPE ratio) may aid in elucidating fatigue [17]. For
example, the internal load of a cyclist who has a reduced
submaximal HR in combination with an elevated RPE,
may be quite different from a cyclist with a normal HR–
RPE ratio [1].
6.5 Training Impulse (TRIMP)
The training impulse (TRIMP) is often considered a useful
means of assessing training load [1]. A TRIMP is a unit of
physical effort that is calculated using training duration and
maximal, resting, and average HR during the exercise
session [18]. Further derivations of Banister’s initial
TRIMP model [19] have been developed. These include
Edwards’ TRIMP, which uses accumulated time in ﬁve
arbitrary HR zones multiplied by a weighting factor [20].
Lucia’s TRIMP model is similar to Edwards’; however,
there are three HR zones that are based on individually
determined lactate thresholds and onset of blood lactate
accumulation [21]. Further, the use of an individualized
TRIMP (iTRIMP) has been developed for use in runners
[22] and recently tested in soccer players [23]. The use of
the iTRIMP reduces issues associated with arbitrary zones
and generic weightings and has been shown to relate better
than previous TRIMP models to changes in velocity at
2 mmol L-1 in professional youth soccer players [23].
However, the authors recognize the technical and scientiﬁc
expertise and resources required for this type of individu-
alized internal load monitoring.
6.6 Lactate Concentrations
Blood lactate concentration is sensitive to changes in
exercise intensity and duration [24]; however, there are a
number of potential limitations to the use of regular mon-
itoring of lactate concentrations during training and com-
petition.
These
include
inter-
and
intra-individual
differences in lactate accumulation depending on ambient
temperature, hydration status, diet, glycogen content, pre-
vious exercise, and amount of muscle mass utilized, as well
as sampling procedures (time and site) [14].
6.7 Lactate to RPE Ratio
Similar to the HR–RPE ratio, the lactate to RPE ratio may
be useful in determining internal load and identifying
fatigue in athletes [25]. Again, changes in these parameters
S142
S. L. Halson
123

----- Page 5 (native) -----
at a ﬁxed submaximal workload may be useful to identify
physiological and perceptual changes in internal load.
6.8 HR Recovery (HRR)
HR recovery (HRR) is the rate at which HR declines at the
cessation of exercise and has been suggested to be a marker of
autonomic function and training status in athletes [26]. The
autonomic nervous system consists of the sympathetic and
parasympathetic systems, with the rise in HR during exercise
being the result of increased sympathetic activity in combi-
nation with a reduction in parasympathetic activity. HRR is
characterized by opposing autonomic nervous system activ-
ity, with an increase in parasympathetic activity and with-
drawal of sympathetic nervous activity [27]. HRR can be
calculated over varying timeframes, usually between 30 s and
2 min, with the difference between end of exercise HR and
HR at 60 s post-exercise being most commonly used [26].
In a recent review on HRR and monitoring changes in
training status [26], it is suggested that HRR improves with
increased training status, remains unchanged when there is
no change in training status, and decreases when training
status is reduced. It was then concluded that, with the
exception of overreaching (where research is conﬂicting),
HRR could be used to monitor the accumulation of fatigue
in athletes [26]. However, the considerations mentioned in
Sect. 6.3 regarding standardization of factors that may
inﬂuence HR are also relevant for HRR.
6.9 HR Variability
The measurement of resting or post-exercise HR variability
(HRV) has been suggested to indicate both positive and
negative adaptations to training [28]. However, the varying
methodological approaches employed, as well as high day-
to-day variability in environmental and homeostatic factors,
have resulted in inconsistent ﬁndings in the scientiﬁc liter-
ature [28]. As such, HRV has been shown to increase
without a change in ﬁtness (VO2max) [29] as well as
decrease alongside increases in ﬁtness [30]. Increases,
decreases, and no change in HRV have also been reported in
the over-training literature [31]. To overcome some of the
inconsistencies in ﬁndings, it has been suggested that both
weekly and 7-day rolling averages have higher validity than
single-day measurements [32]. While various HRV indices
can be measured, Plews et al. [28] prefer the use of the
natural logarithm of the square root of the mean sum of the
squared differences between R–R intervals (Ln rMSSD).
This is due to the lower co-efﬁcient of variation compared
with other indices, a lack of inﬂuence of breathing fre-
quency, and that data can be collected over a short period of
time and easily calculated. As is the case with the majority
of tools to monitor elite athletes, longitudinal monitoring
and an understanding of individual responses in HRV to
training, taper and competition is critical.
6.10 Biochemical/Hormonal/Immunological
Assessments
A relatively large amount of research has been conducted
examining a range of biochemical, hormonal and immu-
nological responses to exercise, primarily in a bid to
monitor fatigue and minimize excessive fatigue and illness.
It is beyond the scope of this article to review the literature
in this area; however, in short, no deﬁnitive marker has yet
been identiﬁed.
Serum creatine kinase activity is often a popular mea-
sure due to the simplicity of sample collection and analysis;
however, variability of this measure is very high, and a
poor temporal relationship with muscle recovery exists
[10]. Salivary cortisol and testosterone measures have been
shown to have some relationship to performance in the
overreached athlete; however, the usefulness of these
measures to quantify internal load on a regular basis has
not been examined [33]. Other hormonal measures and
suggested markers of immune function, such as salivary
immunoglobulin A, natural killer cell activity, and neu-
trophil phagocytic activity have also not been examined on
a routine basis, potentially due to both the expense and the
time required for analysis [34].
In summary, the use of biochemical, hormonal and/or
immunological measures as indicators of internal load is
currently not justiﬁed based on the limited research in this
area. In addition, these measures can be costly, time con-
suming and impractical in an applied environment [10].
6.11 Questionnaires and Diaries
Questionnaires and diaries can be a relatively simple and
inexpensive means of determining the training load and
subsequent responses to that training. However, both
questionnaires and diaries rely on subjective information,
which may need to be corroborated with physiological data
[11]. It is possible for athletes to manipulate data and/or
over- or underestimate training load. Importantly, the fre-
quency of questionnaire administration and length of
questionnaire should be considered to maximize compli-
ance and avoid questionnaire ‘fatigue’. A number of
questionnaires are identiﬁed in the literature as well as
being utilized by high-performance sport programs [5].
These include the Proﬁle of Mood States (POMS) [35], The
Recovery-Stress
Questionnaire
for
athletes
(REST-Q-
Sport) [36], Daily Analysis of Life Demands for Athletes
(DALDA) [37], and the Total Recovery Scale (TQR) [38].
While questionnaires can provide simple and often
useful subjective information, factors such as frequency of
Monitoring Load in Athletes
S143
123

----- Page 6 (native) -----
administration, time taken to complete the questions, sen-
sitivity of questionnaire, type of response required (written
answers or circling responses), time of day of completion
and the amount of time required for appropriate feedback
should all be considered.
6.12 Psychomotor Speed
Fatigued athletes often report impaired concentration and
cognitive complaints [39]; therefore, investigation into
psychomotor speed might provide insight into the cognitive
load induced by exercise. Impairments in psychomotor
speed following 2 weeks of overload training have been
observed in well trained cyclists [40] and in functionally
overreached cyclists [41]. Psychomotor speed is most often
assessed using computer-based reaction time and rapid
visual information processing tasks and therefore can be
affordable. While this measure may be applicable for
examining overreached athletes, it is yet to receive research
attention in the area of determining cognitive load as an
indicator of internal load.
6.13 Sleep
Sleep loss or deprivation can have signiﬁcant effects on
performance, motivation, perception of effort and cogni-
tion as well as numerous other biological functions [42].
Monitoring sleep quality and quantity can be useful for
early detection and intervention before signiﬁcant perfor-
mance and health decrements are observed. The use of
simple diaries indicating hours of sleep and perceived sleep
quality can be useful. Other non-invasive methods such as
actigraphy (wrist watch device utilizing accelerometry) can
provide more detailed information over shorter periods of
7–14 days. Actigraphy can provide data on bedtime, wake
time, sleep-onset latency (time taken to fall asleep), wake
during sleep, and sleep efﬁciency (estimate of sleep qual-
ity), as well as provide information on sleep routines. Due
to the increasing knowledge regarding the importance of
sleep, sleep monitoring and assessment is becoming pop-
ular with elite athletes, coaches, and support staff.
7 Current Monitoring Practices
Current best practice methods for monitoring fatigue in
high-performance sport were recently examined by Taylor
[5]. A total of 55 individuals working with high-perfor-
mance programs across Australia and New Zealand com-
pleted an online survey, with 91 % indicating that they
implemented some form of training monitoring and a
majority (70 %) reporting equal focus on load quantiﬁca-
tion and monitoring fatigue and recovery within their
system. The most important reasons for monitoring were
reported to be injury prevention (29 %), monitoring the
effectiveness of the training program (27 %), maintaining
performance (22 %), and preventing overtraining (22 %)
[5]. In terms of the importance of monitoring to the overall
performance of the athletes, 38 % of respondents rated it
extremely valuable. Self-report questionnaires were the
most common means of monitoring fatigue (84 %), with
the frequency of monitoring reported as daily (55 %),
multiple times per week (24 %), weekly (18 %), or
monthly (2 %) [5]. A performance test was used by 61 %
of respondents and included tests such as maximal jump
and/or strength tests, over-ground sprints, submaximal
cycling or running tests and sport-speciﬁc tests. These tests
were completed either weekly (33 %), monthly (30 %) or
more frequently than weekly (daily or multiple times per
week; 36 %). Measuring performance during competition
was also reported by 43 % of respondents, with GPS
monitoring being used by team sports, cyclists and rowers
[5]. Finally, hormonal proﬁling (n = 4), musculoskeletal
screening (n = 1) and resting HR upon waking (n = 1)
were other monitoring measures utilized.
From this assessment of monitoring, it appears that
monitoring is incorporated by many staff in high-perfor-
mance programs and that self-report measures are most
commonly used, followed by practical sport-speciﬁc per-
formance assessments. Support staff and coaches are
incorporating these techniques regularly, with the goal of
minimizing fatigue and injury as well as examining the
effectiveness of the training program.
7.1 Team Sport versus Individual Sport Athletes
The nature of load monitoring required or indeed possible
may vary greatly between team sport and individual sport
athletes. Monitoring in team sports is often perceived to be
more challenging due to the diverse range of training
activities (e.g. general conditioning, resistance training,
interval training and skill-based conditioning) commonly
employed. Further, the assessment of skilled performance
and ‘cognitive load’ or fatigue that inﬂuences decision
making is important for team sport performance and poses
many challenges for accurate assessment.
When monitoring team sport athletes, some of the most
useful measures involve physiological changes, assessment
of movement patterns and indicators of skills [1], with
these measures being as sport-speciﬁc as possible. Move-
ment patterns can be assessed by time-motion analysis or
GPS tracking [1]. Other difﬁculties when assessing team
sport competition performance include the inﬂuence of
team tactics (including those of the opposing team), envi-
ronmental conditions, team cohesion, home or away com-
petition and travel.
S144
S. L. Halson
123

----- Page 7 (native) -----
In individual sports such as cycling, swimming and
triathlon, the fatigue is often the result of high training
loads; the management of these loads through monitoring
can be particularly important [1]. Load monitoring is often
based on training volume, duration and intensity alongside
indicators of perceptual fatigue such as RPE.
8 The Importance of Individualized Monitoring
As highlighted in the previous section, there are a number
of differences between the requirements for monitoring of
team and individual sport athletes. Further, there is also a
need to ensure appropriate monitoring of individuals within
a team environment. Individual athletes may respond dif-
ferently to a given training stimulus, and the training load
required for adaptation may differ signiﬁcantly from one
athlete to another. Monitoring the individual athlete allows
the identiﬁcation of those athletes who are not responding
to the training program and where there may be a disas-
sociation between external and internal loads.
An individualized approach is also important to ensure
that the internal load experienced by the athlete corresponds
with that intended by the coach. Wallace et al. [6] assessed
the ecological validity of the session-RPE method to quantify
internal training load when compared with HR and distance
swum. One of the ﬁndings of the study when examining the
athlete’s and coach’s perception of internal load using the
session-RPE method was a tendency for athletes to report
higher training intensities than coaches during sessions
designed to be easy. Further, lower training intensities were
reported during sessions designed to be difﬁcult [6]. Thus,
individual monitoring of load can be useful to ensure the load
applied is matched to that which the coach prescribes.
9 Assessing Meaningful Change
The determination of whether changes observed when
monitoring training are clinically or practically relevant is
of particular importance. The use of magnitude-based
inferences with reference to sport-speciﬁc thresholds is
becoming popular in the scientiﬁc literature and with
applied practitioners in the ﬁeld [1]. Knowledge of the
smallest worthwhile change (SWC) and typical error of
measurement allows conﬁdence when making decisions
about the meaningfulness of any observed changes [5] and
whether these changes should be acted upon.
Twist and Highton [10] suggest that, due to the differences
in SWC and the variable reliability of different measures,
arbitrary cut-off points, such as a change greater than 5%,
should not be used. Identifying the reliability of each mea-
sure (co-efﬁcient of variation), the SWC and expressing
change in effect sizes can aid in detecting a meaningful
change. This approach can add scientiﬁc legitimacy to the
monitoring approach as well as allow the expression of data
in a meaningful manner to athletes and coaches.
10 Utilizing a Systems-Based Approach
With the increasing amounts of data available from moni-
toring devices such as GPS, digital video and SRM devices,
in combination with internal load measurements such as HR,
questionnaires
and
perceptions
of
fatigue
comes
the
requirement to incorporate this information into a database
and data-management system that results in efﬁcient access
to meaningful information. According to Pyne and Martin
[1], ‘‘a systems-based approach that integrates well-chosen
diagnostic tests, with smart sensor technology and a real-time
database and data management system, is the future for
fatigue management in elite sport.’’ There are now a number
of commercially available athlete monitoring systems such as
Training PeaksTM, Kinetic Athlete and Smartabase that allow
for integration of data, and simple reporting tools that are
becoming increasingly popular in high-performance sport.
10.1 Speciﬁc Example
Figure 1 depicts the TSSTM of an elite female cyclist over a
12-month period. The Training Peaks TSS is a training load
index that takes into account the duration and intensity of a
workout based on power output. It is conceptually modeled
after the HR-based TRIMP. By deﬁnition, 1 h spent at func-
tional threshold power (FTP) is equal to 100 points. The TSSTM
can be used to understand patterns by calculating short- and
long-term rolling averages to reﬂect fatigue and ﬁtness.
In 1980, Eric Banister proposed a means of modeling
performance based on assessments of ﬁtness and fatigue [19].
Fitness is considered a positive inﬂuence on performance and
is both slow to develop and slow to dissipate [1]. However,
fatigue can occur quickly and dissipate more rapidly. Fig-
ure 1 is a graphical representation of daily power of an elite
female cyclist over a 12-month period. Power data were
collected using an SRMTM device and analysed utilizing
Training PeaksTM software. These data can be examined over
time to highlight when personal best performances occur and
to gain an understanding of when athletes may be likely to
produce exceptional performances [1].
11 Key Features of a Sustainable Monitoring System
An effective and sustainable monitoring system is critical to
ensure data are effectively captured and reported. Table 2
below identiﬁes several key features of such a system.
Monitoring Load in Athletes
S145
123

----- Page 8 (native) -----
12 Conclusions
Despite both the increasing amounts of research and the
popularity of load monitoring in high-performance programs,
a single deﬁnitive tool that is accurate and reliable is not
evident. Indeed, the nature of the monitoring is likely to be
very different depending on the sport and more than one
monitoring tool is often utilized. This is likely the conse-
quence of individual physiological adaptation and responses
to exercise as well as the speciﬁcity required to be relevant to
differing sports. However, recent evidence suggests that
many athletes, coaches and support staff are taking an
increasingly scientiﬁc approach to load monitoring.
Utilizing scientiﬁc principles for load monitoring can be an
important means of reducing the risk of non-functional
overreaching, illness, and injury. With many athletes exposed
to high training loads and high training and competition
stress, it is necessary to manage risks associated with the
possible negative outcomes and to maintain optimal physio-
logical and psychological health and well-being of the athlete.
While a range of potential measures of external and internal
load have been described, numerous factors are involved in
determining the reasons for and against load monitoring, the
speciﬁc type of monitoring necessary for the sport and the
individual and ensuring change is evaluated in an appropriate
manner. If accurate and easy-to-interpret feedback is provided
to the athlete and coach, load monitoring can result in
enhanced knowledge of training responses, aid in the design
of training programs, provide a further avenue for commu-
nication between support staff and athletes and coaches and
ultimately enhance an athlete’s performance.
Acknowledgments
This article was published in a supplement
supported by the Gatorade Sports Science Institute (GSSI). The
supplement was guest edited by Lawrence L. Spriet, who attended a
meeting of the GSSI expert panel in February 2013 and received
honoraria from the GSSI, a division of PepsiCo, Inc., for his meeting
participation and the writing of his manuscript. He has not received
any honoraria for guest editing the supplement. Lawrence L. Spriet
selected peer reviewers for each paper (except his own) and managed
the process. Shona Halson, PhD, attended a meeting of the GSSI
Expert Panel in February 2013 and received honoraria from the GSSI,
a division of PepsiCo, Inc., for her meeting participation and the
writing of this manuscript. The views expressed in this manuscript are
those of the author and do not necessarily reﬂect the position or policy
of PepsiCo, Inc.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, dis-
tribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
author(s) and the source are credited.
TSS/d
Watts
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
ATL (TSS/d)
MMP4min (W)
CT (TSS/d)
MMP10min (W)
MMP5s (W)
MMP30s (W)
MMP1min (W)
Jun 07
Aug 07
Oct 07
Dec 07
Feb 08
Apr 08
Jun 08
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Fig. 1 The Training Stress
ScoreTM of an elite female
cyclist over a 12-month period.
The blue line depicts a long-
term rolling average (20 days)
and indicates ﬁtness CTL. The
pink line is a 5-day rolling
average and indicates fatigue
ATL. Maximal mean power for
speciﬁed durations are also
shown, with the highest three
MMPs for 5, 30 s, 1, 4, and
10 min averaged over
24 months highlighted. ATL
acute training load, CTL chronic
training load, MMP mean
maximal power, TSS Training
Stress ScoreTM. Reproduced
with permission from Nikki
Butterﬁeld
Table 2 Key features of a sustainable monitoring system
Ease of use/intuitive design
Efﬁcient result reporting
Can be used with or without internet connection, i.e. able to be
utilized effectively remotely
Data should be able to be translated into simple outcomes, such as
effect sizes
The system should be ﬂexible and adaptable for different sports
and athletes
Identiﬁcation of a meaningful change should be simple and
efﬁcient
Should include an assessment of cognitive function
Should be able to provide both individual responses and group
responses
S146
S. L. Halson
123

----- Page 9 (native) -----
References
1. Pyne DB, Martin DT. Fatigue-Insights from individual and team
sports. In: Marino FE, editor. Regulation of fatigue in exercise.
New York: Nova Science; 2011. p. 177–85.
2. Edwards RHT. Biochemical basis of fatigue in exercise perfor-
mance. Champaign: Human Kinetics; 1983.
3. Sahlin
K.
Metabolic
factors
in
fatigue.
Sports
Med.
1992;13:99–107.
4. Meeusen R, Duclos M, Foster C, et al. Prevention, diagnosis, and
treatment of the overtraining syndrome: joint consensus statement
of the European College of Sport Science and the American
College of Sports Medicine. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2013;45:
186–205.
5. Taylor K. Fatigue monitoring in high performance sport: a survey
of current trends. J Aus Strength Cond. 2012;20:12–23.
6. Wallace LK, Slattery KM, Coutts AJ. The ecological validity and
application of the session-RPE method for quantifying training
loads in swimming. J Strength Cond Res. 2009;23:33–8.
7. Jobson SA, Passﬁeld L, Atkinson G, et al. The analysis and uti-
lization of cycling training data. Sports Med. 2009;39:833–44.
8. Aughey RJ. Applications of GPS technologies to ﬁeld sports. Int J
Sports Physiol Perform. 2011;6:295–310.
9. Lovell R, Abt G. Individualisation of time-motion analysis: a
case-cohort example. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2013;8:456–8.
10. Twist C, Highton J. Monitoring fatigue and recovery in rugby
league players. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2013;8:467–74.
11. Borresen J, Lambert MI. The quantiﬁcation of training load, the
training response and the effect on performance. Sports Med.
2009;39:779–95.
12. Chen MJ, Fan X, Moe ST. Criterion-related validity of the Borg
ratings of perceived exertion scale in healthy individuals: a meta-
analysis. J Sports Sci. 2002;20:873–99.
13. Foster C. Monitoring training in athletes with reference to over-
training syndrome. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1998;30:1164–8.
14. Borresen J, Lambert MI. Quantifying training load: a comparison
of subjective and objective methods. Int J Sports Physiol Perform.
2008;3:16–30.
15. Hopkins WG. Quantiﬁcation of training in competitive sports.
Methods and applications. Sports Med. 1991;12:161–83.
16. Bagger M, Petersen PH, Pedersen PK. Biological variation in
variables associated with exercise training. Int J Sports Med.
2003;24:433–40.
17. Martin DT, Andersen MB. Heart rate-perceived exertion rela-
tionship during training and taper. J Sports Med Phys Fitness.
2000;40:201–8.
18. Morton RH, Fitz-Clarke JR, Banister EW. Modeling human
performance in running. J Appl Physiol. 1990;69:1171–7.
19. Banister EW, Calvert TW. Planning for future performance:
implications for long term training. Can J Appl Sport Sci. 1980;5:
170–6.
20. Edwards S. High performance training and racing. In: Edwards S,
editor. The heart rate monitor book. Sacramento: Feet Fleet Press;
1993. p. 113–23.
21. Lucia A, Hoyos J, Perez M, et al. Heart rate and performance
parameters in elite cyclists: a longitudinal study. Med Sci Sports
Exerc. 2000;32:1777–82.
22. Manzi V, Iellamo F, Impellizzeri F, et al. Relation between
individualized training impulses and performance in distance
runners. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2009;41:2090–6.
23. Akubat I, Patel E, Barrett S, et al. Methods of monitoring the
training and match load and their relationship to changes in ﬁt-
ness
in
professional
youth
soccer
players.
J
Sports
Sci.
2012;30:1473–80.
24. Beneke R, Leithauser RM, Ochentel O. Blood lactate diagnostics
in exercise testing and training. Int J Sports Physiol Perform.
2011;6:8–24.
25. Snyder AC, Jeukendrup AE, Hesselink MK, et al. A physiolo-
gical/psychological indicator of over-reaching during intensive
training. Int J Sports Med. 1993;14:29–32.
26. Daanen HA, Lamberts RP, Kallen VL, et al. A systematic review
on heart-rate recovery to monitor changes in training status in
athletes. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2012;7:251–60.
27. Shetler K, Marcus R, Froelicher VF, et al. Heart rate recovery:
validation
and
methodologic
issues.
J
Am
Coll
Cardiol.
2001;38:1980–7.
28. Plews DJ, Laursen PB, Stanley J, et al. Training adaptation and
heart rate variability in elite endurance athletes: opening the door
to effective monitoring. Sports Med. 2013;43:773–81.
29. Portier H, Louisy F, Laude D, et al. Intense endurance training on
heart rate and blood pressure variability in runners. Med Sci
Sports Exerc. 2001;33:1120–5.
30. Iellamo F, Legramante JM, Pigozzi F, et al. Conversion from
vagal to sympathetic predominance with strenuous training in
high-performance world class athletes. Circulation. 2002;105:
2719–24.
31. Halson SL, Jeukendrup AE. Does overtraining exist? An analysis
of overreaching and overtraining research. Sports Med. 2004;34:
967–81.
32. Plews DJ, Laursen PB, Kilding AE, et al. Heart rate variability in
elite triathletes, is variation in variability the key to effective
training? A case comparison. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2012;112:
3729–41.
33. Papacosta E, Nassis GP. Saliva as a tool for monitoring steroid,
peptide and immune markers in sport and exercise science. J Sci
Med Sport. 2011;14:424–34.
34. Robson-Ansley PJ, Gleeson M, Ansley L. Fatigue management in
the preparation of Olympic athletes. J Sports Sci. 2009;27:
1409–20.
35. Morgan WP, Brown DR, Raglin JS, et al. Psychological moni-
toring
of
overtraining
and
staleness.
Br
J
Sports
Med.
1987;21:107–14.
36. Kellmann M, Kallus KW. The recovery-stress-questionnaire for
athletes. Frankfurt: Swets and Zeitlinger; 2000.
37. Rushall BS. A tool for measuring stress tolerance in elite athletes.
J Appl Sport Psych. 1990;2:51–66.
38. Kentta G, Hassmen P. Overtraining and recovery. A conceptual
model. Sports Med. 1998;26:1–16.
39. Nederhof E, Lemmink KA, Visscher C, et al. Psychomotor speed:
possibly a new marker for overtraining syndrome. Sports Med.
2006;36:817–28.
40. Rietjens GJ, Kuipers H, Adam JJ, et al. Physiological, bio-
chemical and psychological markers of strenuous training-
induced fatigue. Int J Sports Med. 2005;26:16–26.
41. Nederhof E, Lemmink K, Zwerver J, et al. The effect of high load
training on psychomotor speed. Int J Sports Med. 2007;28:595–601.
42. Halson SL. Sleep in elite athletes and nutritional interventions to
enhance sleep. Sports Med. 2014;44(Suppl 1):13–23.
Monitoring Load in Athletes
S147
123