

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Writingnarrativeliteraturereviewsfor
peer-reviewedjournals:secretsof
thetrade
BartN.Green,DC,MSEd,DACBSPa,
ClaireD.Johnson,DC,MSEd,DACBSPb,
AlanAdams,DC,MS,MSEd,DACBNc
aAssociate Editor, National University of Health Sciences. bEditor, National University of Health Sciences.
cVice President of Academic Affairs and Program Development, Texas Chiropractic College
Submit requests for reprints to: Dr. Bart Green, National University of Health Sciences, 200 E. Roosevelt Rd,
Lombard, IL 60148, bgreen@nuhs.edu
Sources of support: This article is reprinted with permission. Its original citation is: Green BN, Johnson CD,
Adams A. Writing narrative literature reviews for peer-reviewed journals: secrets of the trade. J Sports
Chiropr Rehabil 2001;15:5–19.
ABSTRACT
Objective: To describe and discuss the process used to write a narrative review of the literature for publication in
a peer-reviewed journal. Publication of narrative overviews of the literature should be standardized to increase
their objectivity.
Background: In the past decade numerous changes in research methodology pertaining to reviews of the literature
have occurred. These changes necessitate authors of review articles to be familiar with current standards in the
publication process.
Methods: Narrative overview of the literature synthesizing the findings of literature retrieved from searches of
computerized databases, hand searches, and authoritative texts.
Discussion: An overview of the use of three types of reviews of the literature is presented. Step by step instructions
for how to conduct and write a narrative overview utilizing a ‘best-evidence synthesis’ approach are discussed,
starting with appropriate preparatory work and ending with how to create proper illustrations. Several resources
for creating reviews of the literature are presented and a narrative overview critical appraisal worksheet is
included. A bibliography of other useful reading is presented in an appendix.
Conclusion: Narrative overviews can be a valuable contribution to the literature if prepared properly. New and
experienced authors wishing to write a narrative overview should find this article useful in constructing such a
paper and carrying out the research process. It is hoped that this article will stimulate scholarly dialog amongst
colleagues about this research design and other complex literature review methods. (J Chiropr Med 2006;5:101–
117)
Key Indexing Terms: Review Literature; Authorship; Peer Review, research; Manuscripts; Meta-
analysis
Clinical Update
101
0899-3467/Clinical Update/1002-049$3.00/0
JOURNAL OF CHIROPRACTIC MEDICINE
Copyright © 2006 by National University of Health Sciences

----- Page 2 (native) -----
INTRODUCTION
Background
The purpose of this article is to describe and discuss
the research design known as a review of the litera-
ture and to delineate how to write a particular vari-
ety of this research design, the narrative overview of
the literature. Another intention of this article is to
provide educational information and assistance for
those who have not yet published a literature re-
view and to decrease potential author frustration
that can arise during the peer review process. It is
important to note that the general classification of
’literature review’ has three varieties: narrative re-
view, qualitative systematic review and quantitative
systematic review. Each will be addressed in this
article. However, the primary focus of this article
will be on the writing of a narrative review.
A literature review is a type of research article pub-
lished in a professional peer-reviewed journal. The
purpose of a literature review is to objectively report
the current knowledge on a topic and base this
summary on previously published research.1 A lit-
erature review provides the reader with a compre-
hensive overview and helps place that information
into perspective.2
The literature review research design is different
from other research designs because rather than
patients, data to write the report are collected from
the published literature.3,4 These full length articles
provide a new conclusion to the literature, not the
brief summary of literature that is given typically in
the introduction or discussion sections of other re-
search designs.2,5 In creating a literature review, the
author searches through the literature, retrieves nu-
merous sources of information and synthesizes the
findings of all relevant sources into one article.2,3,6
Thus, a vast amount of information is brought to-
gether and written in a manner in which the reader
can clearly understand the topic.
There are several reasons to read reviews of the
literature. For the clinician, they can save valuable
time when reviewing or searching for information
about patient care by condensing a great amount of
information into a few pages.1,6,7 The clinician can
read one paper instead of sifting through the whole
of the literature to find the answer to a clinical
question; the author of the literature review has
already done most of this work for him. Literature
reviews also provide information for decision mak-
ers and are used by researchers to identify, justify
and refine hypotheses and to recognize and avoid
pitfalls in previous research.1,8 Additionally, reviews
of the literature provide a basis for validating as-
sumptions,9 provide insight into the dynamics un-
derlying the findings of other studies10 and may
offer more conclusive results than a single primary
research study.11 Depending on the variety of litera-
ture review, they may provide a very high level of
evidence for making clinical practice decisions.
One of the cautions that one must consider with
literature reviews is the bias that is often associated
with them.10,11,12,13 As an author, it is important to
attempt to reduce bias as much as possible through
appropriate writing and research techniques. An in-
crease in objectivity leads to improved utility and
credibility in publications.14 While certain criteria
for literature reviews have been published,1 little
has been accomplished in terms of standardizing
and verifying the validity of the criteria pro-
posed.1,14 Indeed, many changes have taken place
in recent years regarding publication standards for
literature reviews10,12 and it is important for authors
to keep current with these changes. This paper
clearly states the minimum acceptable criteria they
pertain to narrative overviews of the literature.
METHODS
Information used to write this paper was collected
from the sources listed in table 1.
DISCUSSION
Three Varieties of Reviews of the Literature
The three basic types of literature reviews are nar-
rative reviews, qualitative systematic reviews, and
Table 1
Sources Used for This Overview
• MEDLINE search 1966–January 2001. Key words:
Review of the Literature; Authorship; Meta-analysis;
Narrative overview.
• CINAHL search from 1982 to December 2000. Key
words: Review of the Literature; Authorship;
Meta-analysis; Narrative overview.
• Hand searches of the references of retrieved
literature.
• Personal and college libraries searching for texts
on research methods and literature reviews.
• Discussions with experts in the field of reviews of
the literature.
• Personal experience participating in and writing
several reviews of the literature.
Volume5
•
Number3
•
Fall2006
102

----- Page 3 (native) -----
quantitative systematic reviews (meta-analyses).
The amount of clinical evidence afforded by each of
these designs increases as the methods employed to
conduct them become more detailed and elaborate.
In this section, the emphasis will be placed on nar-
rative reviews, since they are the subject of this
article; a brief description of qualitative and quanti-
tative systematic reviews will also be given.
Narrative Literature Review
There are three types of narrative reviews of the
literature: editorials, commentaries, and overview
articles.4,15
Editorials, typically written by the editor of the jour-
nal or an invited guest, may be a narrative review if
the author retrieves and synthesizes information
about a particular topic for the reader. Usually these
types of narrative reviews are based upon a short,
select and narrowly focused review of only a few
papers.15 However, editorials may be no more than
the editor’s comments regarding a current issue of
the journal or a current event in health care. There-
fore, editorials do not automatically qualify as nar-
rative reviews.
Commentaries may also be written as a narrative
review, however they are typically written with a
particular opinion being expressed.4 In these articles
research methodology is usually not presented and
the author’s synthesis of the articles demonstrates
bias. Commentaries are usually shorter than a full
length review article and it is expected that the
author possesses expertise in the content area of the
commentary. In short, a commentary is a biased
narrative review that draws upon the wisdom of the
commentator. Usually the purpose of a commentary
is to provoke scholarly dialog among the readers of
the journal.
Narrative overviews, also known as an unsystematic
narrative reviews,16 are comprehensive narrative syn-
theses of previously published information. The de-
tails of how to prepare this type of article are pre-
sented in this paper. This type of literature review
reports the author’s findings in a condensed format
that typically summarizes the contents of each ar-
ticle.1 Some researchers suggest that a proper narra-
tive overview should critique each study in-
cluded,2,17 but other authors write that this is not
necessarily a property of overviews.1 It is up to the
author to determine which of these two paths to
take when writing the article.
There are many good reasons to write a quality
narrative overview. Narrative overviews are useful
educational articles since they pull many pieces of
information together into a readable format. They
are helpful in presenting a broad perspective on a
topic and often describe the history or development
of a problem or its management.2,10 Faculty like to
use overviews in the classroom because they are
often more up to date than textbooks, provide a
single source for students to read from, and expose
students to peer reviewed literature. Narrative over-
views are also used as educational articles to bring
practitioners up to date with certain clinical proto-
cols.7,11 Some journals, publish quizzes related to
such articles; these quizzes can be submitted to
regulating boards for continuing education credit.
Often discussing theory and context, narrative over-
views can serve to provoke thought and contro-
versy. For this reason, these reviews may be an
excellent venue for presenting philosophical per-
spectives in a balanced manner. Philosophical ar-
ticles can be excellent for stimulating scholarly dia-
log amongst readers. Readers can participate in this
process by writing to the letters to the editor section
of the journal and present their opinions and critical
appraisal. The letters to the editor section can be a
dynamic part of a journal; several times in the his-
tory of health care tremendous insight into patient
management and research design has been pre-
sented in this forum.7
Authors of narrative overviews are often acknowl-
edged experts in the field and have conducted re-
search themselves.6,7,15,18 Editors sometimes solicit
narrative overviews from specific authors in order to
bring certain issues to light.18 Authors must be care-
ful to avoid a common pitfall of the overview de-
sign, which is to present an opinion oriented argu-
ment based upon a myriad of references,3 rather
than objective conclusions based upon the literature
reviewed. For this reason, some studies have deter-
mined that some experts are less likely to adhere to
high levels of methodological rigor when writing
these papers than non-experts.14 Therefore, wheth-
er one is a novice or expert, the critical factor in
writing a good narrative review is to use good meth-
ods.
Once quite common, overviews are slowly falling
into disfavor in some journals due to a lack of
Fall2006
•
Number3
•
Volume5
103

----- Page 4 (native) -----
systematic methods that should be employed to
construct them.11,19 Rarely have the methods used
in creating the paper been divulged to the
reader,1,10,11 which is a problem identified as early
as 1987.20 Usually the number of sources employed
to find the literature are incomplete,4,10 possibly
creating an insignificant knowledge base from
which to draw a conclusion. In this rather unsys-
tematic approach, selection of information from
primary articles is usually subjective, lacks explicit
criteria for inclusion and leads to a biased re-
view.4,7,10,13,16 The author’s interpretation and syn-
thesis of information should take into account ma-
jor differences between studies, such as if patients
samples in one study are completely different than
in another4 or that research designs are not compa-
rable.3,7 Without identifying these differences, one
takes the risk of providing faulty conclusions or
incorrect information. All of these potential pitfalls
are avoidable if the author is aware of them and
takes the appropriate steps to avoid them.
In the past, many reviews of the literature were
constructed based upon the personal papers of the
author, creating a bias that was slanted to what that
author found interesting or controversial.3 When
this occurs it is difficult to discern if the author has
constructed an objective review of the literature or a
lengthy commentary. Biased writers will draw con-
clusions based more on opinion than data, which is
not a truthful representation of the research.13,16
Often times this faulty synthesis is then repeated by
other authors and the mistakes are handed down
from one study to the next,1 thus perpetuating the
errors. The aforementioned problems related to lit-
erature reviews are a potential danger in health care
if readers make patient health care decisions based
upon faulty reviews.13,18
While narrative overviews are great papers to read
to keep up to date, receive continuing education
credits, or challenge your way of thinking, they are
not a form of evidence that should be used fre-
quently when making decisions about how to solve
specific clinical patient problems. Narrative over-
views are one of the weakest forms of evidence to
use for making clinical decisions in regard to patient
care,21 primarily because they deal more with
broader issues than focused clinical problems. Addi-
tionally, there is a higher degree of bias involved in
overviews than some other research designs.21,22
Nevertheless, narrative overviews constitute an im-
portant component in the literature base.
Qualitative Systematic Literature Review
A systematic review is a type of literature review
that employs detailed, rigorous and explicit meth-
ods.4,22,23 A detailed search of the literature based
upon a focused question or purpose is the hallmark
of a systematic review.4,22 Since the review is struc-
tured around a focused clinical question, it allows
the researcher to develop criteria that determine if a
research publication should be included or excluded
in the final synthesis.22,23 Step-by-step methodology
used in the research is described. Authors of system-
atic reviews attempt to obtain all original (primary)
research studies published on the topic under study
by searching in multiple databases, performing hand
searches and contacting authors of previously pub-
lished research. Additionally, authors will attempt
to locate articles that may not have been published
because the results of the study did not support the
research hypothesis.1,4,22,23
Each paper is reviewed in a systematic and consis-
tent manner, usually by several independent re-
viewers, and usually rated using a scoring system by
the authors.1,4,23 Each piece of evidence drawn from
a paper for the literature review is extracted in the
same fashion to help decrease the bias that occurs
when this information extraction is done subjec-
tively, such as in a narrative overview.22 Authors
create data, or evidence tables, in order to tease out
the differences in the results of different studies.24
These reviews of the literature are called qualitative
because the process by which the individual studies
are integrated includes a summary and critique of
the findings derived from systematic methods, but
does not statistically combine the results of all of the
studies reviewed.22,24
Because of the rigorous methods employed in con-
ducting qualitative systematic reviews, they are a
more powerful evidence-based source to garner
clinical information than narrative reviews, case re-
ports, case series, and poorly conducted cohort stud-
ies.21
Quantitative Systematic Literature
Review (Meta-analyses)
A systematic review that critically evaluates each
paper and statistically combines the results of the
studies is called a quantitative systematic review of
the literature, also known as a meta-analy-
sis.1,10,22,23,24 Introduced in 1976, meta-analyses
Volume5
•
Number3
•
Fall2006
104

----- Page 5 (native) -----
aim to make an objective science out of research
synthesis.10 Meta-analyses employ all of the rigor-
ous methodology of qualitative systematic reviews.
In addition to the inherent strengths of the system-
atic review process, the major benefit of a meta-
analysis is the pooling of data between studies. In
this process, the authors of a meta-analysis will
gather the original patient data from each of the
studies under review, pool it all together in a data-
base, and perform the appropriate statistics on this
larger sample size. This is especially useful when
clinical trials exist in the literature but possess low
sample sizes that prevent the authors from making
conclusions that can be generalized to the popula-
tion at large.1 This can be particularly powerful if
the studies under review are very similar in their
construction because several studies can be com-
bined as one larger base of data leading to more
powerful conclusions.23
The pooling of data that can be analyzed statistically,
which is the strength of the meta-analysis,25 can
also be a drawback because it is difficult to find
studies that are similar enough to one another to
draw valid comparisons.4,25,26 There is disagreement
amongst experts about the most appropriate meth-
ods to combine the data from studies with different
variables (eg, patient populations, clinical outcome
measures, treatments).25,26,27
Meta-analyses are considered to be a very high form
of evidence for making clinical decisions because the
results of the review are produced from a rigorous
critical appraisal and pooling of data from the stud-
ies reviewed.11,12,16,26 This leads to a more general-
izable conclusion.21
Writing a Narrative Review of the Literature,
Step By Step
Preparation
Before involving oneself completely in the research
endeavor, it is important to observe a few tips that
will sustain the author during the process of the
project. These pearls of wisdom, presented in table
2, are gathered from experienced authors and are
useful for novice as well as experienced writers.
The first step in writing a narrative overview is to
perform a preliminary search of the literature.24 In
this endeavor, the author should search the litera-
ture to see what other work in the area of interest
has already been published.5,17 This initial work
should help the author to refine the topic and ob-
jective of the overview being written. For example,
if one wishes to publish a review of the literature
about the effect of chiropractic adjustments on cer-
vical spine pain, the initial search should reveal if
someone has recently published such a study. In
addition, this initial work will also give the author a
preview of the number of articles available on the
topic. If an article is already published on the very
same topic that the author wishes to write about,
then it may be better to select a slightly different
topic or to slightly modify the focus of the objective.
On the other hand, if there has never been a review
published about the topic, then this helps to estab-
lish the need for this particular contribution.5,17
Once armed with a refined topic, it is time to pro-
ceed with the next steps.
General guidelines
The text that follows delineates what would prob-
ably be acceptable in many journals. These recom-
Table 2
Words of Wisdom for Authors Writing Narrative Overviews
Interesting Topic
Select a topic that you are very interested in, lest you do a lot of work and
then lose momentum to finish the project. There are many half-finished
papers collecting dust on shleves because authors lost the drive and
interest to complete the task. Select an enticing and engaging topic that will
keep you fascinated throughout the process.
Doable Project
Select a topic with a feasible focus. A narrative review on ‘headaches’ is an
impossible task, whereas ‘chiropractic management of muscle tension
headaches’ can be a manageable narrative review. Keep the focus clear and
defined and you will be able to complete the paper.
Get Help
Get help early and often. Call upon people around you who have writing
experience, such as colleagues or faculty who have published narvative
reviews. Consider asking them for their opinions before you begin the paper
and then ask them to review drafts of your paper before submitting it. Some
journal editors can direct you to others that may be of assistance and may be
able to help you themselves when time permits.
Fall2006
•
Number3
•
Volume5
105

----- Page 6 (native) -----
mendations follow the approach put forth by Robert
Slavin, which is called a “best-evidence synthesis”.10
However, there are no rigid published guidelines
designating exactly what should or should not be
included in a quality narrative overview.10 A suc-
cessful narrative review should do the following:
present information that is written using the re-
quired elements for a narrative review, be well
structured, synthesize the available evidence per-
taining to the topic, and convey a clear message.
An objective and scientific approach on behalf of the
author should be conveyed and the paper should
follow the formatting guidelines published in the
Uniform Requirements for Manuscripts Submitted to Bio-
medical Journals. These guidelines describe in detail
what is necessary in order to prepare a manuscript
for submission to a peer reviewed journal. Preparing
a manuscript using these guidelines is essential to
insure that manuscripts are uniform in nature, as
objective as possible, and can be processed by edi-
tors in an expeditious manner, thus providing the
author with a better chance for earlier accep-
tance.28,29 The Uniform Requirements can be found
on the Internet at http://www.icmje.org/
index.html.
The presentation of a narrative review should be as
objective as possible. It is essential that prospective
authors remember that the intention of a narrative
review is to describe and synthesize the available
literature on a topic, providing a conclusion from
this evidence.18 The necessary elements of a narra-
tive review are similar to those required of any form
of scholarly article (Table 3). A detailed rating scale
for narrative reviews of the literature is also in-
cluded in this article as Appendix A.
Title
The title of the article should be interesting and
clearly describe the topic being reviewed.30 It is also
helpful to readers if the words “literature review” or
“review of the literature” appear somewhere in the
title to make it clear to readers what research design
is being used. The reader instantly knows what the
major topic is and that previous publications about
the topic are being synthesized. A good example of a
title is Injuries Associated with Soccer: A Review of Epi-
demiology and Etiology. A bad example of a literature
review title might be The Epidemiology of Soccer Inju-
ries. This title would infer that a population based
study was performed to determine the kinds and
frequency of soccer injuries, which would be mis-
leading to the reader.
Abstract
The abstract is a structured summary of the article
that offers the reader a brief presentation of the
review and relates the most important informa-
tion.11 The abstract and the title are entered into
computer databases and indexing systems, and are
essentials for those conducting literature searches. A
well written abstract allows people searching the
literature to find the information in their search and
discern whether or not they should retrieve the
paper.29,30
Abstracts should be written in a structured format.31
Structured abstracts are required in order to assure
that all necessary information for an abstract is re-
ported for the reader. In the past, narrative abstracts
were often used by journals, but authors sometimes
did not adequately report the necessary elements of
the study in the abstract. Thus, most journals
adopted the structured abstract format over ten
years ago.30,31 Subsections for abstracts of narrative
overviews of the literature typically consist of the
following, further described in table 4: objective,
background, methods, discussion; conclusion, key
words.28
Introduction
Early in the introduction, the author should clearly
state the research purpose or focus. Clearly stated
aims tell the reader that the study was planned out
in advance, usually resulting in a well outlined
study that presents useful information.3,18,24
Next, the author must make a case for the need or
importance of the study. This is essential in order to
relate the importance of this research to the reader.
This usually requires that the author has already
reviewed the literature pertaining to the topic and
Table 3
Components of a Narrative Overview in
Order of Appearance in the Manuscript
1. Title
2. Structured abstract
3. Introduction
4. Methods
5. Discussion
6. Conclusion
7. Acknowledgements (if applicable)
8. References
9. Tables
10. Figures
11. Figure captions
Volume5
•
Number3
•
Fall2006
106

----- Page 7 (native) -----
has discovered a deficiency of a well written review
of the literature in the area. Authors can use the
results of their preparatory literature search dis-
cussed previously as well as further reading un-
veiled during the course of conducting the formal
literature review, described later, for this purpose.
This information should be written in the introduc-
tion to state why the study is important and place it
in context with other published information.10,24
The author should also define any unusual terms or
words that are essential to understanding the infor-
mation in the paper.10 For example, if the paper is
about isometric low back extension endurance tests,
it would be paramount that the author clearly de-
fine what these tests are and what they do.
Methods
The methods section of the article should describe
step by step how the study was performed.11,14,18,24
Sources of information: The most efficient way to be-
gin a literature search is to use electronic databases.
There are many different databases available for
searching and it is important that the appropriate
databases are searched, depending on the objective
and topic of the paper.9 Unfortunately, many people
think that only searching MEDLINE is adequate, but
it is not.4 This is especially true in when writing on
topics pertaining to chiropractic and allied health
disciplines because many journals from these pro-
fessions are listed, or indexed, in databases other
than MEDLINE. It is usually necessary to search at
least two databases appropriate for the area of study
in order to provide a reasonable breadth and depth
on a topic. Searches through the references of ar-
ticles that are retrieved, authoritative texts, personal
contacts with experts, and reviews of unpublished
primary research may also be warranted and impor-
tant to include.17 The breadth and depth of search-
ing is dependent on the topic and objective. Sum-
marily, the author should look in all the locations
that are appropriate for finding the information they
need.
Examples of common databases used in the health
sciences and their areas of focus are listed in table 5.
Some of these databases are free of charge while
others are not. If an author wishes to avoid paying
to perform searches in some of these databases, they
are often available in health science libraries for
students and alumni to use at no cost. Consult a
local chiropractic or other health science library to
find out which databases they carry and also to
inquire about search fees.17 Authoritative texts may
also be found at college libraries or even in your
own personal library. At college libraries there are
usually computerized databases that catalog all of
the books in the library’s holdings. These too can be
searched using search terms.24
It is crucial to divulge the databases that were
searched in the article.3,7,13 This means that it is
important for the author to keep track of the
databases searched and the terms used, in order
to report them to the readers. Some authors
also like to keep track of how many ‘hits’ or
article citations that are found with each search. A
sample tracking sheet is provided in table 6. Mini-
mum requirements for narrative reviews are that
authors should state the database searched, a
starting year, and the ending year and month
of the search. The following example is adequate,
“MEDLINE was searched using the terms ‘low back
pain’ and ‘manipulation’ from 1966 through June,
2000.” Stating, “We searched MEDLINE from 1980
Table 4
Standard Subsections of the Narrative Overview Structured Abstract
Subsection
Description
Objective
• Clearly state the purpose of the paper.
Background
• Describe what prompted this review or why it is being written.
• Briefly present a context for the overview.
Methods:
• Briefly describe the methods used to conduct the ovewview.
Discussion:
• Describe what information the overview presents to the reader.
Conclusion
• Summarize what the overview contributes to the literature.
• State what new conclusion is drawn as a result of the synthesis of the
literature reviewed.
Key words
• Use terms found in the Index Medicus database, which are called medical
subheadings (MeSH).9 MeSH can be found at the PubMed home page
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=mesh).
• List additional words that may be unique to the topic or to the profession.
Fall2006
•
Number3
•
Volume5
107

----- Page 8 (native) -----
to the present.” is grossly insufficient because
the reader is not told what the word “present”
actually means. Months can slip away between the
day of the search and publication, so it must be
defined.
Search terms & delimiting: Setting the specific param-
eters for the literature search is necessary in order to
make the project feasible since it is not reasonable to
review every single paper that has even the most
minute relation to the topic of study.17,24 The
boundaries set in this step must be comprehensive
enough to insure that the author may retrieve all
relevant studies, but narrow enough to focus the
effort.13,17
To do this, one should take the primary concepts or
themes of the topic under study and turn them into
Table 5
Databases to Consider When Performing a Literature Search
Name of Database
How to Access
Internet Site
Pay Site?
PubMed
Online software
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/
query.fcgi
No
Emphasis: medicine, nursing, dentistry, veterinary medicine, and preclinical sciences.
Also includes citations for chiropractic, complementary medicine, and allied health.
Index to Chiropractic
Online software
http://www.chiroindex.org
No
Literature
Emphasis: chiropractic publications
MANTIS
Online search software or
CD-ROM
http://www.healthindex.com
Yes
Emphasis: Health promotion, prevention, and conservative alternative therapies,
including: acupuncture, allopathic medicine, chiropractic, herbal medicine,
homeopathy, naturopathy, osteopathic medicine, physical therapy, traditional Chinese
medicine.
ERIC (Educational
Online search software
http://www.ericsp.org/
No
Resources
Information Center)
Emphasis: Contains more than one million abstracts of education-related documents
and journal articles, including health sciences.
AMED (Allied and
Complementary
Online search software,
CD-ROM, disc, print
http://www.bl.uk/collections/health/
amed.html
Yes
Medicine Database)
Emphasis: Unique bibliographic database produced by the Health Care Information
Service of the British Library. Journals related to complementary medicine,
physiotherapy, occupational therapy, rehabilitation, podiatry, palliative care.
CINAHL (Cumulative
Online search software
http://www.cinahl.com
Yes
Index to Nursing and
Allied Health
Literature)
Emphasis: Citations for nursing, allied health, complementary medicine, including
chiropractic.
EMBASE/Excerpta
Medica
Online search software,
CD-ROM, print
http://www.elsevier.com/wps/find/
bibliographicdatabasedescription
.cws_home/523328/
description#description
Yes
Emphasis: Diverse database including: biomedical sciences, human medicine, health
policy and management, occupational and environmental health, alternative and
complementary medicine, nursing.
SPORT Discus
Online software vendors
http://www.sirc.ca/products/
sportdiscus.cfm
Yes
Emphasis: Sports medicine, physical education, physical fitness, sport law,
administration, training, sport science, kinesiology, coaching, physical therapy,
recreation.
Current Contents
Online search software
http://scientific.thomson.com/products/
ccc
Yes
Emphasis: Clinical medicine; life sciences; agriculture; biology and environmental
sciences; arts and humanities; physical, chemical and earth sciences; engineering,
computing and technology; social and behavioral sciences.
Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews
Online search software
http://www.cochrane.org/reviews/en/
Yes
Emphasis: High quality evidence to inform people providing and receiving care, and
those people responsible for research, teaching, funding and administration at all
levels.
DARE (Database of
Abstracts and
Reviews of
Effectiveness)
Online search software
http://www.york.ac.uk/inst/crd/
crddatabases.htm
No
Emphasis: Database of abstracts of systematic reviews assessed for effectiveness.
Volume5
•
Number3
•
Fall2006
108

----- Page 9 (native) -----
single words, which can be used as search terms. In
addition, insure that the search terms used are rec-
ognized by the vocabulary of the computer data-
base. This is usually easy to do since most comput-
erized indices have a key word search function
within them that will find synonyms in its database
for the word that you enter. Most journals use the
MeSH vocabulary system adopted by the National
Library of Medicine.9 These key words will be the
ones that you will also list in the key terms section
of the abstract.17
It is not necessary to search databases using solely
key words of the database. Most databases will allow
you to search using additional words that you find
appropriate. This is sometimes helpful in finding
more articles since the databases usually search
through title, abstract and key words of the articles
indexed. If the right terms are not used during the
literature search, then chances are high that some
important studies will be missed. General terms,
such as ‘pain’ may result in so many articles to
search through that the authors miss studies. Like-
wise, highly focused words may narrow the search
down too far, revealing no research. Just as with
reporting the databases used, each search term used
to conduct the search ought to be divulged to the
reader.3 How terms are connected together would
also be useful to know.
When writing papers using terms unique to a pro-
fession, it is important to recognize that the term
may have a different meaning in various database.
For example, the term “subluxation” in the medical
literature has a distinctly different meaning than in
the chiropractic literature. The spelling of words
should also be considered, based upon the data-
base being searched. Exemplary is that in the Index
to Chiropractic Literature database, a search using the
spelling “technique” will provide different results
than a search with “technic”. This occurs because
the chiropractic profession historically used the
latter term to describe different chiropractic ad-
justing procedures and the indexing system con-
tinues to use this term. This is also an excellent
example of why it is important to verify the key
words vocabulary of each database. Therefore, to
properly delimit a literature search, authors need
to select key words, including MeSH, keep track
of the terms and search strings used, and report
this information to the reader when writing the
paper.
Selection criteria employed: It is important to briefly
describe what selection criteria were used to include
or exclude a study from the review.7,10,11,18 This
helps keep the paper focused and helps to insure
that papers are included because of their relevance
to the topic rather than how much the author
agrees or disagrees with the study.13,18 Exclusion
criteria should be identified that the authors used to
eliminate studies from consideration that were not
pertinent to the focused purpose of the study. Rea-
sons for exclusion may be old data (early research)
or inappropriate topics.17 For example, researchers
studying the use of isometric muscle endurance of
the lumbar spine would exclude papers found that
discuss standard orthopedic muscle testing of the
low back because it is not the type of muscle testing
being reviewed.
Inclusion criteria should tell the reader what factors
the authors considered in order to include a paper
in the review. This should include articles pub-
lished in various languages, and other factors perti-
nent to the purpose of the paper. Be careful not to
place too many limiting exclusion criteria or have
inclusion criteria that are too wide; papers outside
the domain of the purpose of the study may be
included inadvertently or inappropriately if this oc-
curs.
Summarily, when writing the methods section, the
author should ask him or herself, “Can the reader
replicate the search that was done based upon what
I have written in the methods section?” If the an-
swer is “Yes” then this section has been adequately
written.
Table 6
Sample Literature Search Tracking Sheet.
Date of Search
Database
Years Searched
Search Terms
Strings of Terms
# Hits
1/12/99
PubMed
1975–12/1998
Health promotion
None used
11330
1/12/99
PubMed
1975–12/1998
Health promotion;
chiropractic
Health promotion and
chiropractic
6
1/12/99
Cinahl
1966–12/1998
Preventive medicine,
chiropractic
Preventive medicine
and chiropractic
0
Fall2006
•
Number3
•
Volume5
109

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Discussion
Synthesis: The part of conducting a narrative over-
view that takes the most mental energy is synthe-
sizing all of the information retrieved in the litera-
ture search into comprehensive paragraphs. Since
this is the primary use of reviews of the literature it
is imperative that this section be written as clearly
and as objectively as possible.18 It is here that read-
ers should find the information that they want in
one location.10
How to structure this section and summarize the
information into a comprehensible synthesis de-
pends on what is being reviewed. If an author is
writing a review pertaining to the current best ap-
proaches in assessing and managing patients with a
particular disorder, it may be a good idea to write
the synthesis in the order that the clinical encounter
normally takes place (eg, history, examination, spe-
cial studies, management). As another example, for
this paper we synthesized the literature in the order
that we felt readers would find it most useful when
they decided to write their own overview. There is
no single way to write this section. Therefore it
requires the author to think clearly about what is
being conveyed according to the objective of the
overview.18
Before attempting to write the synthesis authors
should read through each of the papers that will be
included in the overview and take notes on each
one. Most authors prefer to use a word processing
system for taking notes because it is simple to add
new information. Once all of the notes are com-
plete, authors can then easily organize common
themes together. Other authors prefer to take notes
on index cards since they can be shuffled around
and notes can be taken regardless of whether or not
the author is near a computer.
It is recommended that notes include the following:
the purpose of the study reviewed, a synopsis of the
content, the research design or methods used in the
study, a brief review of the findings.9,17 If an author
plans to objectively evaluate, or critically appraise,
each article, then it is also a good idea to take notes
for this part as well. Regardless of the technique that
you use it is essential to always write the complete
reference down for each set of information that you
extract from a study. It is horrifying to find out late
in the writing process that a reference for a bunch of
information was lost and have to spend hours trying
to find it.17
Tables of information may make it easier for some
authors to organize their thoughts when construct-
ing the synthesis.17,24 Tables are easy to make and
categorize information by topic. For example, the
references for each paper reviewed can be written
down one side of the paper and categories of infor-
mation extracted from each paper can be written
along the top. This is best done using a computer, as
it allows for easy arrangement or additions of infor-
mation. An example of part of a table is presented in
table 7. If papers under review contain a lot of data
that the author feels would be beneficial to include
in the manuscript, then data can be collected using a
table and easily be placed in the final paper.
Table 7
Example of a Part of an Evidence Table
Reference
Sample
Test
Design
Results
Comments
Biering-Sorensen,
1984
Denmark; 30–60
yo, 449 men,
479 women
Sorensen’s
method
Postal survey 12
months after
exam
Prognostic for
1st time LBP in
men; women
had insig.
Opposite trend
Some women
omitted from
analysis
Gibbons et al.,
1997
Finland, 35–63
yo, 43 men who
had no LBP
Modified
Sorensen’s
Compared static
back
endurance
time between
group with no
LBP to group
with incidence
of LBP in
preceding 12
mo.
Men who
reported LBP
had slightly
shorter times;
they did not
come close to
stat.
significance.
No association
between static
back
endurance and
future LBP
Difference in
groups may
suggest either
a difference in
condition of
subjects, or a
research
error
Volume5
•
Number3
•
Fall2006
110

----- Page 11 (native) -----
When writing the synthesis for the manuscript,
the author integrates the findings elicited from the
note taking or table making process. It is important
for authors to keep the reading audience in mind
when writing this section; the audience is less
familiar with the topic under review, necessi-
tating a clear, clinically relevant and easy to read
synthesis.
Major areas of agreement and disagreement in the
literature should be discussed.10 The discussion
should tie the study into the current body of lit-
erature, provide its clinical significance, and make
logical interpretations from the literature re-
viewed.1,18,24 If there is no discussion of the rel-
evance of the overview to other work in the field, it
may signal that the author has not thoroughly in-
vestigated the topic. Since the synthesis is the crux
of the overview design it is important to insure that
a meaningful integration is accomplished.
The author’s interpretation of the literature should
also be provided;1 it is for this reason that it is
helpful if the author has some content expertise in
the area under study.18 Often times it is appropriate
for the author to offer some critical appraisal of the
papers reviewed in the discussion.9,11,17 As men-
tioned earlier, this is an area of overviews that some
authorities feel may or may not be necessary in an
overview. One of the reasons for this disagreement
is that the appraisal process can be extremely sub-
jective without the use of explicit critical appraisal
criteria. Since the narrative overview already in-
cludes the biases of the author, there is a limit to
how much more bias may actually enhance the
credibility of the overview.13
It is helpful if the author uses check sheets or guides
when critically appraising the articles. These check
sheets are available from a wide variety of sources.
Some of these critical appraisal aids focus on specific
research designs while others are made for assess-
ment of articles in general. In addition to many
worksheets available in the references used for this
paper, a small sample of additional sources for criti-
cal appraisal check sheets are identified in table 8.
When performing critical appraisal, it is best to use a
check sheet that is specific to the research design
being appraised. For example, Appendix A in this
article is a check sheet for a narrative overview of
the literature. A case report or clinical trial should
be reviewed using a completely different check
sheet.
Limitations to the overview: Authors should address
weak points of their own study and mention areas
for improvement.1,3 No paper is perfect. If limita-
tions are not included in an honest fashion, it warns
Table 8
Examples of Critical Appraisal Check Sheets
Reference
Topic
Internet Address
Centre for Evidence Based Medicine
Articles on therapy, systematic
reviews, diagnosis, prognosis,
harm/etiology, economic analysis
http://www.cebm.net/using_ebm.asp
Critical Appraisal Skills Programme
Randomized controlled trials,
economic analyses, qualitative
research
http://www.phru.nhs.uk/casp/
critical_appraisal_tools.htm
Greenhalgh T. How to read a paper:
Papers that summarise other
papers (systematic reviews and
metaanalyses). BMJ 1997;315:672–
675.
Systematic reviews
http://www.bmj.com
Oxman AD. Systematic reviews:
Checklists for Review Articles.
BMJ 1994:648–651.
Systematic reviews
http://www.bmj.com
Jackson GB. Methods for integrative
reviews. Review of Education
Research 1980;50:438–460.
Integrative reviews of the
literature
NA
Cooper H. Scientific guidelines for
conducting integrative research
reviews. Review of Education
Research 1982;52:291–302.
Integrative reviews of the
literature
NA
Green BN, Johnson CD. Writing
better case reports. J Sports
Chiropr Rehabil 2000;14(3):46–47.
Case reports
NA
Fall2006
•
Number3
•
Volume5
111

----- Page 12 (native) -----
the reader that the paper may contain more bias
than is acceptable for an overview. The inability to
discuss the merits and demerits of a paper may
demonstrate that the author has strayed from the
focus of their purpose.
Because authors are deeply involved in the creation
of the literature review and the writing process, it is
not always easy to recognize the paper’s limitations.
One method that is helpful in writing this section is
to write it as the study evolves. Every time the
author recognizes an area that could be improved in
the study, he or she can simply write those thoughts
down at the time. If the weakness can be corrected
during the research process then the writing related
to it can be deleted. For limitations that are inherent
to the design of the paper or ones that are not
correctable, then this text can remain for the final
paper.
Another method that most experienced authors use
is to have trusted colleagues review the paper before
it is submitted to a journal. It is important to select
colleagues who have expertise in the topic under
study as well as those who have writing experience.
These peers will usually be able to see areas of
weakness not immediately apparent to the author
and they can provide suggestions for improvement.
These suggestions can then be incorporated into the
paper and help provide comments for the discus-
sion. Be sure to select assistants who will be honest
in their feedback, will provide the comments in a
timely manner, and who will respect the confiden-
tiality of your work. In receiving feedback from
peers, it is important for the author not to take the
criticism personally, but to see it as a method for
improving the paper.
Conclusion
The conclusion should provide a tie in to the pur-
pose, the major conclusions drawn from the over-
view, and directions for future research.
A clear and concise summary of the major findings
of the overview should be provided.10 This is not
merely a rehash of the entire paper, but a statement
about what is now known as a result of the publi-
cation of the overview that was not known or ob-
served before. The conclusion should be drawn from
and supported by the papers reviewed;1,10,14,18 the
absence of systematic methods should temper the
conclusion.3 Specific implications to the practice en-
vironment should also be mentioned.3 Authors who
derive conclusions that are irrelevant to the initial
purpose have lost the focus of the review and may
inadvertently infuse bias into the study. If any major
conclusion is not supported by the literature synthe-
sis, then it is a faulty conclusion and your suspicion
about the validity of the paper should be height-
ened. Therefore, conclusions that are made must be
supported by the literature reviewed.
Specific directives for new research initiatives
should be proposed. After reviewing the literature
on a topic the author possesses a vantage point that
may provide valuable guidance for future research
endeavors. Suggestions for new areas of inquiry and
specific study designs are an important outcome of a
thorough review; it is often from these recommen-
dations that researchers begin new studies.
Acknowledgements
It may be appropriate to acknowledge the work of a
colleague who has assisted the author in the prepa-
ration of the manuscript, such as a proofreader or a
person who has provided ideas for the manuscript.
These people can be acknowledged briefly in this
section. People mentioned in this section must give
consent for their name to appear in print, which can
be obtained by asking them to sign a brief statement
that they know that their name will be listed in the
acknowledgements section of the article.28 For more
information on the protocol for writing acknowl-
edgements, see the Uniform Requirements.
References
References are an absolute necessity for any re-
search paper, but especially for a review of the
literature. It is extremely important that authors cite
each of the studies reviewed in order to demon-
strate exactly what research was appraised.11 All of
the papers included in the review should be refer-
enced. Authors should also cite all supporting re-
search used to write the report. References used to
support the work should come from peer-reviewed
journals, texts, government documents or confer-
ence proceedings.17 For the majority of literature
reviews, the use of magazines is not appropriate
because these periodicals are not peer reviewed and
the articles in them are not written with the same
scientific rigor as peer reviewed journal articles.
References should be formatted appropriately. In-
structions for how to write out the references appro-
Volume5
•
Number3
•
Fall2006
112

----- Page 13 (native) -----
priately for a given journal are usually found in the
journal’s instructions for authors or in the Uniform
Requirements. Proper formatting of references is es-
sential, as it costs time and money on behalf of
journal staff members to send this information back
to authors for correction.32 All the information
needed to correctly list a reference can usually be
found with the abstract when conducting a litera-
ture search, or on the pages of the actual journal
article.
Tables
Tables are lists of information that aid in visually
presenting information in an appealing manner
rather than listing information as text in a para-
graph. Such a table in an overview may be the
extraction table used during the synthesis. Tables
should be simple and self-contained, needing no
further explanation. If authors wish to use previ-
ously published tables, the publishing company of
the original material must grant permission and it is
the authors’ responsibility to receive this permis-
sion. Appropriate formatting for tables can be found
in the Uniform Requirements.29
Figures
Figures or illustrations are a necessity to make ar-
ticles interesting to read. Since an overview is a
review of text, it is especially useful to use pictures
and tables in order to keep the paper interesting to
read. Most people do not like to read an article that
is nothing but text from the beginning of the title to
the last letter of the references. Pictures can also
help make the paper easier for readers to under-
stand. If authors wish to use previously published
photographs or illustrations, permission must be
granted by the publishing company of the material
and it is the author’s responsibility to receive this
permission.
Complete requirements for preparing illustrations or
photographs for submission are detailed in the Uni-
form Requirements. Captions for each figure used in
the manuscript should be provided. Authors should
not expect that editors will write the figure cap-
tions.29 Some journals accept electronic images. Be
sure to scan images at a sufficient resolution to
enable quality printing in the journal. Find out from
the journal which formats are accepted, such as tiff
or jpg files, and whether the journal accepts PC or
Mac formatting.
CONCLUSIONS
Narrative overviews can be a valuable contribution
to the literature if they are prepared properly in an
effort to minimize the author’s biases. Further read-
ing on reviews of the literature is available in a
suggested bibliography located in Appendix B of this
article. Authors wishing to submit narrative over-
views should find this article useful in constructing
such a paper and carrying out the research process.
Given the controversy surrounding the review of
the literature research design, it is our aspiration
that this article will facilitate some scholarly dialog
in the pursuit of creating more valid reviews of the
literature and striking a balance between a the un-
systematic overview and the complex meta-
analysis.
REFERENCES
1. Helewa A, Walker JM. Critical evaluation of research in physical re-
habilitation: toward evidence-based practice. Philadelphia: W.B.
Saunders Co.; 2000. p. 109–124.
2. Day RA. How to write and publish a scientific paper. 5th ed. Phoenix,
AZ: The Oryx Press; 1998. p. 163–167.
3. Crombie IK. The pocket guide to critical appraisal. London: BMJ Pub-
lishing Group; 1999. p. 23–29, 56–62.
4. Gray JAM. Evidence-based health care: how to make health policy and
management decisions. NY: Churchill Livingstone; 1997. p. 72–77.
5. Lang G, Heiss GD. A practical guide to research methods. Lanham, MD:
University Press of America; 1998. p. 17–21.
6. Mendelson T. Keeping up with the medical literature. In: Friedland DJ,
editor. Evidence-based medicine: a framework for clinincal practice.
Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange; 1998. p. 145–150.
7. Gehlbach SH. Interpreting the medical literature. NY: McGraw-Hill,
Inc.; 1993. p. 243–251.
8. Jadad AR, Cook DJ, Jones A, Klassen TP, Tugwell P, Moher M, et al.
Methodology and reports of systematic reviews and meta-Analyses:
a comparison of Cochrane reviews with articles published in paper-
based journals. JAMA 1998;280:278–80.
9. Portney LG, Watkins MP. Foundations of clinical research: applications
to practice. 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, Inc; 2000.
p. 127–133.
10. Slavin RE. Best evidence synthesis: an intelligent alternative to meta-
analysis. J Clin Epidemiol 1995;48:9–18.
11. Hutchinson BG. Critical Appraisal of Review Articles. Can Fam Physi-
cian 1993;39:1097–102.
12. Sackett DL. Applying overviews and meta-analyses at the bedside. J
Clin Epidemiol 1995;48:61–6.
13. Oxman AD, Guyatt GH. Guidelines for reading literature reviews. CMA
J 1988;138:697–703.
14. Oxman AD, Guyatt GH. Validation of an index of the quality of review
articles. J Clin Epidemiol 1991;44:1271–8.
15. Dixon RA, Munro JF, Silcocks PB. The evidence based medicine work-
book: critical appraisal for clinical problem solving. Woburn, MA:
Butterworth-Heinemann;1998. p. 148–166.
16. Oxman AD, Cook DJ, Guyatt GH. Users’ guides to the medical litera-
ture, VI. How to use an overview. JAMA 1994;272:1367–71.
17. DePoy E, Gitlin LN. Introduction to research: multiple strategies for
health and human services. St. Louis: Mosby-Year Book, Inc; 1993.
p. 61–76.
18. Oxman AD. Systematic reviews: checklists for review articles. BMJ
1994;309:648–51.
Fall2006
•
Number3
•
Volume5
113

----- Page 14 (native) -----
19. Chalmers I, Altman DG. Systematic reviews. London: BMJ Publishing
Group; 1995.
20. Mulrow CD. The medical review article: state of the science. Ann In-
tern Med 1987;106:485–488.
21. Ball C, Sackett D, Phillips B, Haynes B, Straus S. Levels of Evidence and
Grades of Recommendations. Centre for Evidence Based Medicine
(cited 1999 Nov 18]. Available from: URL: http://cebm.jr2.ox.ac.uk/
docs/levels.html
22. Friedland DJ, et al. Evaluating integrative literature. In: Friedland DJ,
editor. Evidence-based medicine: a framework for clinincal practice.
Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange; 1998. p. 221–46.
23. Sackett DL, Straus SE, Richardson WS, Rosenberg W, Haynes RB. Evi-
dence-based medicine: how to practice and teach EBM. 2nd ed. Ed-
inburgh: Chuchill Livingstone; 2000. p. 133–8.
24. Polgar S, Thomas SA. Introduction to research in the health sciences,
3rd ed. Melbourne: Churchill Livingstone; 1995. p. 343–55.
25. Lau J, Ioannidis JPA, Schmid CH. Summing up evidence: one answer
is not always enough. Lancet 1998;351:123–7.
26. Chalmers I. Applying overviews and meta-analyses at the bedside: dis-
cussion. J Clin Epidemiol 1995;48:67–70.
27. Olkin I. Statistical and theoretical considerations in meta-analysis. J
Clin Epidemiol 1995;48:133–46.
28. Lawrence DJ, Mootz RD. Research Agenda Conference 3: editor’s pre-
sentation: streamlining manuscript submission to scientific journals.
J Neuromusculosket Syst 1998;6:161–7.
29. Green BN, Johnson CD. Writing patient case reports for peer reviewed
journals: secrets of the trade. J Sports Chiropr Rehabil 2000;14:51–9.
30. Sackett DL. How to read clinical journals: I. Why to read them and how
to start reading them critically. CMAJ 1981;124:555–8.
31. Lawrence DJ. Structured abstracts and the JMPT. J Manipulative Phys-
iol Ther 1992;15:77–82.
32. Willis JC. Notes for authors. Chiropr Hist 2000;20:5.
Volume5
•
Number3
•
Fall2006
114

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Appendix A
Narrative Overview Rating Scale
Circle the number that you feel is appropriate for the paper that you are reading:
1 = Absent
2 = Present but not complete
3 = Present and complete
Initial Impression
1
2
3
Does the review appear to be relvant to an issue of interest (18, 30)?
Abstract
1
2
3
Is the specific purpose of the review stated (3, 15)?
1
2
3
Is context for the overview provided?
1
2
3
Is the type of research design stated?
1
2
3
Are the search methods clearly summarized?
1
2
3
Are the important findings clearly discussed?
1
2
3
Are the major conclusions and recommendations clearly outlined?
Introduction
1
2
3
Is the specific purpose of the review clearly stated based upon a brief review of the literature
(1, 3, 18, 24)?
1
2
3
Is the need/importance and context of this study established (2, 11, 24)?
1
2
3
Are novel terms defined (10, 29)?
Methods
1
2
3
Were the electronic databases used to conduct the literature searches identified (MEDLINE,
CINAHL, etc.) (3, 13, 17)?
1
2
3
Were the search years stated?
1
2
3
Were the search terms stated (3)?
1
2
3
Were standard terms used as search terms, including Medical Subject Headings (17)?
1
2
3
Were the guidelines for including and excluding articles in the literature review clearly
identified (10, 18, 22)?
Discussion
1
2
3
Were the results summarized in a comprehensible manner (3, 10)?
1
2
3
Was the critical appraisal of each study the same and reproducible (11, 13, 22)?
1
2
3
Was the quality of the included articles assessed objectively (3, 11, 13)?
1
2
3
Was the variation in the findings of the studies critically analyzed (1, 10, 13, 22)?
1
2
3
Were the meaning of the results addressed (3)?
1
2
3
Do the authors tie in the results of the study with previous research in a meaningful manner
(1, 3, 10)?
1
2
3
Were the weak points and untoward events that occurred during the course of the study
addressed by the authors (1, 3)?
Conclusions
1
2
3
Was a clear summary of pertinent findings provided (10)?
1
2
3
Were the authors’ conclusions supported by the evidence provided (1, 3, 13, 18)?
1
2
3
Were specific directives for new research initiatives proposed?
1
2
3
Specific implications to the practice environment are addressed (3).
Fall2006
•
Number3
•
Volume5
115

----- Page 16 (native) -----
References
1
2
3
Are references relevant, current and appropriate in number (11)?
1
2
3
Are all papers reviewed cited in the references (1)?
Overall Impressions
1
2
3
Do the merits of this review of the literature outweigh the flaws?
1
2
3
Were the authors unbiased in their approach to the review (11, 18)?
1
2
3
Will the results of the paper help me in my philosophical or evidence based approach to
patient care (18, 22)?
Comments & Notes:
Volume5
•
Number3
•
Fall2006
116

----- Page 17 (native) -----
Appendix B
Additional Suggested Readings on
Literature Reviews
Compiled by Alan Adams, DC, MS, MSEd
Books
Chalmers I, Altman DG. Systematic reviews. Lon-
don: BMJ Publishing Group; 1995.
Cooper H, Hedges LV. The handbook of research
synthesis. New York: Russell Sage Foundation;
1994.
Cooper H. Synthesizing research: a guide for litera-
ture reviews. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publi-
cations; 1998.
Fink A. Conducting research literature reviews:
from paper to the internet. Thousand Oaks: Sage
Publications; 1998.
Garrard J. Health sciences literature review made
easy: the matrix method. Gaithersburg: Aspen
Publications; 1999.
Goodman C. Literature searching and evidence in-
terpretation for assessing healthcare practices.
Stockholm: SBU: The Swedish Council on Tech-
nology Assessment in Healthcare; 1993.
Light RJ, Pillemer DB. Summing up: the science of
reviewing research. Cambridge: Harvard Univer-
sity Press; 1984.
Mulrow C, Cook D. Systematic reviews: synthesis of
best evidence for healthcare decisions. Philadel-
phia: American College of Physicians; 1998.
NHS Center for Reviews and Dissemination. Under-
taking Systematic Reviews of Research on Effec-
tiveness: CRD Guidelines for Those Carrying Out
or Commissioning Reviews. CRD Report 4, NHS
CRD, University of York, York, UK; 1996.
Oxman AD. The Cochrane Collaboration handbook:
preparing and maintaining systematic reviews.
2nd ed. Oxford: Cochrane Collaboration; 1996.
Journal Articles
Abramson JH. Meta-analysis: a review of pros and
cons. Public Health Rev 1990–91;18(1):1–47.
Clark MJ, Stewart LA. Obtaining data from ran-
domised controlled trials: how much do we need
for reliable and informative meta-analyses? BMJ
1994;309:1007–1010.
Crombie IK, McQuay H. The systematic review: a
good guide rather than guarantee. Pain 1998; 76:
1–2.
Dickersin K, Berlin JA. Meta-analysis: state of the
science. Epidemiol Rev 1992;14:154–76.
Dickersin K, Scherer R, LeFebvre C. Identifying rel-
evant studies for systematic reviews. BMJ 1994;
309:1286–91.
de Vet HCW. Systematic reviews on the basis of
methodological criteria. Physiotherapy 1997;
83(6):284–289.
Egger M, Smith GD, Phillips AN. Meta-analysis:
principles and procedures. BMJ 1997;315:1533–
1537.
Eysenck HJ. Meta-analysis and its problems. BMJ
1994;309:789–792.
Moher D, Cook DJ, Jadad AR, Tugwell P, Moher M,
Jones A, et al. Assessing the quality of reports of
randomised trials: implications for the conduct of
meta-analyses. Health Technol Assess 1999;3(12):
i-iv, 1–98.
Mosteller F, Colditz GA. Understanding research
synthesis (meta-analysis). Annu Rev Public
Health 1996;17:1–23.
Mulrow CD. Rationale for systematic reviews. BMJ
1994;309: 597–599. Rationale for systematic re-
views. Peto R. Why do we need systematic over-
views of randomized trials? Stat Med 1987;6(3):
233–240.
Thacker SB. Meta-analysis: a quantitative approach
to research integration. JAMA 1988;259: 1685–
1689.
Thompson SG. Why sources of heterogeneity in
meta-analysis should be investigated. BMJ 1994;
309:1351–1355.
Zwarenstein M, Volmink J, Irwig L, Chalmers I.
Systematic review: ‘state of the science’ health-
care decision-making. S Afr Med J 1995;85(12):
1266–1267.
Fall2006
•
Number3
•
Volume5
117