

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Toward a Psychology of Positive Youth Development 
Reed W. Larson 
University of lllinois at Urbana-Champaign 
This article analyzes the development of initiative as an 
exemplar of one of many learning experiences that should 
be studied as part of positive youth development. The 
capacity for initiative is essential for adults in our society 
and will become more important in the 2lst century, yet 
adolescents" have few opportunities to learn it. Their typical 
experiences during schoolwork and unstructured leisure do 
not reflect conditions for learning initiative. The context 
best suited to the development of initiative appears to be 
that of structured voluntary activities, such as sports, arts, 
and participation in organizations, in which youths expe- 
rience the rare combination of intrinsic motivation in com- 
bination with deep attention. An incomplete body of out- 
come research suggests that such activities are associated 
with positive development, but the developmental processes 
involved are only beginning to be understood. One prom- 
ising approach has recorded language use and has found 
that adolescents participating in effective organizations 
acquire a new operating language that appears to corre- 
spond to the development of initiative. 
I 
t cannot be said, as for other domains of psychology, 
that developmental psychology has neglected the pos- 
itive. Development, after all, is a process of growth and 
increasing competence. In the important subdomain of so- 
cial and emotional development, however, we are often 
more articulate about how things go wrong than how they 
go right. We have a burgeoning field of developmental 
psychopathology but have a more diffuse body of research 
on the pathways whereby children and adolescents become 
motivated, directed, socially competent, compassionate, 
and psychologically vigorous adults. Corresponding to 
that, we have numerous research-based programs for youth 
aimed at curbing drug use, violence, suicide, teen preg- 
nancy, and other problem behaviors, but lack a rigorous 
applied psychology of how to promote positive youth 
development. 
The place for such a field is apparent to anyone who 
has had contact with a cross section of American ado- 
lescents. In such a group, one encounters a surprising 
number of youth who appear to be bored, unmotivated, 
and unexcited about their lives. This malaise was 
brought home to me when we obtained a random sam- 
pling of self-reports on 16,000 moments in the daily 
experience of a representative sample of White, work- 
ing- and middle-class young adolescents--a group that 
seemingly has everything going for them. These youth 
reported feeling bored for 27% (4,300!) of these random 
moments (Larson & Richards, 1991). Of course, indi- 
viduals differed in these rates, but what was surprising 
was that honor students were as likely as those involved 
in delinquent activities to be among those reporting high 
rates of boredom, in many cases for more than 50% of 
the random moments. The litany of explanations for this 
boredom--"algebra sucks," "I'm always bored on Sun- 
day," "there's nothing to do," "the Odyssey is boring"-- 
reads like a script from Bart Simpson. They communi- 
cate an ennui of being trapped in the present, waiting for 
someone to prove to them that life is worth living. 
High rates of boredom, alienation, and disconnection 
from meaningful challenge are not signs of psychopathol- 
ogy, at least not in most cases, but rather signs of a 
deficiency in positive development. The same might be 
said for many cases of problem behavior, such as drug use, 
premature sexual involvement, and minor delinquency-- 
that they are more parsimoniously described, not as re- 
sponses to family stress, emotional disturbance, or real- 
adaptive cognitions, but rather to the absence of engage- 
ment in a positive life trajectory. Many youth do their 
schoolwork, comply with their parents, hang out with their 
friends, and get through the day, but are not invested in 
paths into the future that excite them or feel like they 
originate from within. A central question of youth devel- 
opment is how to get adolescents' fires lit, how to have 
them develop the complex of dispositions and skills needed 
to take charge of their lives. This calling is made particu- 
larly difficult by the absence of a well-developed body of 
relevant theory and research regarding these dispositions 
and skills. 
In this article, I am going to focus on adolescents' 
development of initiative, which I see as a core quality of 
positive youth development in Western culture. The con- 
struct initiative is closely related to capacity for agency or 
for autonomous action that others have discussed (Brandt- 
st~idter, 1998; Deci, 1995; Ryan, 1993). It consists of the 
ability to be motivated from within to direct attention and 
effort toward a challenging goal. In addition to being an 
important quality in its own right, I believe that initiative is 
a core requirement for other components of positive devel- 
opment, such as creativity, leadership, altruism, and civic 
engagement. 
Work on this article was partly supported by National Institute of Mental 
Health Grant 1RO1 MH57938. 
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Reed 
W. Larson, University of Illinois, 1105 West Nevada Street, Urbana, IL 
61801. Electronic mail may be sent to larsonr@uiuc.edu. 
170 
January 2000 ° American Psychologist 
Copyright 2000 by the American Psychological Association, Inc. 0003-066X/00/$5.00 
Vol. 55, No. I, 170-183 
DOI: 10.1037//0003-066X,55.1.170

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Reed W. 
Larson 
How does initiative develop? After situating this ques- 
tion in a cultural context, in the first section, I argue that 
initiative must emerge at least partly from adolescents' 
daily experiences, from the sparks of excitement and ab- 
sorption that occur in their ordinary lives. In the following 
section, I examine how adequately the dominant daily 
activities of adolescents--schoolwork and unstructured lei- 
sure-produce the requisite elements. I conclude, as the 
boredom findings suggest, that Western adolescent life 
does not provide abundant daily opportunities for the ex- 
perience and development of initiative. 
In the middle part of the article, my focus turns to 
youths' experiences in structured leisure activities, such as 
arts, sports, hobbies, and participation in organizations. 
These activities account for only a small fraction of ado- 
lescents' time, but preliminary evidence suggests they are a 
context in which the elements of initiative often coalesce 
and an operating language of initiative develops. Readers 
may know that there is a loosely defined field of practice 
called youth development that is concerned with these types 
of activities and that positive youth development is cur- 
rently a hot term in this field (Carnegie Council on Ado- 
lescent Development [Carnegie], 1992). But, regrettably, 
this field has evolved separately from developmental psy- 
chology (partly because we psychologists have had little to 
offer) and has not had a strong base of research and theory, 
especially regarding positive youth development (Brown, 
1988; Dubas & Snider, 1993; Oden, 1995; Roth, Brooks- 
Gunn, Murray, & Foster, 1998). The final section of this 
article envisions a new domain of developmental knowl- 
edge that is integrated with this applied field and is aimed 
at facilitating positive development. 
Initiative in a Western Cultural 
Context 
Given the renewed ideology of enterprise capitalism in 
U.S. and Western society, the importance of initiative 
hardly needs selling. The economic, social, and political 
order of our society presupposes an individual who is 
capable of autonomous action. Furthermore, we are moving 
into a new millennium in which changes in the occupa- 
tional, interpersonal, political, and moral realms will de- 
mand new reserves of adaptation and creativity. In the last 
50 years, we have already seen the wage value of rote, 
repetitive, and manual labor fall, as much of this labor is 
replaced by machines, and daily behavior, it appears, is less 
shaped by shared normative habits and goals than in the 
past (Oettingen, 1997). In the emerging heterogeneous 
global society where job demands and basic life course and 
life-style decisions are not preconfigured, adolescents will 
need to acquire the motivation and skills to create order, 
meaning, and action out of a field of ill-structured choices. 
Individuals will need the capacity to exert cumulative effort 
over time to reinvent themselves, reshape their environ- 
ments, and engage in other planful undertakings. A gener- 
ation of bored and challenge-avoidant young adults is not 
going to be prepared to deal with the mounting complexity 
of life and take on the emerging challenges of the 21st 
century. 
Yet although the capacity for initiative is a presuppo- 
sition of adult membership in our society, it is by no means 
a guaranteed result of our childhood and adolescence. In 
fact, it has been argued that the route to becoming an 
autonomous, agentic adult in our culture is problematic. 
The anthropologist Ruth Benedict (1938) observed that 
many traditional societies provide a progressive set of steps 
that socialize youth into the roles and responsibilities of 
adulthood, whereas in Western society there is marked 
discontinuity between what we expect of children and what 
we expect of adults, especially with regard to initiative. 
Benedict pointed out that children in our society are treated 
as dependent and given few responsibilities, whereas adults 
are required to be independent and suddenly take charge of 
all parts of their life--to a much greater degree than in 
other societies (cf. Sampson, 1988). In a similar vein, 
anthropologists Schlegel and Barry (1991) found that 
American and European adolescents carry less responsibil- 
ity and are given fewer occasions to engage in consequen- 
tial and planful action than are adolescents in most other 
societies of the world. They experience little societal sup- 
port or scaffolding to practice and develop initiative. They 
have few experiences of "preparing, planning, executing, 
and assessing" an endeavor (Heath, 1999, p. 64). It is not 
surprising, then, that young adults in our society fail to 
carry through on a high rate of the intentions they set for 
themselves (GoUwitzer, 1999). 
One way that initiative might be instigated would be if 
adolescents were "pulled" by appealing images of adult- 
hood. They might then be motivated to set themselves on a 
course of action aimed at reaching adult goals. Except for 
sports heros, however, adolescents have few models of 
January 2000 • American Psychologist 
171

----- Page 3 (native) -----
adults they seek to emulate (Balswick & Ingoldsby, 1982; 
McCormack, 1984); the prospect of current adult careers-- 
for example, becoming a systems analyst, marketing spe- 
cialist, or health technician--is not likely to inspire initia- 
tive. Recent commentators have also noted that the path 
into adult occupations is opaque to young people. Many 
poor and minority youth have little contact with successful 
adult models (Wilson, 1996) and perceive the transition 
into middle-class adulthood to be blocked (Ogbu, 1991). 
Yet, even for advantaged middle-class American youth, the 
steps required to gain entrance to many occupations are 
opaque (Hamilton, 1994; Schneider & Stevenson, 1999). 
Whereas an optimistic vision of the future can be an im- 
portant influence on adolescents' choices (Nurmi, 1991; 
Seligman, 1990), images of adult careers do not have 
enough magnetic pull, in and of themselves, to motivate 
most adolescents to begin taking control of their lives. 
The development of initiative, I believe, needs to at 
least partly originate from adolescents' experiences in the 
present moment. Rather than just being pulled, it needs to 
be propelled. Especially given that the future is unstable 
(e.g., that many current occupations may not exist in 20 
years), it is better if adolescents are motivated by the 
process of initiative, rather than by anticipated long-term 
rewards. For this to happen, adolescents need a series of 
experiences and opportunities, a la Benedict (1938), that 
build their development of this capacity. 
What opportunities do youths have? In what contexts 
do Western adolescents experience elements of initiative in 
their daily lives? First, let me elucidate what I think these 
elements are. I see three elements as crucial. To begin with, 
initiative involves intrinsic motivation, the experience of 
wanting to be doing an activity and being invested in it. 
Agency entails the experience that one's thoughts and 
actions originate voluntarily from the self (Ryan, 1993; 
Ryan, Sheldon, Kasser, & Deci, 1996). But intrinsically 
motivated action in a vacuum, or the confines of a solip- 
sistic, self-created, or delusional world does not constitute 
initiative. 
The second requirement is that this intrinsic motiva- 
tion be experienced in association with concerted engage- 
ment in the environment, with exertion of constructive 
attention in a field of action involving the types of con- 
straints, rules, challenge, and complexity that characterize 
external reality. In defining this second element, I draw on 
various constructs from Csikszentmihalyi (1978, 1993, 
t996; Csikszentmihalyi & Larson, 1984). Attention means 
devotion of thought and effort. Constructive attention 
means that this thought and effort is not random but di- 
rected toward creating some form of order, synergy, or 
negentropy. And this order or negentropy must be definable 
within an objective universe, within a field of externally 
recognizable challenge and complexity. 
The third requirement is that this motivation and con- 
certed engagement occur over time. Initiative involves a 
temporal arc of effort directed toward a goal, an arc that 
might include setbacks, re-evaluations, and adjustment of 
strategies. It is the capacity to carry out what Brian Little 
(1983, 1998) describes as a "serial" or "personal project." 
Despite its root in initiate, initiative is not just starting 
things but sticking with them. To be an agentic adult, one 
needs to be able to mobilize one's attention, one's mental 
powers, on a deliberate course of action, without being 
deterred by the first obstacle one encounters. Initiative is 
the devotion of cumulative effort over time to achieve a 
goal. 
For initiative to develop, I believe that all three of 
these elements need to come together. An individual needs 
to experience the three in consort and learn to regulate 
them. Adolescence may be a particularly valuable time for 
the development of initiative, because the acquisition of 
hypothetico-deductive or formal-operational reasoning 
facilitates the growth of metacognitive strategies for self- 
regulation of psychological states and action over time 
(Brandtst~idter, 1998; Lerner & Busch-Rossnagel, 1981). 
Contexts of Adolescents" Daily 
Experience 
Where do these elements of initiative occur in adolescents' 
lives? In what contexts might these three elements come 
together? My colleagues' and my research provides a broad 
view of the different experiential contexts that fill adoles- 
cents" waking hours and includes data bearing on the first 
two elements of initiative. 
One major block of adolescents' daily experience is 
schoolwork. Schools are institutions deliberately created by 
society to prepare youth for adulthood, so one might hope 
they would foster this important capacity. In the United 
States and Europe, schoolwork, including classwork and 
homework, accounts for an average of 25-30% of adoles- 
cents' waking hours (Larson & Verma, 1999). However, 
our data and that of many others indicate that this is a 
limited context for experiencing the elements of initiative. 
The limits of the school context are evident in the 
psychological states adolescents report during schoolwork. 
In our research, we have had adolescents carry electronic 
pagers or alarm watches for one week and report on their 
activities and experiential states at random times when 
signaled by the pagers, following the procedures of the 
experience sampling method. We find that during class- 
work and homework, adolescents experience high levels of 
concentration (Figure 1), as well as high challenge. To me, 
this is evidence (albeit incomplete) of the second element 
of initiative: that they are exerting effort in an environment 
of challenge and complexity. But although this element is 
present, the first element is not. During schoolwork, ado- 
lescents report low intrinsic motivation (Figure 1). They 
also report high rates of boredom, and, although they report 
high concentration, they report difficulty in concentrating. 
Research by others using the same methodology also finds 
this pattern of concentration without intrinsic motiva- 
tion during schoolwork (Csikszentmihalyi, Rathunde, & 
Whalen, 1993; Leone & Richards, 1989; Carli, Delle Fave, 
& Massimini, 1988). This is a context of what Gibson and 
Rader (1979) called "other-directed attention." It is mental 
effort that is under the control of incentives and structuring 
provided by adults. 
172 
January 2000 • American Psychologist

----- Page 4 (native) -----
Figure ! 
High-School-Aged Adolescents Average Ratings of 
Their Psychological States in Class andWith Friends 
Class Experience 
0.5 
0.4 T 
°-it 
0.2 
o ° 0. 
-0.1 
-0.2 I I 
-0.3 
-0.4 
-0.5 k 
Intrinsic 
Motivation 
Concentration 
Experience With Friends 
0.6- 
0.5- 
0.4- 
0.3- 
~= o.2- 
O 
o 
0.1- 
,= 
o, 
N -0.1 
-0.2 : 
-0.3 
-0.4 ~- 
-0,5 
Intrinsic 
Concentration 
Motivation 
Note. Data are from Csikszentmihalyi and Larson (1984). 
This comparative absence of intrinsic motivation sug- 
gests that schoolwork is usually not a context conducive for 
the development of initiative. Indeed, the profile of expe- 
rience just described appears to become less favorable as 
children advance into adolescence. We found that 15-year- 
olds reported lower levels of concentration and intrinsic 
motivation during schoolwork than 10-year-olds, both on 
an absolute scale and in comparison with other domains of 
their daily experience (Larson, Ham, & Raffaelli, 1989; 
Larson & Kleiber, 1993b). Other studies confirm the re- 
duction in intrinsic motivation between the elementary and 
junior high school grades (Eccles, Wig field, & Schiefele, 
1998) and provide behavioral evidence of reduced effort, 
showing a decline in school grades across this period 
(Eccles & Midgley, 1991; Simmons & Zhou, 1994). In 
observational research, Eccles and Midgley (1991) found 
that junior high classrooms provided fewer opportunities 
for student decision making than elementary schools. Al- 
though students are older and more capable of making 
decisions, the junior high school environment appears to 
provide fewer, not more, opportunities for the exercise of 
initiative. 
My aim here is not to be critical of schools. There are 
many constraints on teachers, including large class sizes 
and an obligation to cover a broad ranging curriculum, that 
make it difficult to give students latitude to steer their own 
course. A number of researchers have suggested and dem- 
onstrated ways that schoolwork can be made to be intrin- 
sically motivating (Anderman & Maehr, 1994; Csikszent- 
mihalyi, 1993; Deci & Ryan, 1985). And there are parts of 
adolescents' schoolwork in which many do experience all 
three elements of initiative, for example, in doing indepen- 
dent research projects (Larson, 1985). But in the current 
reality, we need to look to other contexts of adolescents' 
lives to find consistent convergence of the elements of 
initiative. 
Besides schoolwork, the other major block of adoles- 
cents' waking time is leisure. In the United States and 
Europe this discretionary activity accounts for a large ex- 
panse of time, 40-50% of waking hours during the school 
year and more during the summer (Larson & Verma, 1999). 
Because leisure is self-controlled, one might expect that it 
provides unique opportunities for the development of per- 
sonal agency (Silbereisen, Noack, & Eyferth, 1986). One 
large segment of this time, however, is watching TV, 
accounting for 7-14% of the average adolescents' waking 
hours (Larson & Verma, 1999). Adolescents typically re- 
port high intrinsic motivation when watching TV, however, 
they do not report high concentration or challenge (Larson 
et al., 1989; Larson & Kubey, 1983), nor is it associated 
with effort over time. So it is hardly a context of initiative. 
A large proportion of Western adolescents' leisure 
time is spent in activities with peers, mainly talking and 
hanging out. Might this be a context for the experience and 
development of initiative? Our data indicate that, on aver- 
age, this context does yield some of the requisite features of 
subjective experience. Adolescents report high intrinsic 
motivation (Figure 1), as well as ease of concentration. But 
they report low concentration (Figure 1), as well as low 
challenge. In Dewey's (1913) terminology, this is "spon- 
taneous attention," a type of engagement that children 
show in play. It is intrinsically motivated but does not 
involve concerted effort in a domain of challenge and 
complexity. Our data suggest that interactions with friends 
resemble positive feedback systems; ongoing feedback 
from friends is open, accepting, and uncritical, thus impos- 
ing limited reality constraints (Larson, 1983). Although 
there are certainly higher order challenges in negotiating 
peer relationships, most immediate interactions with 
friends do not appear to involve concerted engagement 
with challenge and complexity. 
In conclusion, the great majority of adolescents' time 
is spent in two opposite experiential situations. In school- 
work, they experience concentration and challenge without 
being intrinsically motivated. In most leisure, including 
January 2000 • American Psychologist 
173

----- Page 5 (native) -----
watching TV and interacting with friends, they experience 
intrinsic motivation but not in a context of concentration 
and challenge. Neither provides the combination of both of 
these elements necessary for the experience and develop- 
ment of initiative. There is, however, one small segment of 
adolescents' time that combines intrinsic motivation and 
concerted attention. 
Structured Voluntary Activities 
This one exception is a category we call structured volun- 
tary activities, or youth activities for short. It includes 
activities that are organized by adults, such as extracurric- 
ular school activities and community youth activities, as 
well as structured activities that youth participate in on 
their own--such diverse things as hobbies, writing poetry, 
constructing a web site, or playing in a band with a group 
of friends. Our defining criteria for this category is activi- 
ties that are voluntary (i.e., not required for school) and 
involve some structure, that is, where students' participa- 
tion occurs within a system involving constraints, rules, 
and goals. Sports are the most frequent activity in this 
category, accounting for an average of 4-6 hours per week 
of U.S. adolescents' time (Csikszentmihalyi & Larson, 
1984; Kirshnit, Ham, & Richards, 1989) and somewhat less 
in most European countries (Alsaker & Flammer, 1999). 
Other activities, including arts, music, hobbies, and partic- 
ipation in organizations, account for a total average of 1-2 
hours per week, with variations across Western nations 
(Larson & Verma, 1999). These rates, it should be noted, 
do not include summertime, when structured voluntary 
camps, classes, and sports leagues fill a larger portion of 
time for adolescents from middle-class and affluent 
families. 
As Figure 2 shows, the immediate experience associ- 
ated with these activities includes both high intrinsic mo- 
tivation and concentration. We see this for sports and for 
arts, hobbies, and organizations. In both contexts, students 
also reported that concentration was easier than at other 
times and reported experiencing very high average chal- 
lenge (Larson & Kleiber, 1993a). This conjoint pattern has 
been replicated in our study of urban African-American 
young adolescents (Richards & Larson, 1998) and in other 
studies of adolescents (Csikszentmihalyi et al., 1993; Lar- 
son & Kleiber, 1993a). This co-occurrence of motivation 
and attention, suggests what Dewey (1913) called "volun- 
tary attention" and Gibson and Rader (1979) called "self- 
generated attention": attention that adolescents themselves 
direct. In an interview about experiences during this type of 
activity, one 9th grader described feeling "real strong and 
in control, like I could do anything." Adolescents' subjec- 
tive involvement in these activities also resembles what 
Csikszentmihalyi (1975, 1990) calls flow; another 9th 
grader said, "You change, you forget everything around 
yOU." 
This profile of experience, then, fits my first two 
criteria for initiative, intrinsic motivated effort in a context 
of complexity. Adolescents are highly motivated paying 
attention within a domain of challenges. We also found that 
the correlation between reported motivation and attention 
Figure 
2 
High-School-Aged Adolescents Average Ratings of 
Their Psychological States During Structured Voluntary 
Activities 
Experience During Sports 
m 
i 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
O o 
0.1 
0 
" -o.1 
-0.2 
-0.3 
-0.4 
-0.5 
Intrinsic 
Motivation 
Concentration 
Experience During 
Arts, Hobbies, and Organizations 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
O o 
0.1 
0 
-0.1 T 
-0.2~ 
-0.3 T 
-0.4 T 
-0.5 
Intrinsic 
Concentration 
Motivation 
Note. Data are from Larson and Kleiber (1993a) and Csikszentmiholyi and 
Larson (1984). 
increased with age during these activities, which suggests 
that adolescents may be learning to coordinate these two 
elements (Larson et al., 1989). Indeed, in interviews, older 
adolescents reported exerting more control and self-regu- 
lation of these elements than did younger adolescents. 
Our momentary sampling data do not provide direct 
substantiation of the third element of initiative: an arc of 
effort over time. But this arc is inherent in many of these 
activities. Many involve cumulative planning and action 
for the duration of a project or season (Heath, 1994; Larson 
& Kleiber, 1993b). They have the quality of Little's (1983) 
"personal projects," involving concerted effort over time 
toward an outcome. 
A richer picture of this temporal arc of agentic action 
is provided by Rogoff, Baker-Sennett, Lacasa, and Gold- 
174 
January 2000 * American Psychologist

----- Page 6 (native) -----
smith's (1995) observations on the experience of Girl 
Scouts engaged in a campaign to sell cookies. They ob- 
served that these girls, both singly and in small groups, 
developed plans for their sales that included rehearsal of 
their sales pitch and development of spatial routes through 
the neighborhoods. As they gained experience, they then 
adjusted their plans and strategies. Sales pitches became 
more refined, their methods for keeping track of orders 
became more systematic, and they took over responsibili- 
ties initially held by their mothers. The temporal course of 
their involvement included monitoring their activities and 
self-regulation: They modified their strategies in response 
to feedback from their experiences. Rogoff et al. also 
emphasized that this process of learning was collabora- 
tive-with parents, peers, and customers--and they pro- 
vided a useful warning that development of initiative is not 
necessarily an individual process, but rather often involves 
this type of collaborative agency. 
As a whole, these findings begin to suggest that struc- 
tured voluntary activities are a context that is particularly 
suited to the development of initiative. The presence of 
intrinsic motivation, concerted engagement, and, in many 
cases, a temporal arc, suggests that participants in these 
activities are having experiences of directing and regulating 
their actions in pursuit of a goal. Such experiences, I 
believe, are likely to stimulate the learning of initiative 
dispositions and skills. The process of creating order or 
negentropy within the activity, I suspect, promotes second- 
ary processes of change within individuals (personal ne- 
gentropy), change that facilitates this type of endeavor in 
the future. 
For me, the phenomenological profile that we discov- 
ered for these activities inspires further theorizing. The 
unique combination of psychological states, intrinsic mo- 
tivation with concentration, suggests that adolescents are 
awake, alive, and open to developmental experiences in a 
way that is less common in other parts of their daily lives. 
Research suggests that positive states are associated with 
more global and integrative thinking (Isen, 1987; Isen & 
Means, 1983) and that they can be "organizers of develop- 
ment" (Collins & Gunnar, 1990; Hauser & Smith, 1991). I 
believe that this unique combination of agentic states may 
make these activities a fertile context for adolescents to 
develop and teach themselves a wide range of positive 
competencies, in addition to initiative. 
Such unbridled enthusiasm, however, has a long his- 
tory in the discussion of youth activities and has often 
strained credibility. Proponents have frequently made un- 
critical claims that youth activities build character, redirect 
aggressive impulses, and promote initiative, without sub- 
jecting these claims to the test of falsifiability. We must 
ask, then, where is the beef? What is the evidence that 
participation in these activities is related to measurable 
developmental change? 
Outcome Research 
Existent evaluation research on structured youth activities 
has typically dealt with the question of outcomes in general 
terms. It has examined outcomes from activity participation 
for broad, generic adjustment variables, without specifi- 
cally focusing on initiative, and often without any theoret- 
ical base. 
The history of these studies provides a textbook ex- 
ample on the difficulties of conducting truly critical out- 
come research. A substantial fund of cross-sectional, cor- 
relational research at first blush would seem to substantiate 
the claims that youth activities are related to positive de- 
velopmental change. Participation in school extracurricular 
activities and community youth organizations has been 
found to be correlated with higher self-esteem, feelings of 
control over one's life, lower rates of delinquency, and 
higher educational aspirations and achievement (Holland & 
Andre, 1987; Larson, 1994). The problem with these cor- 
relational relationships, however, is that research also sug- 
gests that youths' participation in these activities is selec- 
tive. Participation is greater among higher socioeconomic 
status (SES) and higher ability-tracked students, who have 
more parental support (Butcher, 1985; Carnegie, 1992; 
Holland & Andre, 1987; McNeal, 1995; Winnie & Walsh, 
1980). These are factors that predict positive outcomes on 
their own, so they represent a confound in the interpretation 
of correlational findings. Once these factors are controlled, 
the relationships between participation and positive out- 
comes are reduced in strength and in some cases disappear 
(Agnew & Petersen, 1989; Holland & Andre, 1987; Scha- 
fer, 1969). 
The claim that structured youth activities promote 
positive developmental outcomes is more adequately tested 
by longitudinal studies. These, however, are few and many 
of them suffer the same possibility of confounding self- 
selection variables as the cross-sectional research. A num- 
ber of studies analyzing data over long time periods suggest 
impressive long-term effects. They have found associations 
between high school and adult participation in political 
organizations (DeMartini, 1983), the arts (Bloom, 1985), 
and sports (Howell & McKenzie, 1987) but do not ade- 
quately control for the possibility that prior, unmeasured 
third variables were driving these relationships. Studies 
that control for some of the variables that affect high school 
participation, such as SES, grade point average (GPA), and 
academic ability, still find effects, though modest in size. 
Hanks and Eckland (1978) found that youth who partici- 
pated in extracurricular activities in high school were more 
likely to be involved in voluntary associations at age 30, 
even with controls for initial SES and academic aptitude. 
Glancy, Willits, and Farrell (1986) found participation in 
extracurricular activities to be associated with occupational 
attainment 24 years later, with controls for parents' SES 
and high-school GPA. 
The most rigorous test of the thesis is provided by 
shorter term longitudinal studies in which dependent vari- 
ables are measured on multiple occasions. This design 
allows investigators to assess whether participation in 
youth activities is related to within-person change for these 
dependent variables. Using this approach with a sample of 
1,259 middle-class youth, Eccles and Barber (1999) found 
that participation in structured youth activities in 10th 
grade predicted positive changes in GPA between 10th and 
January 2000 • American Psychologist 
175

----- Page 7 (native) -----
12th grade. They also found that participation in team 
sports was related to a comparative increase in use of 
alcohol. Analyzing longitudinal data from a sample of 
10,000 youths in the High School and Beyond Study, 
Marsh (1992) found significant relationships between par- 
ticipation in extracurricular and community activities and 
positive changes in self-concept, schoolwork, and educa- 
tional and occupational aspirations from 10th to 12th grade. 
Marsh noted that the effect sizes were small, under one 
percent. But this may be because the impact of effective 
programs or activities is diluted by the lack of impact 
among weaker ones. 
Effects can, in fact, be much larger for specific struc- 
tured youth activities, as is demonstrated by research eval- 
uating adventure programs, such as Outward Bound. Ad- 
venture programs are not the prototypic structured youth 
activity; they involve experiences of intense mental, phys- 
ical, and interpersonal challenge in a wilderness setting, 
typically for a period of two to four weeks. They are, 
however, structured and voluntary. What is more, they 
easily lend themselves to rigorous pre-post evaluation. 
Hattie, Marsh, Neill, and Richards (1997) conducted a 
meta-analysis of evaluation data from 151 samples of par- 
ticipants, approximately one half of whom were school- 
aged adolescents. Aggregating findings for 40 different 
types of outcome variables, they found a mean effect size 
of .34 across all samples and .26 for the adolescent sam- 
ples. In a similar, although less comprehensive meta-anal- 
ysis, Cason and Gillis (1994) found a mean effect size of 
.31 for adolescents. The strongest effect sizes in Hattie and 
associates' meta-analysis were for variables dealing with 
self-control, such as independence (.47), self-efficacy (.31), 
assertiveness (.42), internal locus of control (.30), and 
decision making (.47)--variables that relate to my con- 
struct of initiative. The most striking finding of their meta- 
analysis was that, unlike in most program evaluations, 
effect sizes increased rather than diminished in the 25 
months following participation in the program. This sug- 
gests that participants may have acquired some new qual- 
ity, such as initiative, that is generative of additional, 
postprogram positive growth. 
This research on adventure programs is clearly the 
most compelling body of evidence that structured voluntary 
activities can have powerful, sustainable, positive effects 
on development, including what looks like development of 
initiative. But the differences in effect sizes between this 
and other youth activities also highlights how little we 
really know about what actually accounts for these 
changes. Several authors have lamented the absence of 
theory in this research and the lack of attention to process 
(Brown, 1988; Holland & Andre, 1987; Oden, 1995). Most 
of this outcome research does not allow us to conceptualize 
or discriminate what processes or experiences create posi- 
tive development in some activities but not in others. 
The one set of processes that is discussed in some of 
this research, but not rigorously tested, is the sociological 
phenomenon of social integration into a group (Eccles & 
Barber, 1999; Youniss, Yates, & Su, 1997). Classic socio- 
logical theory recognizes that joining a group leads to 
processes of secondary socialization, which include assim- 
ilation of the group's norms and internalization of an iden- 
tity associated with group membership (Berger & Luck- 
mann, 1966). In the case of youth activities, not only does 
a teen join the team, club, or activity group, but frequently 
other participants become part of the teen's peer friendship 
network (Brown, 1990), thus redoubling the opportunity 
and impetus for him or her to be socialized into group 
norms. Eccles and Barber suggested that the sequence is 
typically reflexive, that the choice to enter an activity may 
both grow out of and reinforce an adolescent's norms and 
emerging identity. Ethnographic studies provide in-depth 
descriptions of this socialization into group norms (Eder & 
Parker, 1987; Fine, 1983, 1987). 
The most extensive and most psychological discus- 
sion of these processes of social integration are provided by 
Youniss, Yates, and their colleagues, who have focused on 
how participation in service activities, an important sub- 
category of youth activities, is related to adolescents' de- 
velopment of civic participation. They argued that service 
activities provide a context for youth to observe and prac- 
tice basic roles and processes of civic engagement 
(Youniss, McLellan, & Yates, 1997). They also proposed 
that the formation of relationships with group members and 
adult leaders furnishes adolescents with valuable social 
capital (Youniss, Yates, & Su, 1997). Furthermore, they 
suggested that experiences in service activities can provide 
provocative reflective material at a critical juncture in iden- 
tity development that adolescents incorporate into their 
identity work (Youniss, McLellan, Su, & Yates, 1999; 
Youniss & Yates, 1997). 
These processes of social integration are useful for 
making sense of outcome findings regarding normative 
behavior. Reduced delinquency, increased self-esteem, 
greater career aspirations, and even athletes' increased al- 
cohol use may reflect socialization into group mores and 
identity, and the social capital acquired in an activity may 
facilitate continued participation and advancement in that 
activity after high school. As a psychologist, however, I 
find these processes less useful for explaining what seem 
like organismic developmental changes, such as the acqui- 
sition of initiative. With the exception of Youniss and 
Yates's (1997) discussion of identity development, these 
accounts do not seem very useful for explaining changes 
that increase after group membership ends, such as the 
rising effect sizes that follow participation in adventure 
programs. Recent research by Shirley Brice Heath (1999) 
provides a window on processes that are more internal, 
organismic, and better suited to explaining the develop- 
ment of initiative. 
A Language of Agency 
As a linguist, Heath has been interested in the oral com- 
munications of adolescents while they participate in struc- 
tured voluntary activities. The speech samples she obtained 
provide a direct view of changes in adolescents' thought 
processes that reflect learning of initiative. Heath's re- 
search, conducted in collaboration with Milbrey McLaugh- 
fin and others, deals with youth participating in organiza- 
176 
January 2000 • American Psychologist

----- Page 8 (native) -----
tions that youth themselves have identified as being partic- 
ularly attractive and effective (Heath, 1993; Heath & 
McLaughlin, 1993; McLaughlin, Irby, & Langman, 1994). 
Their sample of organizations included art and drama 
groups, sports teams, Boys and Girls Clubs, YMCA gang 
intervention programs, and other community organizations. 
All were in low-income neighborhoods, serving multieth- 
nic groups of youth in urban, small-city, and rural settings. 
The researchers observed activities, interviewed partici- 
pants, and recorded their language use. 
Before discussing developmental changes in the 
youths' language, it is essential to provide a brief descrip- 
tion of the psychological environments these organizations 
provided. These environments appeared to be structured to 
facilitate the three elements of initiative. First, these re- 
searchers found that all of these effective organizations 
were youth based: Although the original impetus for the 
groups came from adults, the motivation, direction, and 
goals of the groups' activities came from the participants. 
Adult leaders skillfully avoided assuming responsibility for 
the direction of the group, insisting that those decisions be 
made by participants (McLaughlin et al., 1994). Agentry 
was placed with the youth. Thus, rather than working 
toward goals set for them by adults, the participants held 
responsibilities for setting goals and identifying what prob- 
lems needed to be solved. They held responsibility for 
raising money, writing grants, handling budgets, setting 
rules, and deciding schedules. These organizations de- 
pended upon the participants being intrinsically motivated, 
otherwise they quite literally went under (Heath, 1997). 
A second feature of these effective organizations was 
that all of them engaged youth in an environment of real- 
world constraints, and the leaders did not blanch from 
articulating these constraints. The coach of one Little 
League team that Heath studied repeatedly restated the 
rules of the game, including the constitutive rules of base- 
ball and informal rules of strategy and good sportsmanship. 
He also continually asked players to recite these rules to 
encourage their internalization (Heath, 1994). In all of the 
organizations, the groups' work eventually led to some 
form of what Heath (1997) called "authentic evaluation," 
assessment of the group's product by an outside evaluator, 
criteria, or test. In other words, to the extent that partici- 
pants devoted attention to the activity, they were required 
to engage with challenge and complexity. 
Third, all of the organizations studied involved an arc 
of activity over a period of time. In some cases it was a 
season, in others the period of time required to develop a 
production or perlbrmance. As a result, all involved stages 
of planning, practice, or rehearsal, followed by production, 
performance, or achievement of a goal (Heath, 1994; Heath 
& Langman, 1994). This arc of activity frequently involved 
setbacks, obstacles, and emerging challenges, such as los- 
ing games, funding shortages, toilets overflowing in the 
organization's building, or the challenge of how to get 11 
band members into a van when the insurance only covered 
9 people (Heath, 1997). Therefore, youths were required to 
monitor and regulate the cumulative course of their actions. 
These organizations, then, provided an environment 
of possibilities for planful action, for initiative. They pro- 
vided a context that demanded self-directed constructive 
attention over time. What emerged within these environ- 
ments was a language of agency. When adolescents first 
joined these organizations, they exhibited a type of lan- 
guage fitted to the bored youth that I described at the 
beginning of this article. They changed topics of conver- 
sation frequently, with few instances of sustained focus on 
a single topic. Their statements included almost no conjec- 
tures about future events and reflected a passive and self- 
defensive orientation that viewed acts of initiative as inev- 
itably doomed to failure. However, Heath (1997, 1999) 
reported marked changes in the language of young people 
in these organizations within their first three to four weeks 
of participation. Four types of language use increased that 
reflect skills to think about the world as a field of action. 
To begin with, Heath found a dramatic increase in the 
use of conditionals, statements taking the form "If A, B & 
C, then X, Y & Z." These statements often laid out hypo- 
thetical scenarios for discussion and analysis. "Let's imag- 
ine that .... then what?" Scenarios typically situated the 
individual or group as actors. They dealt with likely out- 
comes that might ensue from different courses of action. "If 
we spend our budget on set design, how much money will 
we have left for costumes?" Or they dealt with types of 
actions that might be required should certain situations 
arise. 
Along with more frequent conditionals, new partici- 
pants increased their use of modals, such as "should," 
"could," and "would." "Could we do so and so? Would it 
work out?" Heath observed a dramatic increase in proba- 
bilistic thinking. Their language reflected a weighing of 
hypothetical possible actions against realistic likelihoods 
that those actions would have desired versus undesired 
consequences. They were developing the language skills of 
contingency thinking. 
Next, new participants increased their use of strategies 
for getting clarification from others. In discussion with 
each other, or with outside people with whom they were 
engaged, they more often sought to sharpen their under- 
standing of conditionals: "You mean if I do X, then... ?" 
This reflects increased value placed on precise knowledge 
of consequences. For example, "If we rent the band shell, 
will the city give us access to electric jacks and bath- 
rooms?" Contingency thinking requires accurate informa- 
tion about likely outcomes of actions. 
Finally, Heath found that new participants expanded 
their use of varied genres and voices in their speech. They 
more frequently shifted registers in their statements, in- 
cluding adapting the perspective and language of board 
members, business leaders, reporters, and other adult 
worlds with which they interacted. Depending on the situ- 
ation, they might use legalese, a care-giving register, or 
problem-solving language. In short, they became more able 
to play a variety of roles and take multiple perspectives 
(Heath, 1997, 1999). Heath (1993) reported that, when 
adapting the role of someone else, even shy youth showed 
January 2000 ° American Psychologist 
177

----- Page 9 (native) -----
an assertive confidence not evident when speaking as 
themselves. 
What unites all four of these changes is the represen- 
tation of thought and action in a world of contingencies and 
possibilities. These teens had learned to think of the world 
as similar to a chess board in play. They learned to perceive 
the array of strategic options and to estimate probable 
consequences associated with these options. In other terms, 
they had developed what I would call an operating lan- 
guage for initiative, with tools for anticipating, planning, 
adapting to others, monitoring progress, and adjusting be- 
havior over time to achieve a goal. For most of the groups 
Heath studied, this language was learned in group contexts, 
reflecting the injunction from Rogoff et al. (1995) that the 
development of agency in these contexts often involves 
collective participation. 
What Heath's work does, then, is begin to open the 
black box to internal transformations within participants, 
providing a window on what they are actually learning. It 
begins to make the processes of developmental change 
more tangible, including some of the processes that corre- 
spond to the development of initiative. These changes can 
be seen partly as secondary socialization: Leaders and older 
members modeled this operating language and new mem- 
bers, eager to be part of the group, internalized it (Heath, 
1991, 1999; Heath & Langman, 1994). But these changes 
also involve organismic, developmental processes. Partic- 
ipants did not merely acquire a language, they learned to 
adapt and use it generatively. Although the sociological 
account elucidates processes of social integration, this lin- 
guistic-psychological account gives us a handle on pro- 
cesses of personal integration. New participants appeared 
to undergo a paradigm shift in their way of thinking, 
reflecting qualitative developmental change. They ap- 
peared to have developed skills for implementing plans, for 
directing and regulating their activities over time. They 
ingested a new mode of action. Along with it, they reported 
feeling more self-efficacious, more confident in their ability 
to affect the world (Heath, 1997). Such a paradigm shift 
could provide an explanation of why youth in adventure 
programs show sustained and increased effects after the 
program is over; they acquire an operating language that is 
generative. 
It is too soon to be certain how much this language 
change corresponds to actual behavioral change. As of yet, 
there is not evidence regarding its association with acts of 
initiative or anything else. Development of other constructs 
from the emerging social psychological literature on 
agency, such as implementation intentions and emotional 
self-regulation (Gollwitzer, 1999; Mischel, Cantor, & Feld- 
man, 1996), might also be fruitfully tested in this context. 
Nonetheless, Heath's work provides a very promising start. 
Conclusion: Youth Activities as 
Developmental Contexts 
The thesis of this article has been that structured voluntary 
youth activities provide a fertile context for positive devel- 
opment, particularly the development of initiative. First, I 
showed that during youth activities, adolescents experience 
a unique combination of intrinsic motivation and concen- 
tration that is rarely present during their daily experiences 
in schoolwork and unstructured leisure. These two compo- 
nents of experience, I proposed, represent two critical ele- 
ments of initiative, and when they occur in activities in- 
volving a temporal arc of action toward a goal, as is the 
case with many youth activities, all three elements for the 
experience and learning of initiative are in play. Second, I 
reviewed a range of outcome research that begins to con- 
firm that such activities are indeed associated with posi- 
tive outcomes, such as diminished delinquency, greater 
achievement, and increased self-control and self-efficacy. 
Some of these positive outcomes may be attributable to 
important sociological processes, such as secondary social- 
ization into a group, but these processes were not adequate 
for explaining changes that appeared to be more internal 
and organismic. Thus, last, I presented Heath and col- 
league's work demonstrating that activity participation, at 
least in some cases, is related to acquisition of an operating 
language of agency. This gives us a window on organismic 
processes that might lie behind the positive outcomes as- 
sociated with participation in structured youth activities, 
particularly the development of initiative. It suggests pro- 
cesses of personal integration that may work in tandem 
with the sociological processes of social integration. 
The conditions that make structured youth activities a 
fertile context for the development of initiative, I believe, 
also make them a rich context for the development of an 
array of other positive qualities, from altruism to identity. 
Children and adolescents come alive in these activities, 
they become active agents in ways that rarely happen in 
other parts of their lives. This makes youth activities an 
invaluable laboratory for the study of processes of positive 
development, one that deserves much more scientific atten- 
tion. Of course, positive development occurs across con- 
texts--in school, with families, and with peers--but I 
hypothesize that this is a context in which there is often a 
higher density of growth experiences. 
To advance knowledge of positive development, one 
useful avenue for developmental psychology would be to 
give youth activities equivalent status to school, family, 
and peers as a focal context of development. This might 
include comparable research funding and a separate chapter 
in developmental textbooks. True, this context accounts for 
much less of youths' daily time, but knowledge of devel- 
opmental processes in this domain has the potential to have 
equal or greater impact on practice. It is essential, of 
course, that research on this context be done in collabora- 
tion with youth development professionals, for there to be 
the type of interaction between science and practice 
that has been called for in applied developmental science 
(Fisher & Lerner, 1994). I should also call attention to 
fruitful visions developed by others for such a field of 
research and practice (American Youth Policy Forum, 
1997; Hamburg, 1997; Roth et al., 1998). 
An alternative avenue would be to envision positive 
youth development as a parallel (and closely aligned) field 
to developmental psychopathology, one that deals with 
positive development regardless of context. This might also 
178 
January 2000 • American Psychologist

----- Page 10 (native) -----
be envisioned as a National Institute of Mental Health 
study section and a separate chapter in developmental 
textbooks. It would seek to integrate research on resiliency, 
initiative, emotional regulation, self-efficacy, identity, pro- 
social behavior, and moral development, among other top- 
ics. Although I do not want to diminish this later alternative 
(indeed, I would like to see both taken up), I spend the 
remainder of this conclusion drawing out the first proposal, 
because I think its focus on a specific context gives it more 
potential as a cohesive project. Here are some of the issues 
I see as foundational. 
Contexts 
A key to conceptualizing structured youth activities as 
developmental contexts is identifying the processes that 
occur in them, from learning an operating language to 
developing emotional skills to overcome disappointments. 
A major challenge to research and theory, however, is 
dealing with the heterogeneous array of extracurricular, 
community, and self-directed activities that can be included 
as youth activities, each harboring distinct opportunities 
and processes. From aerobics to service activities to creat- 
ing a web site, the "treatment" is extremely varied. Some 
activities are collective and demand coordination with oth- 
ers, whereas others are solitary. Activities differ in the 
degree to which the goals and criteria for desirable perfor- 
mance are prescribed (gymnastics, school band) versus 
those in which participants have much freedom to create 
their own standards (plastic arts). Adolescents' activities on 
computer systems are particularly diverse in form, with 
some being structured and goal oriented and others requir- 
ing little cumulative effort over time. How do we catego- 
rize this array? 
A useful starting point for conceptualizing and cate- 
gorizing youth activities would be descriptive research that 
simply enumerates what types of process experiences par- 
ticipants typically have across different types of activities. 
How often do youth in swimming versus drama clubs 
versus service organizations have the experience of setting 
their own goals, developing plans, or empathizing with 
people from a dissimilar background to theirs? In gathering 
such enumeration, it would be useful to obtain parallel data 
for activities such as schoolwork, work at a job, and un- 
structured leisure activities, in order to test whether rates of 
these process experiences are indeed higher during youth 
activities. 
Developmental and Individual Differences 
The occurrence of developmental processes in a given 
setting, of course, is not just a function of the context, but 
is a joint function of the context and the individual. What 
would be beneficial is theory and research that helps iden- 
tify individuals' preparedness to engage in specific devel- 
opmental processes. How might age, personality, culture, 
gender, and SES, among other factors, shape initial dispo- 
sitions and how youths experience and participate in an 
activity? 
The starting point for much developmental research 
has always been identifying ages at which specific skills are 
and can be mastered. For example, at what age are children 
or adolescents able to acquire the various elements of an 
operating language for initiative, such as the use of 
modals? Rogoff et al. (1995) observed that with age and 
experience, Girl Scouts had diminished needs for adult 
scaffolding in structuring their activities. Indeed, if one 
looks at the current array of structured activities available 
to youth, one sees that there is already a loose progression 
from activities in childhood, such as Brownies and Cub 
Scouts, that are highly structured by adults, to activities in 
high school, such as publishing a school newspaper, in 
which youths take much more responsibility for directing 
their action. More specific data on the ages at which youths 
are ready to master specific skills would be beneficial to the 
design of activities and, eventually, to knowledge that helps 
place individual youths in activities suited to their zone of 
proximal development. Other individual factors besides 
age need to be considered as well. For example, how do 
cultural differences in the construction of agency (Markus, 
Kitayama, & Heiman, 1996) affect youth's participation 
and learning? 
Leading~Coaching 
Knowledge of the interplay between contexts and persons 
leads to the applied question of how leaders of structured 
voluntary activities can best facilitate developmental pro- 
cesses. Leaders face a fundamental problematic of allowing 
participants' actions to be self-directed, voluntary, and 
intrinsically motivated, yet also structured and challenging 
enough that participants are stretched into new domains of 
complexity. Leaders of Heath and colleagues' successful 
organizations tenaciously insisted that youths hold respon- 
sibility for major decisions of the organization, even when 
those decisions threatened the existence of the organiza- 
tion. But at the same time, these leaders played a role in 
defining the situation and modeling the language of agency. 
They laid out problems in the form of "what if' and "if 
then" contingencies. They prompted participants to think 
through alternative scenarios and hypothetical situations, 
posing open-ended dilemmas that required reflection, anal- 
ysis, and drawing on past experience (Heath, 1991; Heath 
& Langman, 1994; McLaughlin et al., 1994). 
Research in coaching sports is the furthest along in 
providing empirically tested paradigms for addressing this 
fundamental problematic. Roberts and colleagues have 
found that many youth coaches create a performance-ori- 
ented motivational climate that is not conducive to devel- 
opment because it focuses athlete's attention on winning, 
public recognition, and performance relative to others. Ath- 
letes adapting this performance-focused orientation tend to 
think of talent as a native endowment and practice less, and 
their motivation flags when feedback suggests that they are 
less endowed with talent than others (Roberts & Treasure, 
1992; Roberts, Treasure, & Kavussanu, 1997). In contrast, 
another set of coaches create a mastery-oriented climate 
that focuses athletes' attention on their development of 
skills relative to individualized standards. Athletes adapt- 
ing this mastery orientation are more likely to see talent as 
something that results from practice, are more likely to 
January 2000 • American Psychologist 
179

----- Page 11 (native) -----
persist in the face of difficulty, and show more skill devel- 
opment over the course of a season. These findings have 
had a direct impact on practice, leading to the development 
of techniques for coaches to work with athletes in setting 
goals for personal skill development that are independent 
of winning and losing (Roberts & Treasure, 1992; Roberts 
et al., 1997). Coaches learn to support self-direction, while 
encouraging structures suited to mastery of new skills. 
A next step is to evaluate how well this and other 
knowledge of coaching can be applied to leadership in 
nonsport youth activities. In addition, we might ask, how 
much existing knowledge about good teaching and good 
parenting can be applied? For example, are good leaders 
like authoritative parents, like child-centered teachers? 
Outcomes 
Outcome research is often a necessary evil that is done 
before anyone knows what to look for, and that has been 
the case in this domain as well. Evaluative data have been 
needed to justify funding for youth activities, even though 
we are not yet sure what the independent and dependent 
variables for this evaluative research should be. From a 
scientific perspective, the first priority needs to be descrip- 
tive and process research, done in collaboration with youth 
professionals, that helps to conceptualize what the devel- 
opmental phenomena are. What is especially needed is 
longitudinal action research and qualitative research that 
follows the same individuals over time in order to develop 
models of change processes. A useful strategy for some 
types of activities would be to identify individuals and 
groups whose participation in an activity showed exem- 
plary objective progress, then look backwards to these 
longitudinal data to see how their processes differed from 
those exhibited by individuals and groups who spun their 
wheels and showed less progress. 
When the field is ready for quantitative outcome stud- 
ies, they need to use a higher level of critical rigor than has 
often been the norm. This calls for research that evaluates 
the occurrence of processes as a function of activity, par- 
ticipants' developmental stages, and leadership variables, 
and how these processes are related to progressive change 
over time. Researchers must study and control for self- 
selection characteristics. Evaluations need to assess possi- 
ble negative effects of participation in youth activities as 
well as positive ones. For example, research on participa- 
tion in competitive sports suggests that they are associated 
with increased competition anxiety (Smoll & Smith, 1996) 
and acquisition of more self-centered moral reasoning 
(Bredemeier & Shields, 1996). Might these negative out- 
comes also occur in other demanding and competitive 
activities, such as in music competition? 
The most strenuous evaluation research would test 
whether participation in an activity is related to effects 
outside the activity itself. I have argued that youth activities 
are a context for development of qualities and skills, like 
initiative, that have general applicability across domains of 
life. In a similar vein, Youniss, Yates, and Su (1997) 
hypothesized that participation in youth activities creates 
personal confidence that increases the participants' likeli- 
hood of engaging in public service in other contexts. Re- 
search evaluating these types of generalized, cross-context 
effects will be the most difficult to conduct, but will pro- 
vide the most persuasive evidence. 
Practice 
The large applied discipline of psychotherapy currently 
exists to treat psychological problems. Imagine, if you will, 
a field of psychological practitioners whose knowledge, 
skills, and status are comparable with those of clinical 
psychologists, who have advanced training in diagnostics, 
mentoring, and program design, and who draw upon a 
well-developed body of research to provide guidance and 
counseling on positive human development. Such a field 
does not need to start de novo, as there are currently many 
youth development professionals. But it does need to 
evolve to incorporate a cumulative body of research and 
theory. One role of these practitioners would be to help 
place children, adolescents, and perhaps adults too in struc- 
tured voluntary contexts that are suited to individuals' 
personality, developmental stage, and ability level. Another 
would be to provide process mentoring, to help keep people 
"in the envelope" of intrinsically motivated challenge and 
learning. Yet another role would be to design and run 
programs that maximize individual and group growth. 
Rather than leaving positive development in the hands of 
nonprofessionals, self-help gurus, and for-profit, Club- 
Med-type chains, we need a science and art, comparable 
with psychotherapy, regarding how to help people realize 
their full capacities across ages. 
Research on coaching provides an example of the 
impressive payoffs that can result from a research-based, 
applied discipline of positive development. In observa- 
tional studies, Smith and Smoll (1990) found favorable 
psychological outcomes to be greater for boys in Little 
League Baseball whose coaches engaged in high levels of 
positive reinforcement for both desirable performance and 
effort, who responded to mistakes with encouragement and 
technical instructions, and who emphasized the importance 
of fun and personal improvement over winning (Curtis, 
Smith, & Smoll, 1979; Smith & Smoll, 1990). On the basis 
of these and other findings, they then designed a three-hour 
training workshop for new coaches. Three hours is ex- 
tremely short compared with most interventions; nonethe- 
less, they found that athletes playing for the trained coaches 
reported substantially and significantly more enjoyment 
than did control participants, showed increases in self- 
esteem and decreases in performance anxiety over the 
course of the season, and were more likely to return the 
next season, with the biggest effects being for athletes who 
were low in self-esteem (Smith & Smoll, 1997; Smoll, 
Smith, Barnett, & Everett, 1993). If a three-hour interven- 
tion can have such long-term impact, imagine what might 
be accomplished with a body of research comparable in 
size and sophistication with that for developmental 
psychopathology. 
As someone with a special interest in adolescence, my 
vision for the 21 st century is a society in which youth have 
a rich range of expertly staffed structured activities to 
180 
January 2000 * American Psychologist

----- Page 12 (native) -----
choose from, regardless of their SES, gender, ethnicity, 
sexual orientation, ability level, and type of interest. This 
would include activities during the school year and sum- 
mer, and activities with links to businesses, professional 
arts, and civic organizations, so that youths develop con- 
nections that integrate them into adult society. Participation 
in these activities would be self-determined but supported 
and guided according to age, stage, learning style, and 
ability, so that youths are stretched to their full potential. 
Each activity would have enough structure so that youths 
are challenged, but also enough flexibility so that, as youths 
gain experience, they assume responsibility for the direc- 
tion of the activity. As a result, participants progressively 
learn to internalize an operating language for sustaining 
their own motivation and directing and monitoring their 
actions over time, a language that is generative and that 
carries over, helping them to create order, meaning, and 
direction when they encounter ill-structured choices in 
other parts of their lives. 
REFERENCES 
Agnew, R., & Petersen, D. (1989). Leisure and delinquency. Social 
Problems, 36, 332-350. 
Alsaker, F. D., & Flanuner, A. (1999). The adolescent experience in 
twelve nations: European and American adolescents in the nineties. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
American Youth Policy Forum. (1997). Some things do make a difference 
for youth: A compendium of evaluations of youth programs and prac- 
tices. Washington, DC: Author. 
Anderman, E. M., & Maehr, M. L. (1994). Motivation and schooling in 
the middle grades. Review of Educational Research, 64, 287-309. 
Balswick, J., & Ingoldsby, B. (1982). Heroes and heroines among Amer- 
ican adolescents. Sex Roles, 8, 243-249. 
Benedict, R. (1938). Continuities and discontinuities in cultural condi- 
tioning. Psychiatry, l, 161-167. 
Berger, P. L., & Luckmann, T. (1966). The social construction of reality: 
A treatise in the sociology of knowledge. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. 
Bloom, B. (1985). Developing talent in young people. New York: Bal- 
lantine. 
Brandtstadter, J. (1998). Action perspectives on human development. In 
R. M. Lerner (Ed.), Theoretical models of human development (Hand- 
book of child psychology, Vol. 1, No. 5). New York: Wiley. 
Bredemeier, B., & Shields, D. (1996). Moral development and children's 
sport. In F. Smoll & R. Smith (Eds.), Children and youth in sport: A 
biopsychosocial perspective (pp. 381-401 ). Chicago: Brown & Bench- 
mark. 
Brown, B. B. (1988). The vital agenda for research on extracurricular 
influences: A reply to Holland and Andre. Review of Educational 
Research, 58, 107-111. 
Brown, B. B. (1990). Peer groups and peer cultures. In S. S. Feldman & 
G. R. Elliot (Eds.), At the threshold: The developing adolescent (pp. 
171-196). Cambridge, MA: Harvard Press. 
Butcher, J. (1985). Longitudinal analysis of adolescent girls' participation 
in physical activity. Sociology of Sport Journal, 2, 130-143. 
Carli, M., Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (1988). The quality of expe- 
rience in the flow channels: Comparison of Italian and U.S. students. In 
M. Csikszentmihalyi & I. Csikszentmihalyi (Eds.), Optimal experience: 
Psychological studies of flow in consciousness (pp. 288-306). New 
York: Cambridge University Press. 
Carnegie Council on Adolescent Development. (1992). A matter of time: 
Risk and opportunity in the nonschool hours. New York: Carnegie 
Corporation of New York. 
Cason, D., & Gillis, H. L. (1994). A recta-analysis of outdoor adventure 
programming with adolescents. Journal of Experiential Education, 17, 
40-47. 
Collins, W. A., & Gunnar, M. R. (1990). Social and personality develop- 
ment. American Review of Psychology, 41, 387-416. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975). Beyond boredom and anxiety: The experi- 
ence of play in work and games. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1978). Attention and the wholistic approach to 
behavior. In K. S. Pope & J. L. Singer (Eds.), The stream of conscious- 
ness (pp. 335-358). New York: Plenum. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experi- 
ence. New York: Harper-Collins. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1993). The evolving self" A psychology for the third 
millennium. New York: Harper-Collins. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). Creativity: Flow and the psychology oJ 
discovery and invention. New York: Harper-Collins. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Larson, R. W. (1984). Being adolescent. New 
York: Basic Books. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M., Rathunde, K., & Whalen, S. (1993). Talented 
teenagers: The roots' of success and failure. Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Curtis, B., Smith, R., & Smoll, F. (1979). Scrutinizing the skipper: A 
study of leadership behaviors in the dugout. Journal of Applied Psy- 
chology, 64, 391-400. 
Deci, E. L. (with Flaste, R.). (1995). Why we do what we do: The 
dynamics of personal autonomy. New York: Putnam. 
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and self-deter- 
mination in human behavior. New York: Plenum. 
DeMartini, J. (1983). Social movement participation: Political socializa- 
tion, generational consciousness, and lasting effects. Youth and Society, 
15, 195-223. 
Dewey, J. (1913). Interest and effort in education. Carbondale: Southern 
Illinois University Press. 
Dubas, J. S., & Snider, B. A. (1993). The role of community-based youth 
groups in enhancing learning and achievement through nonformal ed- 
ucation. In R. M. Lerner (Ed.), Early adolescence: Perspectives on 
research, pol&y, and intervention (pp. 150-174). Hillsdale, NJ: Erl- 
bantu. 
Eccles, J. S., & Barber, B. L. (1999). Student council, volunteering, 
basketball, or marching band: What kind of extracurricular involvement 
matters'? Journal of Adolescent Research, 14, 10-43. 
Eccles, J. S., & Midgley, C. (1991). Changes in academic motivation and 
self-perception during early adolescence. In R. Montemayor, G. R. 
Adams, & T. P. Gulotta (Eds.), From childhood to adolescence: A 
transitional period? (Advances in adolescent development, Vol. 2). 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
Eccles, J. S., Wigfield, A., & Schiefele, U. (1998). Motivation to succeed. 
In W. Damon & N. Eisenberg (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: 
Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality development (5th ed., pp. 
1017-1095). New York: Wiley. 
Eder, D., & Parker, S. (1987). The cultural production and reproduction of 
gender: The effect of extracurricular activities on peer-group culture. 
Sociology of Education, 60, 200-213. 
Fine, G. A. (1983). Shared fantasy: Role-playing games as social worlds. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Fine, G. (1987). With the boys: Little League baseball and preadolescent 
culture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Fisher, C. B., & Lerner, R. M. (Eds.). (1994). Applied developmental 
psychology. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Gibson, E., & Rader, N. (1979). Attention, the perceiver as performer. In 
G. Hale & M. Lewis (Eds.), Attention and cognitive development (pp. 
1-21). New York: Plenum. 
Glancy, M., Willits, F., & Farrell, P. (1986). Adolescent activities and 
adult success and happiness: Twenty-four years later. Sociology and 
Social Research, 70, 242-250. 
Gollwitzer, P. M. (1999). Implementation intentions: Strong effects of 
simple plans. American Psychologist, 54, 493-503. 
Hamburg, D. (1997). Toward a strategy for healthy adolescent develop- 
ment. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154(6), 7-12. 
Hamilton, S. (1994). Employment prospects as motivation for school 
achievement: Links and gaps between school and work in seven coun- 
tries. In R. K. Silbereisen & E. Todt (Eds.), Adolescence in context: The 
interplay of Jamily, school, peers, and work in adjustment (pp. 267- 
303). New York: Springer-Verlag. 
January 2000 • American Psychologist 
181

----- Page 13 (native) -----
Hanks, M., & Eckland, B. (1978). Adult voluntary associations and 
adolescent socialization. Sociological Quarterly, 19, 481-490. 
Hattie, J., Marsh, H. W., Neill, J. T., & Richards, G. E. (1997). Adventure 
education and outward bound: Out-of-class experiences that make a 
lasting difference. Review of Educational Research, 67, 43-87. 
Hauser, S. T., & Smith, H. F. (1991). The development and experience of 
affect in adolescence. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic' Associ- 
ation, 39, 131-165. 
Heath, S. B. (1991). "It's about winning!": The language of knowledge in 
baseball. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S. D. Teasley (Eds.), 
Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 101-124). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association. 
Heath, S. B. (1993). Inner city life through drama: Imagining the language 
classroom. TESOL Quarterly, 27, 177-192. 
Heath, S. B. (1994). The project of learning from the inner-city youth 
perspective. In F. A. Villarruel & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Promoting 
community-based programs for socialization and learning (New Direc- 
tions for Child Development, Vol. 63, pp. 25-34). San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass. 
Heath, S. B. (1997, April 21). Language and work: Learning and identity 
development of older children in communi~ settings (George Miller 
Committee Lecture), University of Illinois. 
Heath, S. B. (1999). Dimensions of language development: Lessons from 
older children. In A. S. Masten (Ed.), Cultural processes in child 
development: The Minnesota symposium on child psychology (Vol. 29, 
pp. 59-75). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Heath, S. B., & Langman, J. (1994). Shared thinking and the register of 
coaching. In D. Biber & E. Finegan (Eds.), Sociolinguistic perspectives 
on register (pp. 82-105). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Heath, S. B., & McLaughlin, M. W. (Eds.). (1993). Identity and inner-city 
youth: Beyond ethnicity and gender. New York: Teachers College 
Press. 
Holland, A., & Andre, T. (1987). Participation in extra-curricular activi- 
ties in secondary school: What is known, what needs to be known'? 
Review of Educational Research, 57, 437-466. 
Howell, F., & McKenzie, J. (1987). High school athletics and adult 
sport-leisure activity: Gender variations across the life cycle. Sociology 
of Sport Journal, 4, 329-346. 
Isen, A. M. (1987). Positive affect, cognitive processes, and social behav- 
ior. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology 
(Vol. 20, pp. 203-253). New York: Academic Press. 
Isen, A. M., & Means, B. (1983). The influence of positive affect on 
decision-making strategy. Social Cognition, 2, 18-31. 
Kirshnit, C. E., Ham, M., & Richards, M. H. (1989). The sporting life: 
Athletic activities during early adolescence. Journal of Youth and 
Adolescence, 18, 601-615. 
Larson, R. W. (1983). Adolescents' daily experience with family and 
friends: Contrasting opportunity systems. Journal of Marriage and the 
Family, 45, 737-750. 
Larson, R. W. (1985). Emotional scenarios in the writing process: An 
examination of young writers' affective experiences. In M. Rose (Ed.), 
When the writer can't write: Studies of disruption in the composing 
process (pp. 19-42). New York: Guilford Press. 
Larson, R. W. (1994). Youth organizations, hobbies, and sports as devel- 
opmental contexts. In R. K. Silbereisen & E. Todt (Eds.), Adolescence 
in context: The interplay of family, school, peers, and work in adjust- 
ment (pp. 46-65). New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Larson, R. W., Ham, M., & Raffaelli, M. (1989). The nurturance of 
motivated attention in the daily experience of children and adolescents. 
Advances in motivation and achievement: Vol. 6. Motivation enhancing 
environments (pp. 45-80). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press. 
Larson, R. W., & Kleiber, D. (1993a). Daily experience of adolescents. In 
P. Tolan & B. Cohler (Eds.), Handbook of clinical research and 
practice with adolescents (pp. I25-145). New York: Wiley. 
Larson, R. W., & Kleiber, D. A. (1993b). Structured leisure as a context 
for the development of attention during adolescence. Loisir et SocidtF/ 
Society and Leisure, 16, 77-98. 
Larson, R. W., & Kubey, R. (1983). Television and music: Contrasting 
media in adolescent life. Youth and Society, 15, 13-31. 
Larson, R. W., & Richards, M. H. (1991). Boredom in the middle school 
years: Blaming schools versus blaming students. American Journal of 
Education, 99, 418-443. 
Larson, R. W., & Verma, S. (1999). How children and adolescents spend 
time across the world: Work, play and developmental opportunities. 
Psychological Bulletin, 125, 701-736. 
Leone, C. M., & Richards, M. H. (1989). Classwork and homework in 
early adolescence: The ecology of achievement. Journal of Youth and 
Adolescence, 18, 531-548. 
Lerner, R., & Busch-Rossnagel, N. (1981). Individuals as producers of" 
their development. New York: Academic Press. 
Little, B. R. (1983). Personal projects: A rationale and method for inves- 
tigation. Environment and Behavior, 15, 273-309. 
Little, B. R. (1998). Personal project pursuits: Dimensions and dynamics 
of personal meaning. In P. T. P. Wong & P. S. Fry (Eds.), The human 
quest ~r meaning: A handbook of psychological research and clinical 
applications (pp. 193-212). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Markus, H. R., Kitayama, S., & Heiman, R. J. (1996). Culture and "basic" 
psychological principles. In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), 
Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 857-913). New 
York: Guilford Press. 
Marsh, H. W. (1992). Extracurricular activities: Beneficial extension of 
the traditional curriculum or subversion of academic goals? Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 84, 553-562. 
McCormack, J. (1984). b~terpersonal influences and the channeling of 
goals in adolescence. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of 
Chicago. 
McLaughlin, M. W., Irby, M. A., & Langman, J. (1994). Urban sanctu- 
aries: Neighborhood organizations in the lives and futures of inner-city 
youth. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
McNeal, R. B. (1995). Extracurricular activities and high school dropouts. 
Sociology of Education, 68, 62-81. 
Mischel, W., Cantor, N., & Feldman, S. (1996). Principles of self-regu- 
lation: The nature of willpower and self-control. In E. T. Higgins & 
A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic prin- 
ciples (pp. 329-360). New York: Guilford Press. 
Nurmi, J. (1991). How do adolescents see their future? A review of the 
development of future orientation and planning. Developmental Re- 
view, ll, 1-59. 
Oden, S. (1995). Studying youth programs to assess influences on youth 
development: New roles for researchers. Journal of Adolescent Re- 
search, 10. 173-186. 
Oettingen, G. (1997). Culture and future thought. Culture & Psychology, 
3, 353-381. 
Ogbu, J. U. (1991). Racial stratification and education in the United 
States: Why inequality persists. Teachers College Record, 96, 254- 
298. 
Richards, M. H., & Larson, R. W. (1998). [Daily experience and mental 
health of youth at risk]. Unpublished raw data. 
Roberls, G. C., & Treasure, D. C. (1992). Children in sport. Sport Science 
Review, 1(2), 46 64. 
Roberts, G. C., Treasure, D. C., & Kavussanu, M. (1997). Motivation in 
physical activity contexts: An achievement goal perspective. Advances 
in Motivation and Achievement, 10, 413-447. 
Rogoff, B., Baker-Sennett, J., Lacasa, P., & Goldsmith, D. (1995). De- 
velopment through participation in sociocultural activity. Cultural 
practices as contexts for development: New Directions for Child De- 
velopment, 67(Spring), 45-65. 
Roth, J., Brooks-Gunn, J., Murray, L., & Foster, W. (1998). Promoting 
healthy adolescents: Synthesis of youth development program evalua- 
tions. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 8, 423-459. 
Ryan, R. M. (1993). Agency organization: Intrinsic motivation, auton- 
omy, and the self in psychological development. The Nebraska Sym- 
posium on Motivation, 40, 1-56. 
Ryan, R. M., Sheldon, K. M., Kasser, T., & Deci, E. L. (1996). All goals 
are not created equal: An organismic perspective on the nature of goals 
and their regulation. In P. M. Gollwitzer & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), The 
ps)chology of actions: Linking cognition and motivation to behavior 
(pp. 7-26). New York: Guilford Press. 
Sampson, E. E. (1988). The debate on individualism: Indigenous psychol- 
ogies of the individual and their role in personal and societal function- 
ing. American Psychologist. 43, 15-22. 
Schafer, E. E. (1969). Participation in interscholastic athletics and delin- 
quency: A preliminary study. Social Problems, 17, 40-47. 
182 
January 2000 • American Psychologist

----- Page 14 (native) -----
Schlegel, A., & Barry, H. (1991). Adolescence: An anthropological in- 
quiry. New York: Free Press. 
Schneider, B., & Stevenson, D. (t999). The ambitious generation: Amer- 
ica's teenagers, motivated but directionless. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press. 
Seligman, M. (1990). Learned optimism: How to change your mind and 
your life. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Silbereisen, R. K., Noack, P., & Eyferth, K. (1986). Place for develop- 
ment: Adolescents, leisure settings, and developmental tasks. In R. K. 
Silbereisen, K. Eyferth, & G. Rudinger (Eds.), Development as action 
in context: Problem behavior and normal youth development (pp. 
87-107). New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Simmons, R., & Zhou, Y. (1994). Racial, school, and family context 
among adolescents. In R. K. Silbereisen & E. Todt (Eds.), Adolescence 
in context: The interplay of family, school, peers, and work in adjust- 
ment (pp. 149-175). New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Smith, R. E., & Smoll, F. L. (1990). Self-esteem and children's reactions 
to youth sport coaching behaviors: A field study of self-enhancement 
processes. Developmental Psychology, 26, 987-993. 
Smith, R. E., & Smoll, F. L. (1997). Coaching the coaches: Youth sports 
as a scientific and applied behavioral setting. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 6, 16-21. 
Smoll, F. L., Smith, R. E., Barnett, N. P., & Everett, J. J. (1993). 
Enhancement of children's self-esteem through social support train- 
ing for youth sport coaches. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 
602-610. 
Wilson, W. J. I 1996). When work disappears: The world of the new urban 
poor. New York: Vintage Books. 
Winnie, P. H., & Walsh, J. (1980). Self-concept and participation in 
school activities reanalyzed. Journal of Educational Psychology, 72, 
161-166. 
Youniss, J., McLellan, J. A., Su, Y., & Yates, M. (1999). The role of 
community service in identity development: Normative, unconven- 
tional, and deviant orientations. Journal of Adolescent Research, 14, 
248-261. 
Youniss, J., McLellan, J. A., & Yates, M. (1997). What we know about 
engendering civic identity. American Behavioral Scientist, 40, 620- 
631. 
Youniss, J., & Yates, M. (1997). Community service and social respon- 
sibili O' in youth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Youniss, J., Yates, M., & Su, Y. (1997). Social integration: Community 
service and marijuana use in high school seniors. Journal of Adolescent 
Research, 12, 245-262. 
January 2000 • American Psychologist 
183