

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Self-branding, ‘micro-celebrity’ & the rise of Social Media Influencers  
 
Abstract : The notion of self-branding has drawn myriad academic responses over the last 
decade. First popularised by Tom Peters (1997) in a provocative piece published in Fast 
Company, self-branding has been criticised by some on theoretical, practical and ethical 
grounds (Shepard 2005), while others have endorsed and propelled the idea (Lair, Sullivan 
and Cheney 2005; Thomson 2006; Speed, Butler and Collins 2015; Gandini 2015). This 
article considers how and why the concept of self-branding has become so prevalent. We 
contend that it parallels the growth of digital technology (particularly social media) 
embedded in the current political climate: neoliberal individualism. Another objective here is 
to imbue the concept of self-branding with a marketing perspective and show how the 
‘celebrities’ of self-branding manifest at a marketing media nexus distinct to the opening 
decades of the 21st century. Building on literature from mostly media and cultural studies, this 
critique see self-branding as a problematic distortion of key branding principles that has 
obvious implications for its practitioners and advocates. These inherent tensions and 
problematic ironies are shown through discussion of three Social Media Influencers (SMIs) 
whose fame and following was achieved via the practices and phenomena under 
consideration.    
Keywords: self-branding, micro-celebrity, social media, neoliberalism, branding 
 
Introduction 
Self-branding, which is sometimes called personal branding, involves individuals 
developing a distinctive public image for commercial gain and/or cultural capital. The 
number of books, websites, workshops, and seminars devoted to its principles and 
promotion is evidence of its prevalence and appeal (Khedher, 2014, p.30). Central to 
self-branding is the idea that, just like commercially branded products, individuals

----- Page 2 (native) -----
benefit from having a unique selling point, or a public identity that is singularly 
charismatic and responsive to the needs and interests of target audiences. This idea has 
permeated business literature since at least the 1920s, with best-selling titles that extol 
the merits of self-improvement and a positive attitude, but its broader resonance over 
the last 20 years is significant. In terms of pushing the idea of self-branding from the 
margins of marketing literature to the forefront of mainstream media, a 1997 article 
published in the business magazine Fast Company bears noting. In the article ‘The 
Brand Called You’, Tom Peters argues that individuals must assume control of their 
own brand identity to stand out in the labour market, project a dynamic and memorable 
image, and consistently deliver value to consumers, employers and markets. Grafting 
the logic of branding onto individuals is not only possible or desirable, he argues; it is 
imperative and inevitable.  
 
Lest individuals surrender their brand identities to others, for lack of initiative, interest 
or strategy, Peters believes that self-branding requires the same dedication and drive 
that saw the likes of Nike and Starbucks achieve prominence and loyalty. He writes: 
“We are CEOs of our own companies: Me Inc. To be in business today, our most 
important job is to be head marketer of the brand called You” (Peters 1997: online). 
Peters thus encourages individuals to turn their résumé into a ‘marketing brochure’ full 
of ‘braggables’ for which they want to be famous (the term he uses): “being CEO of Me 
Inc. requires you to act selfishly – to grow yourself, to promote yourself, to get the 
market to reward yourself” (ibid).  His message captured popular audiences with its 
clarity, simplicity and conviction; and, as argued shortly, its seamless consonance with 
the reigning tenets of a neoliberal ideology.

----- Page 3 (native) -----
A problematic concept & practice  
Branding is inextricably tied to marketing; however, the concept of self-branding does 
not fit neatly as a subset of branding and scaling the branding concept down to the 
individual is problematic. Branding an individual raises conceptual, practical, and 
ethical issues, which are either not acknowledged or simply glossed over by its 
advocates. Moreover, there is an implicit assumption that everyone is expected to self-
brand in order to realise his or her fullest potential. There is even a call for academics to 
build a personal brand in order to help sell their university online (Brandabur 2012), 
while one researcher has developed (albeit facetiously) the ‘Kardashian Index’, to 
measure the popularity of scientists by their number of followers on Twitter (Hall 
2014).  
 
The word ‘brand’ is derived from the Old Norse word brandr, meaning ‘to burn’, and 
referred to the practice whereby livestock owners would burn a unique and 
differentiating symbol into their animals’ skins. In its contemporary use for marketing, a 
brand signifies a certain quality or idea associated with a commodity which ostensibly 
simplifies the consumer’s decision-making. Ideally, a brand must be seen to possess 
strong, favorable, unique and relevant mental associations (Keller 2007), which helps 
differentiate the brand in an otherwise crowded and cacophonous market. Another 
function of branding is to imbue the product, service or firm with a personality. 
Presumably, personality dimensions such as ruggedness, sophistication, sincerity, 
excitement and competence (Aaker 1997) give a product, service or firm a human-like 
quality and thus make it more relatable. The brand’s usefulness therefore rests on the 
promise of consistency, which mitigates risks for the consumer. That is, one can more 
or less know what to expect when they commit to a reputable brand: the Starbucks

----- Page 4 (native) -----
‘experience’ varies little from Sydney to New York to Shanghai, and this holds more or 
less true for Nike, Apple, Coke and so on. The brand’s consistency thus encourages 
repeat purchases (over space and time) and, most importantly, brand loyalty. 
 
Herein lays the obvious problem when the concept of branding is applied to a person: 
consistency is notoriously difficult to sustain. One need only consider the numerous 
examples of celebrities caught doing or saying something that undermines the brands 
with which they are affiliated. For example, when news broke of Tiger Woods’ 
extramarital infidelities in late 2009, several sponsors suspended their contracts with 
him almost immediately, including Accenture, AT&T, Gatorade, General Motors, 
Gillette and TAG Heuer. Their message was clear: Woods no longer embodied the 
brand attributes that they hoped to secure through his endorsement and falls in their 
market value confirm that there was subsequent material loss (Knittel and Stango  
2014). This is the risk every brand takes when a celebrity has been engaged for 
promotion: the celebrity must maintain at least a charade of consistently desirable, 
aspirational attributes – a quest bedeviled by not just the paparazzi industry, but also the 
average passer-by that can instantly capture every indiscretion on his or her smartphone. 
Of course, it is not just celebrities that go ‘off message’. Political leaders suffer a similar 
fate when they deviate from policies and are then punished by voters for having 
abandoned their promises (Speed et al. 2015). The point is that consistency requires 
vigilance, authenticity, and the absence of unexpected hurdles that would require 
amendments or negotiation, all of which are extremely difficult for humans to ensure.     
 
Despite these issues, the concept of self-branding continues to be both popular and 
influential. However apart from the issue of maintaining consistency (and hence

----- Page 5 (native) -----
authenticity), the ‘ordinary’ person wanting to be famous faces another major hurdle: 
how to build and cultivate a large target audience. To make sense of this, we need to 
consider the interplay between marketing, media and celebrity.     
 
Audience size and celebrity: where does the opportunity lie? 
Marketing and media are mutually dependent. Media rely on advertising revenue for 
commercial viability, while advertisers have traditionally relied on media to address the 
audience (their potential consumers). To deliver an audience, media organisations create 
interesting, engaging content; this is their primary objective. One type of content that 
has been broadly popular with audiences is celebrity.  In turn, there is an obvious 
marketing relationship between a brand, media, audience and celebrity. The brand 
represents the identity of a commodity (a product, service or firm), and its main 
function is to convey a certain level of quality to the target audience but to reach the 
target audience (at an optimal frequency), the brand owners (or advertisers) pay media 
to deliver the message to the target audience. When a celebrity is introduced into the 
picture, the situation becomes more complicated. A human brand is defined here as a 
‘‘any well-known persona who is the subject of marketing communications efforts’’ 
(Thomson 2006, p. 104). The most important difference is that the human brand can 
bring his or her own audience into the equation. Of course, the human brand can still 
rely on traditional media to deliver the audience, while some celebrities also use their 
own media (e.g. websites, blogs, Facebook, Twitter and Instagram) to cultivate their 
own audience.  Eventually, with consistent juxtaposition, the human brand can become 
synonymous with the brand and hence with the product, service or firm).  This suggests 
that self-branding makes most sense if celebrities can lend their names profitably to 
major brands.  Sports stars for instance can earn many times more from their

----- Page 6 (native) -----
endorsement fees than prize money.  This is because major sporting events command a 
large audience.  This provides the endorsed brand with massive exposure, and if the 
sports star also wins major tournaments, the ‘halo effect’ will flow onto the endorsed 
brand.  While not all celebrities have an equal amount of marketing pull, the more 
successful have talent and personal agents to help convert their fame into lucrative 
endorsement deals.    
 
Our interest here is in fame-seekers who lack both a strong public identity and the 
resources to self-promote on the scale of an established celebrity. The opportunity for 
ordinary persons may lie in social media (and/or reality television) to help build a strong 
fan base, sizable enough to interest advertisers. In other words, through social media, 
reality television and strategies of ‘micro-celebrity’ (discussed shortly), a modicum of 
even transient fame can still be achieved. Given the issues noted though (lack of 
consistency and the challenge of building a sizable target audience) we now return to 
our original question of why self-branding has continued to grow in popularity?  We 
contend that there are two reasons for this: 
 
1. Social media tacitly promises fame (and subsequent wealth) to ‘ordinary’ users 
and thus encourages practices of micro-celebrity   
2. Within a political culture of neoliberal individualism, self-branding is 
encouraged with the promise of reward  
 
Our contention is that the increased ease of projecting one’s image through social media 
coupled with the rise of individualism has made the notion of self-branding more

----- Page 7 (native) -----
popular.  This in turn creates the illusion, often exemplified by the success of reality 
television stars that anyone can be famous and hence become ostensibly successful.   
 
Social media & the practices of micro-celebrity  
Peters (1997) did not attribute the importance of self-branding exclusively to the 
Internet but his central message has certainly been amplified and extended by others 
who see in the digital age a heightened need for the practices and mind-set that Peters 
encourages.  At the very least, the (mostly) open platform of online media makes it 
highly amenable to the strategic and targeted packaging of users’ identities, insofar as 
content production and distribution becomes a seemingly egalitarian affair. As 
Labrecque et al. argue: “No longer does a person need to be familiar with complex 
coding languages or other technicalities to build Web sites, because virtually anyone 
can upload text, pictures and video instantly to a site from a personal computer or 
phone. With technological barriers crumbling and its increasing ubiquity, the Web has 
become the perfect platform for personal branding” (2011, p. 38).  
 
It is, moreover, an exceedingly consumer-centric space, as individuals actively and 
autonomously seek out resources that they are most interested in – and therein lies the 
‘need’ for self-branding. In an environment and era of media surplus, where audiences 
are saturated with so much to choose from, the premium on distinctiveness and 
visibility grows. For this reason, marketing personnel began to speak more of the 
‘attention economy’ (Brody, 2001, p. 20), wherein an unprecedented number of 
communicators compete across more screens for increasingly distracted, dispersed and 
privatised audiences. According to Fairchild, “Regardless of its sociological vacuity or 
validity, the attention economy is by now an established reality for advertisers. It has

----- Page 8 (native) -----
inspired new thinking about how to create lasting, flexible, and evolving relationships 
with consumers” (2007, p. 359).  With this in mind, and as Shepherd notes, self-
branding is “essentially an attention-getting device, and is frequently sold as the key to 
helping the aspiring professional to achieve competitive advantage in a crowded 
marketplace” (2005, p. 597).  
 
By enabling ordinary users to assert strong identities that can underpin and animate high 
public profiles, self-branding makes fame and/or celebrity more attainable – indeed, this 
is often the raison d’être for self-branding practices since they are designed for 
maximising prominence, recognition and loyalty. While it is not pertinent here to detail 
the machinations by which fame and/or celebrity was achieved before the digital age (if 
such an exercise is even possible) it suffices to note that, at the very least, it was a 
relatively rare experience generally enjoyed by those that had achieved something 
remarkable (like elite sportspeople, politicians and innovators), were hugely popular in 
the culture industries (such as cinema or music), or were born into the privileged 
echelons of society (like royalty or the extremely wealthy). Furthermore, such 
individuals usually had at least two things in common: they could attract attention 
easily; and, depending on the basis of their fame, each embodied a narrative of sorts.  
 
From the early 2000s, self-branding was practiced not just by those for whom a strong 
public image was expected (such as sportspeople, professional musicians and such) but 
also ‘ordinary’ people that had shrewdly gauged the marketing possibilities of 
contemporary convergent technologies, particularly social media. Whilst it was possible 
to establish a strong online identity through personal blogs and websites, platforms such 
as Facebook, YouTube, Twitter and Instagram accelerate and accentuate the means by

----- Page 9 (native) -----
which users can package, perform and sell a lucrative personal brand across several 
online sites. In turn, the shift towards media convergence, as content flows across 
multiple channels with diverse access points accordingly, seemingly aids the (self-) 
branding process inasmuch as narrative, the emotive and/or ‘human’ pull of an effective 
brand (Herskovitz and Crystal, 2010, p. 21), is sustained more widely, and hence 
strengthens the bond between the brand and the audience (Granitz and Forman, 2015, p. 
5).  
 
In this way, self-branding could benefit from the ‘context collapse’ of social media 
activity – that is, what Vitak terms “the flattening out of multiple distinct audiences in 
one’s social network, such that people from different contexts become part of a singular 
group of message recipients” (2012, p. 451). On the one hand, ‘context collapse’ 
problematically inhibits the practices of selective self-presentation that Goffman 
described in 1959: the idea that individuals modify ‘performance’ according to different 
audiences and expectations. Occasionally, social media users circumvent this through 
various tactics, such as decoy profiles, privacy settings or minimal disclosure of 
personal information (Marwick, 2013, p. 360). For self-branding purposes though, to 
further visibility and salience, ‘context collapse’ can be viewed as a promotional boon. 
To this end, a distinction provided by Davis and Jurgenson is useful: they differentiate 
between context collusion and context collision; both represent context collapse but 
only the former is intentional. That is, context collision occurs when “different social 
environments unintentionally and unexpectedly come crashing into each other”, while 
collusion is “the process whereby social actors intentionally collapse, blur and flatten 
contexts, especially using various social media” (2014, p. 480). Viewed thus, context

----- Page 10 (native) -----
collusion speaks to the audience reach enabled by the exhilarating diversity of multiple 
social media platforms, and the efficient crafting of messages to address this ‘en masse’.   
 
Self-branding through social media pivots on attention and narrative, yet significantly 
extends the potential for fame and celebrity. Compelling narratives potentially attract 
audiences for a multitude of reasons – they could be inspirational, relatable, instructive, 
cautionary and so on. What matters is that they find a following through social media 
and thus stand out in the attention economy. Moreover, through trans-media narratives, 
the hallmarks of all effective branding are theoretically sustained (consistency, 
distinctiveness and value) and the brand is consolidated as audiences/followers/fans 
embed it within their own individualised media flows through Likes, shares, and 
comments. This collaborative, dialogic space facilitates self-branding as attention-
seeking users produce a public persona that is targeted and strategic. As such, and as 
Page argues, there is “particular emphasis on the construction of identity as a product to 
be consumed by others, and on interaction which treats the audience as an aggregated 
fan base to be developed and maintained in order to achieve social or economic benefit” 
(2012, p. 182). 
 
 Social media is driven by a specific kind of identity construction – self-mediation – and 
what users post, share, and Like effectively creates a highly curated and often abridged 
snapshot of how they want to be seen. Self-mediation was clearly possible before the 
Internet era, for example: diaries preceded blogs, photo albums preceded Instagram, and 
hardcopy scrapbooks preceded Facebook (Good, 2012, p. 569). The main difference 
with personal archives on social media though is how convergent technologies provide 
a platform for global, interactive and commercial communication, on a scale and at a

----- Page 11 (native) -----
speed hitherto not possible except for privileged elites. Since it is designed for public 
consumption rather then personal reflection, the branded self not only plays to 
postmodern notions of identity, with an emphasis on construction, style and fluidity; it 
also and necessarily claims distinctiveness (Berger , 2011, p. : 235).     
 
Social media both accommodates ordinary users with distinctive stories and/or content, 
and furnishes them with highly visible metrics of popularity and endorsement. These 
metrics are inextricably tied to self-branding: a following can evolve into a fan-base and 
in this way ‘ordinary’ users find online fame. Keeping in mind the importance of 
visibility and attention, the pursuit of this recognition entails practices of ‘micro-
celebrity’: the concerted and strategic cultivation of an audience through social media 
with a view to attaining celebrity status. Theresa M. Senft coined the term ‘micro-
celebrity’ in 2001 during her research on how ‘camgirls’ used conditions afforded by 
online tools to forge a then-new style of performance. This entailed “people ‘amping 
up’ their popularity over the Web using technologies like video, blogs and social 
networking sites” (Senft, 2008, p. 25). While this popularity required micro-celebrities 
to sustain a relationship with their audience that seemed more ‘real’ than the 
conventional one between mainstream media stars and fans, there was at least one 
important similarity: “both must brand or die” (ibid., p. 26). Whilst Senft’s research 
chronicled the relatively early adopters of such strategies, within a few years both the 
concept and the mind-set had become a pervasive cultural phenomenon, such that, as 
Marwick and boyd point out: micro-celebrity “implies that all individuals have an 
audience that they can strategically maintain through ongoing communication and 
interaction” (Marwick and boyd, 2010, p. 121). Again, success here is registered 
through the number of Likes, shares, re-Tweets, followers and comments that one can

----- Page 12 (native) -----
boast – albeit superficially, the bigger the audience, the stronger the brand. This 
phenomenon is fuelled by at least three interrelated forces: the extent to which social 
media proceeds without the gamut of gatekeepers that otherwise determines and limits 
content flows; audiences increasingly predisposed to ‘ordinary’ people in the spotlight; 
and a cultural economy that contours almost everything (including conceptions of the 
self) along consumerist lines. The ‘celebrities’ of self-branding thus manifest and 
triumph at a marketing media nexus distinct to the opening decades of the 21st century.   
 
The ‘demotic turn’ 
As ‘ordinary’ people seek and find fame through practices of micro-celebrity, they 
redistribute cultural power in both media and marketing: implicitly, micro-celebrity 
points to the growing agency, enterprise and business acumen of everyday media users. 
However, while social media in particular places users in a command position insofar as 
self-branding is enabled and encouraged, it bears stressing that this seemingly 
egalitarian shift in media did not originate online. Rather, it surfaced most notably in the 
early 1990s with the popularity of reality television and that genre’s reliance on 
‘factuality’ for entertainment. Global hits such as Big Brother, the Idol franchise, 
Survivor and Masterchef turned ‘ordinary’ participants into primetime stars, moving 
them from the peripheries of cultural life (the ‘non-media’ margins) to its centre: 
celebrity (Couldry 2002, p. 289). Turner calls this seminal change in media the ‘demotic 
turn’, with the growing visibility of the ordinary person across media generally, and 
certain genres especially: reality television (e.g. Big Brother), confessional talk shows 
(e.g. Jerry Springer), docu-soaps (e.g. Sylvania Waters) and reality-based game shows – 
all of which depended on ordinary people wanting fame. Using Rojek’s term ‘celetoid’ 
to describe the ‘ordinary’ person whose primary goal is media visibility  (or fame), no

----- Page 13 (native) -----
matter how fleeting or fragile, Turner writes: “Given what appears to be our culture’s 
appetite for consuming celebrity and the scale of the demand for new stories, gossip and 
pictures the celebrity-media industries generate, the accelerated commodity life cycle of 
the celetoid has emerged as an effective industrial solution to the problem of satisfying 
demand” (2006, 156). For Turner, the demotic turn validates the celetoid commercially 
inasmuch as he/she experiences celebrity not despite their ordinariness but because of it, 
since it is a precondition for eligibility.  
 
Importantly, Turner saw in the demotic turn – this spotlight on the ‘ordinary’ – its 
production-side appeal. He writes: “Installing ordinary people into game shows, docu-
soaps and reality TV programming enables television to ‘grow their own’ celebrity, to 
control how they are marketed before, during and after production – all of this while 
still subordinating the celebrity of each individual to the needs of the particular 
programme or format” (ibid). Reality television seemingly welcomes ‘ordinary’ 
participants into the mediasphere, and baits them with the high likelihood of fame, 
celebrity or, at the very least, mass exposure. However this is conditional on their fit 
with the product at hand and its commercial imperatives as participants are embedded 
into a given program and repurposed across its media with implicit marketing goals in 
mind. For instance, in 2009 the inaugural winner of Masterchef Australia Julie 
Goodwin was the archetypally relatable mum whose ‘ordinariness’ served the show on 
several fronts. Her ‘back to basics’ style – in cooking, demeanour and looks – was 
easily woven into the Masterchef model, with its emphasis on contestants’ personalities, 
backstories and ‘journeys’; in turn, her win was a fitting tribute to the Masterchef brand 
and its associated merchandising (Khamis 2013). Considering its commercial aims, as 
the first Australian television show to break the $100 million advertising revenue mark

----- Page 14 (native) -----
(Hargreaves 2010, p. 90), it was crucial that the Masterchef winner complemented the 
show’s wide suite of sponsors, which included grocery giant Coles, Western Star butter 
and Campbell’s Real Stock. Given Masterchef’s target demographic, the cultural middle 
ground and ‘everyday’ cooks, Goodwin’s persona (an endearing and accessible 
suburban mum) worked well for its brand.   
 
The Rise of ‘Instafame’ 
The demotic turn that Turner refers to is extended on social media.  Users need not be 
folded into an existing narrative structure (such as Masterchef) and can instead fashion 
their own autonomously authored brand. In this way, self-branding ostensibly frees 
practitioners from the top-down dynamic that ultimately characterises reality television, 
despite whatever democracy it suggests. Micro-celebrity is predicated on this, and takes 
for granted users’ ability to muster a following and fan-base independent of the 
resources and dictates of legacy media (the big-name bastions of television, print, and 
radio); online, self-branding is a decidedly individualised process. While the goal might 
be to eventually link up with advertisers and parlay an online profile towards a broader 
public presence, self-branding through social media does not require initial affiliation 
with the ‘already powerful’. Rather, and to reiterate, what matters most is visibility and 
attention – and therein lays the critical importance of self-branding strategies and 
practices of micro-celebrity.  
 
The scale of potential audience reach for ‘ordinary’ people through social media is such 
that popularity and prominence no longer rest on the go-ahead from traditional 
gatekeepers (editors, producers, etc.). As Marwick notes, for instance: “With 
Instagram’s user base of 150 million comes the possibility of achieving Instafame, the

----- Page 15 (native) -----
condition of having a relatively great number of followers on the app” (2015, p. 137). 
While Marwick concedes that the most followed users of Instagram remain celebrities 
whose fame is conferred by traditional mainstream media (such as Beyoncé, Oprah 
Winfrey and Kobe Bryant), she highlights how ordinary users have become ‘Instagram 
famous’ through what appears to be little more than streams of eye-catching ‘selfies’ 
(self-portraits). For example: Cayla Friesz, a photogenic and conventionally attractive 
high school student from Indiana whose otherwise ‘ordinary’ pictures of herself, 
friends, food and outings are seen by over 35, 000 followers, many of whom have 
dedicated fan pages to her. Marwick argues: “Instafamous people like Friesz have the 
potential to reach an audience that rivals that of television networks in size, what we 
might call a mass audience” (ibid: 150).   
 
Marwick’s notion of the Instafamous is easily applied across the most common social 
media sites, especially Facebook, YouTube and Twitter. Their popularity does not just 
challenge that of legacy media but increasingly eclipses it, especially among young 
people.  For these ‘digital natives’ most media activity (production, distribution and 
consumption) is conducted overwhelmingly online. Not surprisingly, the fact that 
micro-celebrity such as that enjoyed by Friesz appears disproportionately dependent on 
the vanity and ego of attention-seekers fuels wider fears that social media underwrites 
an epidemic of self-obsession. Young people in particular appear convinced that good 
looks, good living and conspicuous consumption (through artfully composed images of 
outfits, make-up, meals, holiday resorts etc.) warrant adoration and emulation. This 
emphasis on spectacle seems to have a lamentable psychodynamic consequence. 
According to MacDonald, for instance, social media is primarily a gateway to self-
promotion and therefore is at least partly responsible (alongside changes to traditional

----- Page 16 (native) -----
family life and the growth of celebrity worship) for an increasingly narcissistic society. 
For MacDonald, the desire for social media fame prompts young people to focus on 
image and artifice at the expense of ‘real’ achievements of depth and substance, which 
in turn warps perceptions of actual accomplishment – that is, that it can be articulated 
through a false and materialistic grandiosity (2014, p. 147).  
 
This article is not interested in how narcissism functions in (or is a product of) self-
branding through social media; it will suffice to note that, in the packaging of image for 
commercial and/or cultural gain, it makes sense that users enhance what they consider 
their most appealing or lucrative aspects, and underplay those that do not further their 
branding objectives. What is more pertinent here is the widespread willingness of fame-
seekers to be submitted to personalised scrutiny in the media. For P. David Marshall, 
this marks a specific historic moment: “the ubiquity of the exposed public self” whereby 
“the individual is more than invited to participate in a world of general exposure and 
learns to inhabit the risks that such a world entails” (Marshall, 2016, p. 235). Moreover, 
this openness to ‘exposure’ can be rationalized in terms of how the ‘attention economy’ 
expects from everyone what was once associated with celebrities: “The recognition 
culture that operates as a form of economic value in this wider culture industry is 
similarly the model through which the populace begins to calibrate their own value” 
(ibid: 507). As such, the normalisation of these practices speaks to the dissolution of 
any social demarcation between celebrities and ordinary people. As Gamson notes: 
“The ordinary turn in celebrity culture is ultimately part of a heightened consciousness 
of everyday life as a public performance – an increased expectation that we are being 
watched, a growing willingness to offer up private parts of the self to watchers known 
and unknown, and a hovering sense that perhaps the unwatched life is invalid or

----- Page 17 (native) -----
insufficient” (2011, p. 1068).  This last provocative point – that “perhaps the unwatched 
life is invalid or insufficient” – merits further discussion.  Obviously it points to the 
philosophical and existential questions at play, but this is beyond the thematic breadth 
of this discussion. The focus turns instead to the political-economy behind Gamson’s 
claim, specifically: how self-branding through social media and the attendant logic of 
micro-celebrity marks the extension of a consumerist ideology and orientation to 
practically every area of contemporary cultural life, and the totalising rise of largely 
neoliberal values, ideals and assumptions.     
 
The political economy of self-branding  
Self-branding operates through principles and practices distinct to the ‘promotional 
culture’ (Wernick 1992) of advanced consumer capitalism. It shows how private 
individuals have internalised ideas that were designed for the marketing of 
commodities, and thus represents a seminal turning point in how subjectivity itself is 
understood and articulated. There is an historical logic to this: global capitalism coupled 
with the communication technologies of social media has wrought significant cultural, 
economic and political upheaval, and the concept of self-branding manifests as an 
apposite navigational strategy for otherwise vulnerable, overwhelmed individuals. As 
such, self-branding through social media can be understood as a way to retain and assert 
personal agency and control within a general context of uncertainty and flux. Therefore, 
it: harmonises with neoliberal notions of individual efficacy and responsibility; and rests 
on capitalist faith in enterprising, resourceful and self-directed labour. Within the 21st 
century context of intense media activity and competition, the emphasis on the 
atomised, distinctive self is framed as an affirmation of control and conviction.  In this 
schema, just to be noticed is a victory of sorts. As Senft makes clear, whatever

----- Page 18 (native) -----
‘immaterial labor’ (in the Marxian sense) is required to assert the branded self through 
social media is “almost always cast in narratives of empowerment” (2013, p. 350) – 
which effectively celebrates those that triumph in the ‘attention economy’.  
 
Self-branding explicitly invokes labour to be malleably responsive to dynamic market 
conditions. It calls for what Duffy and Hund term “creative self-enterprise” (Duffy & 
Hund, 2015, p. 1) and sits easily within dominant discourses of creative economies, 
cities and precincts. Here, cultural entrepreneurs (rather than ‘labourers’) assume both 
the risks and rewards of dynamic economic opportunities and constitute a ‘creative 
class’ that is, argue Banet-Weiser and Sturken, “comprised not only of professionals 
who are paid for their creative labor but also of ‘creative amateurs’, encouraged to be 
‘empowered’ by the flexibility and openness of new technological formats and 
expanded markets” (Banet-Weiser & Sturken, 2010, p. 272). In turn, and as Chen notes, 
“For amateur individuals in social media, personal branding becomes a very important 
business concept because it demonstrates self-performances and presents a sense of 
individuality that can help to differentiate a personal brand from its competitors” (2013, 
p. 334). However, the fact that this requirement to project a distinctive character is 
channelled through a discourse of autonomy and independence is highly disingenuous. 
On the one hand, platforms such as YouTube, Twitter and Facebook empower users to 
address audiences without the constrictive scaffolding of traditional media. Through 
strategically inspired image control, self-branding through social media relies on 
rhetoric of freedom and agency. On the other hand though, the fact that self-branding 
shifts the onus of labour security to the individual and their capacity for commercial 
relevance sits within increasingly dominant economic realities and political priorities. 
Ironically, self-branding can therefore be seen less as a testament to personal control

----- Page 19 (native) -----
and more as a reflection of unstable and uncertain labour markets, whereby workers are 
expected to be as adaptive and nuanced as all branded products (from sneakers and fast-
food to smart phones and furniture) in post-Ford globalised economies. As such, and as 
Bandinelli and Arvidsson argue, the rise of self-branding constitutes another form of 
neoliberal governance by compelling (or ‘empowering’) people to consider themselves 
entrepreneurial subjects, ultimately responsible for their own success or failure in the 
marketplace. Moreover, it has spawned a belief system that now infiltrates the 
neoliberal knowledge economy: marketing, coaches, therapists, teachers, social 
workers, and universities, all of which promote self-branding skills as both life-
changing and life-making and thus succeed in the social production of market relations 
(Bandinelli and Arvidsson, 2012, p. 68).  
 
The branded self, with subjectivity shaped by and for the market, is always working. 
For Hearn (drawing on Tronti), this monetisation of just being makes most sense 
through the concept of the ‘social factory’, which “describes a situation under 
contemporary capitalism in which work extends far beyond the temporal and spatial 
limits of traditional workplaces, eluding effective forms of capture and measurement, 
and capital’s productivity penetrates ever more deeply into all, including the most 
intimate, aspects of our lives” (Hearn 2011, p. 316). With the commodification of the 
self, individuals are locked into a mode of constant promotion. This surfaces 
spectacularly on social media sites, since these “produce inventories of branded selves; 
their logic encourages users to see themselves and others as commodity-signs to be 
collected and consumed in the social marketplace” (Hearn 2008a, p. 211). Self-branding 
asks the individual to view relationships as transactional and instrumental, and to look 
to the market to gauge personal accomplishment – each social encounter effectively

----- Page 20 (native) -----
tests how useful (and hence valuable) the branded self is (Wee and Brooks 2010, p. 54). 
In this way, and as Hearn points out, self-branding ultimately exacerbates the insecurity 
it aims to resolve, since it relies on economic conditions that are notoriously precarious, 
decentralised and flexible. She writes: “Here, we see the ‘self’ as a commodity for sale 
in the labour market, which must generate its own rhetorically persuasive packaging, its 
own promotional skin, within the confines of the dominant corporate imaginary” (Hearn 
2008b, p. 497). All branding requires consistency of narrative and image, yet the market 
– the “dominant corporate imaginary” – is highly changeable (under the pretext of 
consumer choice and variety), and therein lays a constant and inescapable tension.    
 
 
In its breathless appeals to self-motivation, the literature of self-branding reworks one of 
the most haloed motifs in United States culture: the resourceful individual. With its 
upbeat and optimistic tone, the concept demands the successful individual to be driven 
and future-focused, and posits naysayers and sceptics as cynical, defeatist and/or lazy. 
As Lair et al. note, the concept “resonates strongly with the by-your-bootstrap mythos 
that has historically played a central role in American culture in general and American 
business culture in particular, as well as with the neoliberal economic philosophy that 
has become so prominent for many Western governments” (2005, p. 322). It casts 
economic turmoil as a default setting for which anything other than a ‘can-do’ attitude 
is futile. The more laissez faire the economy, the more creative agility an individual 
needs – or to put it another way, it implies that it is not the economy that should be 
corrected or adjusted, but rather the individual. In this way, self-branding effectively 
absolves governments of fiscal intervention, and thus plays straight into the modus 
operandi of free-market ideologues.

----- Page 21 (native) -----
Recent cases of self-branding & the rise of Social Media Influencers 
To consider strategies of micro-celebrity in practice, and see the phenomena discussed 
thus far manifest with varying consequences, three recent examples are highly pertinent. 
These examples illustrate a particular kind of online micro-celebrity: the social media 
influencer (SMI). As Hearn and Schoenhoff explain: “The SMI works to generate a 
form of ‘celebrity’ capital by cultivating as much attention as possible and crafting an 
authentic ‘personal brand’ via social networks, which can subsequently be used by 
companies and advertisers for consumer outreach” (Hearn & Schoenhoff 2016, p. 194). 
SMIs determine their success in terms of ROI – return on influence – as marketers seek 
them out to capitalise on their wide social networks and benefit from the intimate, more 
‘trustworthy’ relationships SMIs have ostensibly created (ibid: 203; Gormley 2016).  
 
In 2015, two Australian food bloggers made headlines for very different but not entirely 
unrelated reasons. In February Jess Anscough, better known to her fans as the Wellness 
Warrior, died from a rare form of cancer – epithelioid sarcoma – at the age of 30. 
Anscough, who had been diagnosed seven years earlier, and had lost her mother Sharyn 
to breast cancer in 2013, found social media fame by eschewing conventional cancer 
treatment and instead advocating the controversial Gerson Therapy (Corderoy 2015: 
online). Developed in the 1930s, Gerson Therapy claims to cure cancer and other 
degenerative diseases through diet, which for Anscough entailed huge amounts of fruit 
and vegetables and up to six daily coffee enemas. In April, 23 year old Belle Gibson, 
who found social media fame by claiming to have cured her terminal brain cancer 
through diet and lifestyle alone, revealed that she had lied about having cancer (Davey 
2015, online; Phillip 2015, online). By the time her hoax was exposed, Gibson’s empire, 
under the name ‘The Whole Pantry’, had grown from a blog to a widely publicised

----- Page 22 (native) -----
phone app and a book deal. This article is not concerned so much with the ire, 
scepticism or pity these women generated, in their eager embrace of ‘wellness’ 
strategies that were obviously contentious: their fame rested on their rejection of 
conventional medicine and science. Instead, it is argued here that, by strategically 
embedding compelling narratives within their respective online personas, both 
Anscough and Gibson show how contemporary social media enables and powers online 
celebrity, whereby ‘ordinary’ users cultivate fame and influence that can be then 
leveraged more widely.  
 
Through stories that were inspirational, accessible and consistent with burgeoning 
mainstream interest in ‘wellness’, the process of making active choices towards a 
healthy and fulfilling life, Anscough and Gibson attracted fan bases, media attention 
and cultural traction. Both had also traded on one of the most import facets of micro-
celebrity: a promise of ‘authenticity’. Free of the filtering that takes place through the 
thick web of PR and management, micro-celebrity is a mind-set and a set of practices 
that courts attention through insights into its practitioners’ private lives, and a sense of 
realness that renders their narratives, their branding, both accessible and intimate. That 
is, writes Marwick, they “know their fans, respond to them, and often feel an obligation 
to continue this interaction to boost their popularity, breaking down the traditional 
audience/performer spectator/spectacle dichotomy” (2016, p. 345). On the one hand, 
this requires an ‘always on’ work mode, with the constant vigilance and monitoring of 
this ‘authentic’ self that is paradoxically both edited (since it is outward-looking) and 
‘real’. Such ‘emotional labour’ can have adverse consequences, requiring, as Marwick 
writes, “a thick skin, and an ongoing awareness of the audience” (2013, p. 196). On the 
other hand though, the perception of authenticity creates a space that is readily

----- Page 23 (native) -----
exploitable, insofar as SMIs can parlay the trust they inspire into myriad commercial 
arrangements. Indeed, as Abidin argues, the sense of closeness that SMIs contrive is 
central to their material success, since their allure “is premised on the ways they engage 
with their followers to give the impression of exclusive, ‘intimate’ exchange”, and 
followers “are privy to what appears to be genuine, raw and usually inaccessible aspects 
of influencers’ personal lives” (Abidin, 2015). This perceived authenticity was at work 
in the online profiles of both Anscough and Gibson.    
 
Crucially, both women crafted an online presence that effectively monetised their 
personal image: through self-branding, their ‘authentic’ public identities were 
commodified. In this way, both showed the ironic inversion of authenticity as it 
manifests through self-branding. As Banet-Weiser puts it, the traditional notion of 
authenticity is one based on “intrinsic motivation, which values uniqueness, original 
expression, and independence from the market”; in the schema of micro-celebrity 
though, “it is about external gratification” (Banet-Weiser 2012, p. 80), its recognition 
and reward determined by others. Once their celebrity was secured in the blogosphere, 
Anscough and Gibson went on to make television appearances, magazine interviews, 
speaking engagements and more. They had shrewdly appraised the marketing value of 
their attention-getting, authentic-seeming brands, and found wide popularity as two of 
Australia’s most well known SMIs.  
 
Since these women had so convincingly converted ‘internet fame’ into ‘proper’ fame, 
there was intense interest (and scrutiny) when Anscough succumbed to her cancer, and 
Gibson was shown to have lied. Despite the scale of criticism and anger levelled at both 
Anscough and Gibson for what many deemed a dangerously tenuous grasp of

----- Page 24 (native) -----
nutritional science, it is clear that – until early 2015 – both had successfully contrived 
attractive and lucrative careers through social media. In their advocacy of a nebulously 
holistic understanding of personal wellbeing, with a diet-based approach to health and 
nutrition, both exploited growing popular interest in food education, which is being 
increasingly sought online. Moreover, there are numerous examples of other bloggers 
that have successfully created high media profiles by promoting similarly construed 
ideas. Given just how quick and low-cost online nutrition information is, this is hardly 
surprising: around 80% of all internet users aged 18 to 46 go online for health 
information, and the majority of this are women (Lohse 2013, p. 69). Due to the 
potential reach of such information, professional nutritionists have called for ‘best 
practice’ industry guidelines to ensure quality control for such online resources (Tobey 
and Manore 2014, p. 128), but the nature of social media obviously defies such 
containment. Clearly, the absence of industry-endorsed qualifications did not impede 
these women’s social media ascent; it probably made them more relatable and 
endearing to their fans. Yet despite the controversy that these cases generated (around 
the efficacy and merits of Gerson Therapy as advocated by Anscough; and the flagrant 
lies that Gibson had told to her growing fan-base), they show just how seductive social 
media are as profile-boosting platforms, and that strategies of micro-celebrity can forge 
a loyal following on even the flimsiest of grounds. One of the most famous food 
bloggers for instance is 36-year-old Vani Hari, better known around the world as the 
Food Babe. Hari began blogging in April 2011 and chronicled how she regained her 
health and vitality after an appendectomy through a more mindful diet, and by combing 
through food labels to better understand the typical American food system. Aghast at 
what she considered an alarming rate of toxic chemicals in popular everyday foods, and 
convinced that these were to the nutritional detriment of consumers, Hari established

----- Page 25 (native) -----
her signature mission: to reveal the ‘truth’ behind packaged, processed foods and lobby 
for greater transparency on the part of big business. To this end, Hari uses the ‘Food 
Babe Army’ – her legion of online fans: in June 2015 her Facebook page had 972, 000 
Likes, her Instagram account had over 46, 000 followers, and her Twitter handle had 
over 89, 000 followers.  
 
Through practices of micro-celebrity on their social media platforms, these three SMIs 
found both fame and marketability through strategic self-branding. Ultimately (and 
obviously) Hari, aka the Food Babe, has been the most successful. As James Hamblin 
wrote in The Atlantic, hyperbolically perhaps, “the idea of a lone consultant becoming, 
in three short years, more influential than entire university departments of Ph.Ds., is 
indicative of a new level of potential for celebrity in health messaging” (2015, online). 
That is not to say that her contribution to the wellness industry has been any more 
robust, considered or valid – on social media, celebrity is not necessarily dependent on 
such ‘logical’ indices. Hari has been the subject of much derision from science writers 
precisely because of her populist spin on nutritional advice, but her profile continues to 
grow, with coverage across the New York Times, NBC News, and the Washington Post, 
and her appointment as CNN’s food expert. She is a savvy entrepreneur as much as a 
consumer advocate, and sells eating guides with meal calendars, recipes and grocery 
lists replete with ‘approved brands’ – that is, those with which she has a commercial 
arrangement (Schultz and Morrison 2014, online). The size of her fan base bodes well 
for her online petitions that demand change from the giants of the American food 
industry, including Subway, Lean Cuisine, McDonalds, General Mills, Starbucks, and 
Coca-Cola – all of which have, according to Hari, buckled to Food Army pressure and 
dropped what she claimed were harmful chemicals in their foods. The Food Babe’s

----- Page 26 (native) -----
brand is strong, distinctive and consistent, much to the chagrin of actual scientists who 
argue that just because an ingredient is hard to pronounce or is indecipherable for the 
average consumer does not render it dangerous (Gorski 2014, online). Moreover, like 
Anscough and Gibson, she has a story – a journey to ‘wellness’ through diet – that has 
been reconfigured as a popularly accessible promise.  
 
Conclusion 
The aim of this article is to critically examine the idea of self-branding first popularised 
in the 1990s.  Although it is conceptually flawed its popularity however has not waned.  
The question is why? In terms of the examples considered (Anscough, Gibson and 
Hari), the issue is not their motivations, credentials or even sincerity. Rather, it is the 
degree to which contemporary social, economic and technological processes both 
accommodate and reward their style of message management, insofar as social media 
propelled them from relative obscurity to become prominent SMIs, and the role of self-
branding in this development. Their visibility and efficacy are clearly indebted to 
communication capabilities distinct to the early 21st century, and a cultural milieu 
increasingly primed for self-promotion and triumphant individualism. This article 
shows how social media encourages the practices of self-branding that these three 
women engaged in. At stake is how these practices capitalise on the apparent 
democratisation of media production and distribution, whereby entry levels are 
comparatively low and potential reach, in terms of audience and influence, is 
spectacularly high. The wide-ranging effects of participatory media and user-generated 
content have been amply documented and discussed for almost two decades. It is argued 
here though that, in the early 21st century, key trends appear especially pronounced, not

----- Page 27 (native) -----
the least of which is the extent to which social media like Facebook, Twitter, YouTube 
and Instagram facilitate not just participation but practices of self-branding.  
 
The rapid globalisation of advanced consumer capitalism has obviously widened the 
scope and scale of all brand marketing, but it is the ascent and entrenchment of self-
branding that is considered here, and the ways this phenomenon links dominant notions 
of individual success, personal responsibility and subjectivity to a political-economy 
defined almost completely by consumerist logic. Our analysis suggests that the rise of 
social media and our current consumerist orientation may have contributed to this 
popularity. The rise of both ‘Instafame’ and SMIs – their pursuit and realisation – 
effectively underscores three distinct and interrelated processes: the transformative and 
seminal effects of social, interactive and conversational media in the Information Age; 
the mercurial dismantling of what were once ‘knowledge monopolies’, as the likes of 
Anscough, Gibson and Hari become quasi-experts and assume the role historically 
reserved for highly trained specialists (such as doctors, dieticians and scientists); and the 
near-total extension of marketing logic and language into more areas of contemporary 
social life. While all these processes predate and are not exclusive to social media, 
cumulatively social media intensifies and spotlights their salience.

----- Page 28 (native) -----
References 
 
Abidin, C., 2015. Communicative Intimacies: Influencers and Perceived Interconnectedness. 
Ada: A Journal of Gender, New Media, & Technology, 8 [online]. Available from:   
http://adanewmedia.org/2015/11/issue8-abidin/ [Accessed 23 June 2016]. 
 
Berger, A. A., 2011. The Branded Self: On the Semiotics of Identity. The American Sociologist, 
42 (2/3), 232-237 
 
Bandinelli, C. and Arvidsson, A., 2012. Brand Yourself a Changemaker! Journal of 
Macromarketing, 33 (1), 67-71 
 
Banet-Weiser, S., 2012. AuthenticTM: The Politics of Ambivalence in a Brand Culture. New 
York: New York University Press. 
 
Banet-Weiser, S. and Sturken, M., 2010. The Politics of Commerce: Shepard Fairey and the 
New Cultural Entrepreneurship. In: M. Aronczyk and D. Powers, eds. Blowing Up the Brand: 
Critical Perspectives on Promotional Culture. New York: Peter Lang, 263-283.   
 
Brandabur, R.E., 2012. Personal branding of teacher – an approach into e-educational 
environment, eLearning and Software for Education. In Conference proceedings of “eLearning 
and Software for Education” (eLSE), issue (01), 44-49. 
 
Brody, E. W., 2001. The “Attention” Economy. Public Relations Quarterly, (Fall), 18-21  
 
Chen, C-P., 2013. Exploring Personal Branding on YouTube. Journal of Internet Commerce, 12 
(4), 332-347 
 
Corderoy, A., 2015. Cancer death of “Wellness Warrior” Jess Ainscough brings focus onto 
alternative treatments. Sydney Morning Herald, 5 March. Available from: http://smh.com.au 
[accessed May 2015] 
 
Couldry, N., 2002. Playing for Celebrity: Big Brother as Ritual Event. Television & New Media, 
3 (3), 283-293 
 
Davey, M., 2015. “None of it’s true”: wellness blogger Belle Gibson admits she never had 
cancer. The Guardian, 22 April. Available from: www.theguardian.com/australia [accessed 
January 2016]  
 
Davis, J. L and Jurgenson, N., 2014. Context Collapse: theorizing content collusions and 
collisions. Information, Communication & Society, 17 (4), 476-485. 
 
Dufy, B. E. and Hund, E., 2015. ‘Having it All’ on Social Media: Entrpreneurial Femininity and 
Self-Branding Among Fashion Bloggers. Social Media & Society, July-December, 1-11. 
 
Fairchild, C., 2007. Building the Authentic Celebrity: The “Idol” Phenomenon in the Attention 
Economy. Popular Music and Society, 30 (3), 355-375 
 
Gamson, J., 2011. The Unwatched Life Is Not Worth Living: The Elevation of the Ordinary in 
Celebrity Culture. Theories and Methodologies, 126 (4), 1061-1069 
 
Gandini, A., 2015. Digital work: self-branding and social capital in the freelance knowledge 
economy. Marketing Theory, October, 1-19

----- Page 29 (native) -----
Good, K.D., 2012. From scrapbook to Facebook: A history of personal media assemblage and 
archives. New Media & Society 15 (4), 557-573 
 
Gormley, A., 2016. How brands can get more from their influencer relationships. Mumbrella 
[online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://mumbrella.com.au/five-top-tips-influencing-influencers-
372025 [Accessed 23 June 2016]. 
 
Gorski, D., 2014. Vari Hari, a.k.a. “The Food Babe”, finally responds to critics. Science-Based 
Medicine, 8 December. Available from: https://www.sciencebasedmedicine.org [accessed May 
2015]  
 
Granitz, N. and Forman, H., 2015. Building self-brand connections: Exploring brand stories 
through a transmedia perspective. Journal of Brand Management, 1-22  
 
Hall, N., 2014. The Kardashian index: a measure of discrepant social media profile for 
scientists. 
GenomeBiology, 
15 
(424), 
Available 
from: 
http://www.genomebiology.com/2014/15/7/424 [accessed January 2016] 
 
Hamblin, J., 2015. The Food Babe: Enemy of Chemicals. The Atlantic (11 February) [online]. 
Available from: http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2015/02/the-food-babe-enemy-of-
chemicals/385301/ [Accessed 23 June 2016].  
 
Hargreaves, W., 2010. Happy to toast the tasteless kitchen plus. Sunday Herald-Sun, 13 June,  
90 
 
Hearn, A., 2008a. “Meat, Mask, Burden”: Probing the contours of the branded “self”’. Journal 
of Consumer Culture, 8 (2), 197-217 
 
Hearn, A., 2008b. Insecure: Narratives and economies of the branded self in transformation 
television. Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies, 22 (4), 495-504 
 
Hearn, A., 2011. Confessions of a Radical Eclectic: Reality Television, Self-Branding, Social 
Media and Autonomist Marxism. Journal of Communication Inquiry, 35 (4), 313-321 
 
Hearn, A. and Schoenhoff., 2016. From Celebrity to Influencer: Tracing the Diffusion of 
Celebrity Value across the Data Stream. In P. David Marshall and S. Redmond, eds. A 
Companion to Celebrity. New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, 194-212. 
 
Herskovitz, S. and Crystal, M., 2010. The essential brand persona: storytelling and branding. 
Journal of Business Strategy, 31 (3), 21-28 
 
Khamis, S., 2013. Mastering the brand: How an ‘ordinary’ cook achieved extraordinary cook 
book success. TEXT: Journal of writing and writing courses, 24, 1-8 
 
Khedher, M., 2014. Personal Branding Phenomenon. International Journal of Information, 
Business and Management, 6 (2), 29-40 
 
Knittel, C.R. and Stango, V., 2014. Celebrity Endorsements, Firm Value, and Reputation Risk: 
Evidence from the Tiger Woods Scandal. Management Science, 60 (1), 21-37  
 
Labrecque, L.I., Markos, E. and Milne, G.R., 2011. Online Personal Branding: Processes, 
Challenges, and Implications. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 25, 37-50 
 
Lair, D.J., Sullivan, K. and Cheney, G., 2005. Marketization and the Recasting of the 
Professional Self. Management Communication Quarterly, 18 (3), 307-343

----- Page 30 (native) -----
Lohse, B., 2013. Facebook Is an Effective Strategy to Recruit Low-income Women to Online 
Nutrition Education. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 45 (1), 69-76 
 
MacDonald, P., 2014. Narcissism in the modern world. Psychodynamic Practice, 20 (2), 144- 
153. 
 
Marshall, P. D., 2016. Exposure: The Public Self Explore. In. P. D. Marshall and S. Redmond, 
eds. A Companion to Celebrity. West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons, 497-517. 
 
Marwick, A. E., 2016. You May Know Me from YouTube: (Micro-)Celebrity in Social Media. 
In. P. D. Marshall and S. Redmond, eds. A Companion to Celebrity. West Sussex: John Wiley 
& Sons, 333-350. 
 
Marwick, A. E., 2015. Instafame: Luxury Selfies in the Attention Economy. Public Culture, 27 
(1), 137-160 
 
Marwick, A. E., 2013. Status Update: Celebrity, Publicity, and Branding. New Haven: Yale 
University Press. 
 
Marwick, A. E., 2013. Online Identity. In. J. Hartley, J. Burgess and A. Bruns, eds. A 
Companion to New Media Dynamics. West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell, 355-364. 
 
Marwick, A.E. and boyd, d., 2010. I tweet honestly, I tweet passionately: Twitter users, context 
collapse, and the imagined audience. New Media & Society, 13 (1), 114-133 
 
Page, R., 2012. The linguistics of self-branding and micro-celebrity in Twitter: The role of 
hashtags. Discourse & Communication, 6 (2), 181-201 
 
Peters, 
T., 
1997. 
The 
Brand 
called 
You. 
Fast 
Company, 
Available 
from:  
http://www.fastcompany.com [accessed May 2015] 
 
Phillip, A., 2015. “None of it’s true”: Disgraced wellness guru Belle Gibson comes clean on 
cancer hoax. The Washington Post, 22 April, Available from: http://www.washingtonpost.com 
[accessed May 2015] 
 
Schultz, E. J and Morrison, M., 2014. Activist or Capitalist? How “Food Babe” Makes Money. 
Ad Age, 14 July, Available from: http://adage.com [accessed May 2015] 
 
Senft, T. M., 2008. Camgirls: Celebrity and Community in the Age of Social Networks. New 
York: Peter Lang. 
 
Senft, T. M., 2013. Microcelebrity and the Branded Self. In. J. Hartley, J. Burgess and A. Bruns, 
eds. A Companion to New Media Dynamics. West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell, 346-354.  
 
Shepherd, I.D.H., 2005. From Cattle and Coke to Charlie: Meeting the Challenge of Self 
Marketing and Personal Branding. Journal of Marketing Management, 21 ( 5/6), 589-606 
 
Thomson, M., 2006. Human Brands: Investigating Antecedents to Consumers’ Strong 
Attachments to Celebrities. Journal of Marketing, 70, 104-115   
 
Tobey, L.N. and Manore, M.M., 2014. Social Media and Nutrition Education: The Food Hero 
Experience. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 46 (2), 128-133

----- Page 31 (native) -----
Turner, G., 2006. The mass production of celebrity: “Celetoids”, reality TV and the “demotic 
turn”. International Journal of Cultural Studies, 9 (2), 153-165. 
 
Vitak, J., 2012. The Impact of Context Collapse and Privacy on Social Network Site 
Disclosures. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 56 (4), 451-470.  
 
Wee, L. and Brooks, A., 2010. Personal Branding and the Commodification of Reflexivity. 
Cultural Sociology, 4 (1), 45-62 
 
Wernick, A., 1992. Promotional Culture, advertising, ideology and symbolic expression. 
London: Sage.