

----- Page 1 (native) -----
THEORETICAL REVIEW
Augmented visual, auditory, haptic, and multimodal
feedback in motor learning: A review
Roland Sigrist & Georg Rauter & Robert Riener & Peter Wolf
Published online: 7 November 2012
# Psychonomic Society, Inc. 2012
Abstract It is generally accepted that augmented feedback,
provided by a human expert or a technical display, effectively
enhances motor learning. However, discussion of the way to
most effectively provide augmented feedback has been con-
troversial. Related studies have focused primarily on simple or
artificial tasks enhanced by visual feedback. Recently, techni-
cal advances have made it possible also to investigate more
complex, realistic motor tasks and to implement not only
visual, but also auditory, haptic, or multimodal augmented
feedback. The aim of this review is to address the potential
of augmented unimodal and multimodal feedback in the frame-
work of motor learning theories. The review addresses the
reasons for the different impacts of feedback strategies within
or between the visual, auditory, and haptic modalities and the
challenges that need to be overcome to provide appropriate
feedback in these modalities, either in isolation or in combina-
tion. Accordingly, the design criteria for successful visual,
auditory, haptic, and multimodal feedback are elaborated.
Keywords Skill learning and automaticity . Augmented
extrinsic feedback . Unimodal feedback . Feedback strategy
Introduction
In the field of sports, trainers want their athletes to jump
higher or run faster—in general, to perform motor tasks
better. In rehabilitation, therapists want their patients to
recover lost motor functions as quickly and permanently as
possible. The aim of research in motor learning is to en-
hance these examples of complex motor (re-)learning by
optimizing instructions and feedback. Depending on the
motor feature to be learned, trainers and therapists switch
modalities to instruct the motor task; for instance, instead of
visually demonstrating the movement, they move the athlete
or patient through it. Technical displays, which have be-
come increasingly common for providing augmented feed-
back, can also address different modalities: vision (screens,
head-mounted displays), hearing (speakers, headphones),
haptics (robots, vibrotactile actuators), or a combination of
them.
Feedback strategies may also be classified according to
the point in time at which feedback is provided: either
during motor task execution (i.e., concurrent [online, real-
time] feedback) or after it (i.e., terminal feedback). Recently,
the benefits of concurrent, as compared with terminal, feed-
back strategies have been controversially discussed. Litera-
ture related to this controversy is the basis of this review; we
elaborate the potential and the limitations of concurrent
feedback strategies for enhancing motor learning. In this
context, we will particularly consider motor task complexity
and the applied feedback modality.
The review starts with definitions of relevant terms, fol-
lowed by general remarks on augmented feedback to broad-
en the contextual integration of the statements. In the
subsequent sections, the efficiency of concurrent feedback
strategies are separately discussed for the visual, auditory,
and haptic modalities, followed by a section on multimodal
feedback strategies (see Fig. 1). In each of these sections, the
advantages of displaying feedback in that modality or in a
multimodal manner are listed, existing studies are reviewed,
and guidelines for designing feedback displays are
provided.
R. Sigrist: G. Rauter: R. Riener: P. Wolf
Sensory-Motor Systems Lab, ETH Zurich & Spinal Cord Injury
Center, University Hospital Balgrist,
Zurich, Switzerland
R. Sigrist (*)
ETH Zurich, Sensory-Motor Systems Lab,
Sonneggstrasse 3 (ML G 57),
8092 Zürich, Switzerland
e-mail: roland.sigrist@hest.ethz.ch
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53
DOI 10.3758/s13423-012-0333-8

----- Page 2 (native) -----
We mainly review studies with healthy subjects. Stud-
ies with patients are only partly considered, since patients
often know how a movement should be performed but
are physically not able to do so (Yang & Kim, 2002).
Feedback may, therefore, not exclusively facilitate motor
learning but, rather, enhance compensatory mechanisms
and strategies in order to overcome loss of motor func-
tion due to a damaged neuromuscular system. Thus,
patients may benefit from augmented feedback in a way
that is different from motor learning in healthy individu-
als. Even though the effectiveness of augmented feedback
applied in rehabilitation is beyond the scope of the
present review and has been discussed elsewhere (Huang,
Wolf, & He, 2006; Molier, Van Asseldonk, Hermens, &
Jannink, 2010; Ribeiro, Sole, Abbott, & Milosavljevic,
2011), some studies will be considered for a broader
discussion of feedback design aspects.
Definitions
Augmented feedback, also known as extrinsic feedback, is
defined as information that cannot be elaborated without an
external source; thus, it is provided by a trainer or a display
(Schmidt & Wrisberg, 2008; Utley & Astill, 2008). The term
display is not constrained to the visual modality—for exam-
ple, screens or projectors. Headphones and speakers are also
called auditory displays, and robots can act as haptic displays.
Augmented feedback can relate the learner’s individual per-
formance to a desired performance or to an instruction.
Instructions are used to emphasize certain aspects of the
movement, to remind of previously explained principles
(Schmidt & Wrisberg, 2008), or to induce a certain focus
(Wulf & Shea, 2002). Intrinsic or internal feedbacks—that
is, sensory afferences—are always present during motor learn-
ing. In this review, the term feedback means augmented feed-
back; otherwise, we explicitly refer to intrinsic feedback.
In this review, the word haptic refers to both tactile and
kinesthetic perception: Tactile perception is usually con-
veyed through the skin, such as by vibrations or pressure;
kinesthetic perception refers to receptors in muscles and
tendons that allow us to feel the pose of our body (O’Malley
& Gupta, 2008). In our definition, the term haptic augment-
ed feedback extends the term haptic guidance, also known
as physical guidance or physical assistance. Haptic guid-
ance refers to physically guiding the subject through the
ideal motion by a haptic interface (Feygin, Keehner, &
Tendick, 2002). Beyond haptic guidance, haptic augmented
feedback also includes any kind of haptic perception that
teaches the necessary features that guide the subject toward,
and not necessarily through, the desired motion. This defi-
nition also distinguishes haptic augmented feedback from
haptic rendering, which refers to feeling virtual objects
haptically (Salisbury & Srinivasan, 1997).
Motor learning describes a lasting change of motor per-
formance caused by training. Motor learning includes the de-
velopment of a parameterized motor program, which forms the
basis of the feedforward control strategy, as well as the gradual
reduction of the variability in the newly developed motor
program via sensory feedback loops (Shmuelof, Krakauer, &
Fig. 1 Illustration of the review outline and summary of the main
conclusions. The figure shows the experimentally confirmed (solid)
and our hypothesized (dashed) effectiveness of a feedback strategy to
enhance motor learning depending on functional task complexity. The
broader the shape, the more effective the strategy is
22
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Mazzoni, 2012). At a behavioral level, motor learning can be
characterized by three different phases (Fitts & Posner, 1967;
Schmidt & Wrisberg, 2008). In an early, attention-demanding
phase, learning progresses rapidly, and a first movement
representation—that is, the motor program—of the to-be-
learned task is formed. During a second phase, the motor
presentations are further refined, and error detection/correction
mechanisms are improved. Sensory afferences of the ongoing
movement are compared with the intended motor output, and
errors are corrected either online, when the movement is slow,
or in a subsequent movement, when trials are fast. Consequent-
ly, overall error and movement variability are improved. Final-
ly, in a third phase, movements are performed in a highly
automatized and consistent manner. Consequently, in this re-
view, we characterize motor learning by a lasting increase of
performance assessable in short- and long-term retention tests,
when augmented feedback is withdrawn, or in transfer tests,
when different or related movements are performed. If an
augmented feedback was tested only for its benefits in enhanc-
ing current performance—that is, during the training with the
feedback—we will explicitly refer to this issue. To define task
complexity, we refer to a general description provided by Wulf
and Shea (2002): “We will judge tasks to be complex if they
generally cannot be mastered in a single session, have several
degrees of freedom, and perhaps tend to be ecologically valid.
Tasks will be judged as simple if they have only one degree of
freedom, can be mastered in a single practice session, and
appear to be artificial” (Wulf & Shea, 2002, p. 186). Data from
studies on simple tasks reflect the second phase of learning,
where studies of complex tasks provide insights about the
processes occurring in the first phase.
Important contextual insights gained from studies
on visual feedback
During the last few years, vision has been the modality most
intensively investigated in the context of optimizing
augmented feedback for motor learning. This research
has revealed how (visual) feedback strategies can either
facilitate or impair motor learning. General opportunities, as
well as the pitfalls, of visual augmented feedback will be
described next.
In general, concurrent feedback can enhance performance
in the acquisition phase, but the performance gains are lost
in retention tests. This finding is explained by the guidance
hypothesis, which states that permanent feedback during
acquisition leads to a dependency on the feedback (Salmoni,
1984; Schmidt, 1991; Schmidt, Young, Swinnen, & Shapiro,
1989). The guidance forces learners to ignore their intrinsic
feedback—that is, proprioception. Evidence for this expecta-
tion of performance loss has been given in studies on simple
motor tasks applying concurrent feedback or very frequent
terminal feedback (Schmidt & Wulf, 1997; Van der Linden,
Cauraugh, & Greene, 1993; Winstein et al., 1996). The guid-
ance hypothesis is also supported by results of studies on
visuomotor adaptation in simple motor tasks (Bernier, Chua,
& Franks, 2005; Heuer & Hegele, 2008; Sulzenbruck &
Heuer, 2011).
The specificity-of-learning hypothesis states that learning
involves integration of the most optimal sources of afferent
information for performing the given task, thereby surpass-
ing other sources of afferent information—for example,
proprioception (Proteau, 1992). Usually, augmented feed-
back is designed to be this optimal source and becomes part
of the task itself. This hypothesis has been supported in
studies on simple tasks such as aiming tasks (Proteau,
2005; Proteau & Isabelle, 2002; Robin, Toussaint, Blandin,
& Proteau, 2005), visuomotor adaptation tasks (Bernier et
al., 2005), arm movement pattern reproduction tasks (Blandin,
Toussaint, & Shea, 2008), and a force production task
(Ranganathan & Newell, 2009). Accordingly, concurrent
feedback may change the task (Schmidt & Wrisberg, 2008),
and performance is expected to decrease when the feedback
information is withdrawn—that is, performance in the original
task. The concurrent information may impose training of a
specific control strategy that can be recalled better than the
untrained strategy when the task is addressed without addi-
tional information. For instance, when concurrent visual in-
formation is available, a fast-developing component in visual-
spatial coordinates—for example, location of sequential target
positions—is used to control a movement pattern. When no
concurrent visual information is available, a slow-developing
component in motor coordinates—for example, muscle acti-
vation patterns—is used to preplan movements (Kovacs,
Boyle, Grutmatcher, & Shea, 2010).
However, one should be careful in transferring conclu-
sions found in studies on simple tasks to complex task
learning (Guadagnoli & Lee, 2004; Winstein, 1991; Wulf
& Shea, 2002). Concurrent, as well as very frequent, feed-
back was found to be detrimental for simple task learning,
but this might not be true for complex, sport-related task
learning, which is promoted by a meta-analysis (Marschall,
Bund, & Wiemeyer, 2007). By tendency, it seems that the
more complex the task, the more the trainee can profit from
concurrent feedback. One reason could be that concurrent
feedback attracts an external focus of attention (Shea &
Wulf, 1999), which was found to be beneficial for motor
learning, since it “promotes automaticity in movement con-
trol” (Wulf, 2007a, p. 4). Another reason might be that in an
early learning phase, concurrent feedback can prevent cog-
nitive overload and, therefore, enhance learning of complex
motor tasks (Wulf & Shea, 2002). The discovery of the new
structure of the movement (Braun, Mehring, & Wolpert,
2010; Wolpert, Diedrichsen, & Flanagan, 2011; Wolpert &
Flanagan, 2010) may be facilitated by concurrent feedback
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53
23

----- Page 4 (native) -----
that makes the relevant information more accessible. The
guiding role of concurrent feedback might, therefore, have a
positive effect by making the complex motor task easier to
understand (Huegel & O’Malley, 2010).
In the early learning phase, guidance in the form of
concurrent feedback or very frequent terminal feedback
has been suggested to be effective (Liebermann et al.,
2002). As such, concurrent feedback could also be com-
bined with very frequent terminal feedback, since the latter
seems to reduce the dependency on the former by limiting
information processing of the concurrent feedback (Blandin
et al., 2008). However, when the learner has an idea of the
movement—that is, the first phase of learning has been
overcome—the learner may profit more from less frequent
feedback, either concurrent or terminal. No-feedback trials
are needed to develop a persistent internal movement repre-
sentation, which can be recalled in retention tests when
augmented feedback is withdrawn (Crowell & Davis,
2011; Kovacs & Shea, 2011; Winstein, 1991). Thus, the
frequency of feedback should decrease with increasing skill
level—that is, with decreasing functional task complexity—
to further facilitate motor learning (Guadagnoli & Lee,
2004; Timmermans, Seelen, Willmann, & Kingma, 2009;
Wulf & Shea, 2002; Wulf, Shea, & Matschiner, 1998).
Functional task complexity depends on the current individ-
ual skill level and changes during the learning process,
whereas nominal task complexity remains invariant
(Guadagnoli & Lee, 2004).
Different adaptations of feedback frequency to an in-
creasing skill level have been proposed for terminal feed-
back. Fading feedback—that is, reduced feedback frequency
over time—has been shown to be effective (Crowell &
Davis, 2011; Kovacs & Shea, 2011). However, the optimal
fading rate is commonly unknown. Feedback reduction
usually follows a predefined schedule and might, therefore,
not be optimal for each individual. To respect individual
progress, performance-based feedback adaptions have also
been introduced (Huegel & O’Malley, 2010). Bandwidth
feedback—that is, feedback when the movement error
exceeds (or is within) a certain threshold (Ribeiro et al., 2011)
—should force the learner to repeat good trials (Winstein,
1991). Bandwidth feedback has been shown to be effective
(Timmermans et al., 2009); however, setting the error threshold
is not trivial (Ribeiro et al., 2011). Adverse thresholds could
promote maladaptive short-term corrections; that is, the learner
corrects irrelevant errors originating from noise in the sensory–
motor system (Schmidt, 1991), which may “hinder
the development of a stable movement representation”
(Chiviacowsky & Wulf, 2002, p. 413). Thus, errors caused by
motor noise should be ignored; instead, errors in motor plan-
ning should be minimized (van Beers, 2009). Since the brain
cannot determine the origin of the current error, it has been
suggested that the brain corrects errors only incompletely (Liu
& Todorov, 2007) to minimize variance in movement (van
Beers, 2009). This matches with a theory of optimal motor
control, stating that task-irrelevant errors or variability coming
from sensory–motor noise should be left untreated to maxi-
mize performance (Liu & Todorov, 2007; Todorov, 2004;
Todorov & Jordan, 2002; Wei & Körding, 2009; Wolpert et
al., 2011).
Self-controlled feedback allows the learner to determine
when feedback should be provided. Advantages of self-
controlled feedback are seen in the adaptation to the learner’s
needs, in that it allows a focus on the current aspect the learner
wants to correct, in the promotion of deeper information
processing, and in the involvement of the learner in the learn-
ing process, resulting in an increased motivation (Wulf,
2007b). Self-controlled terminal feedback has been proven
to be more effective than externally imposed terminal feed-
back in ball throwing (Janelle, Barba, Frehlich, Tennant, &
Cauraugh, 1997; Janelle, Kim, & Singer, 1995), in sequential
timing tasks with the index finger (Chiviacowsky & Wulf,
2002, 2005), and in a motor perception task requiring walking
through virtual sliding doors on a treadmill (Huet, Camachon,
Fernandez, Jacobs, & Montagne, 2009).
Self-controlled feedback per se cannot be the only reason
for better learning, as Chiviacowsky and Wulf have shown:
Subjects who had to decide prior to the trial whether they
wanted to receive terminal feedback were outperformed by
subjects who could decide after the trial (Chiviacowsky &
Wulf, 2005). It seems that feedback is most effective if it is
provided after good trials, due to enhanced motivation and
positive reinforcement to repeat good trials (Chiviacowsky
& Wulf, 2007). Indeed, self-controlled terminal feedback
tends to be requested after learners believe that they have
performed well (Chiviacowsky & Wulf, 2002, 2005). This
ability to request feedback oneself and relate it to one’s own
performance may promote self-efficacy (Chiviacowsky &
Wulf, 2005). This promotion of self-efficacy has been sug-
gested to have more impact on motor learning than well-
chosen feedback frequency (Wulf, 2007b; Wulf, Shea, &
Lewthwaite, 2010).
Besides self-efficacy, self-estimation of movement error
is also stated to facilitate motor learning (Guadagnoli &
Kohl, 2001; Liu & Wrisberg, 1997), due to a better devel-
opment of error detection capabilities (Swinnen, Schmidt,
Nicholson, & Shapiro, 1990). Delaying terminal feedback for
a few seconds is believed to allow sufficient time for self-
estimation of the error to prevent reliance on extrinsic feed-
back (van Vliet & Wulf, 2006). Therefore, a disadvantage of
concurrent feedback might be that self-estimation of the error
is hindered. However, to profit from self-estimation of the
actual movement error, learners should know the targeted
movement in general to be able to self-estimate their perfor-
mance—a prerequisite that might not be fulfilled in early
learning phases (Sigrist, Rauter, Riener, & Wolf, 2011).
24
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53

----- Page 5 (native) -----
To get an idea of the targeted movement, feedback in
complex tasks should be prescriptive—that is, feedback
should inform the learner on how to correct the error—
rather than descriptive (i.e., information about occurrence
of an error) (Tzetzis, Votsis, & Kourtessis, 2008). After an
internal movement representation has been developed, de-
scriptive feedback is meaningful. Accordingly, terminal
feedback facilitates learning as soon as the learner is able
to associate the terminal feedback with the prior perfor-
mance. Before this ability is acquired, prescriptive terminal
feedback, but also concurrent feedback, is suggested to be
more effective (Sulzenbruck & Heuer, 2011).
Due to the potential of concurrent feedback to en-
hance learning, concurrent feedback is more and more
provided by a variety of technical systems applied in
sports and rehabilitation. Most commonly, concurrent
feedback is displayed visually, since this is, at first
glance, the most natural and easiest way. The effective-
ness of visual concurrent feedback and visualization
design aspects are discussed next.
Visual feedback: Impact of task complexity and design
criteria
Vision is often regarded as the most important perceptive
modality during interaction with the environment in daily
life. At least for perceiving spatial information, vision dom-
inates other senses (Nesbitt, 2003). Many motor tasks are
impossible or, at least, are much harder to perform without
vision—for example, walking on an uneven terrain, hitting a
tennis ball, or skiing. In the field of motor learning, visual
learning strategies such as learning by observation or by
imitation, as well as by video demonstration, are well-
established. Accordingly, several researchers have investi-
gated the effects of visual feedback on learning a motor task.
Applied methods and gained results of related studies have
revealed that the impact of augmented feedback depends on
task complexity and skill level (Timmermans et al., 2009;
Utley & Astill, 2008; Wulf & Shea, 2002). Thus, in the first
part of this section, feedback provided during simple tasks is
discussed separately from that provided during complex
tasks. Besides task complexity, the way of visualizing the
feedback can influence its effectiveness. Therefore, different
visualization approaches are discussed in the second part of
this section.
Effectiveness depends on task complexity
Visual feedback in simple tasks
The effects of concurrent visual feedback have often been
investigated in simple labor tasks. During acquisition of a
simple lever arm movement, a concurrent visual feedback
group outperformed a no-feedback group (Schmidt & Wulf,
1997). However, in the retention tests when feedback was
withdrawn, accuracy and stability degraded in the feedback
group, as compared with the no-feedback group. Similar
effects have been reported in studies on simple isometric
force production tasks (Ranganathan & Newell, 2009; Van
der Linden et al., 1993) or a partial weight-bearing task
(Winstein et al., 1996). As compared with terminal feed-
back, concurrent visual feedback has led to a better perfor-
mance during acquisition. However, in retention tests, the
concurrent visual feedback groups performed worse than the
terminal feedback groups. Park, Shea, and Wright (2000)
reported concurrent feedback to be effective in a hand force
production task, but only in combination with terminal
feedback on the same trial and no-feedback trials on alter-
nate trials. The no-feedback trials during the acquisition
phase were suggested to be important “to develop intrinsic
error detection and correction capabilities” and to avoid
dependency on the augmented, extrinsic feedback (Park et
al., 2000, p. 294).
In studies on visuomotor adaptation with simple aiming
movements, concurrent feedback was less effective than
terminal feedback in acquiring the related internal model.
In these studies, the feedback about the movement resulted
in a transformed cursor movement on the screen. After
training, subjects were still adapted to the manipulated feed-
back if they had practiced with terminal feedback—that is,
aftereffects were present—but not with concurrent feedback
(Bernier et al., 2005; Heuer & Hegele, 2008; Sulzenbruck &
Heuer, 2011). However, contradictory results have also been
reported (Hinder, Tresilian, Riek, & Carson, 2008).
The results of the aforementioned studies indicate that
concurrent visual feedback is rather unfavorable for learning
simple motor tasks. In general, those findings can be
explained by the guidance hypothesis, which states that
permanent feedback during acquisition leads to a dependen-
cy on the feedback (Salmoni, 1984; Schmidt, 1991; Schmidt
et al., 1989). However, it cannot be excluded that learning of
simple motor tasks may benefit from concurrent feedback if
the training includes trials without feedback (Wulf & Shea,
2002) or is combined with terminal feedback (Blandin et al.,
2008). Interestingly, in a simple aiming task, training with
weak visual feedback (bad contrast on the screen) seemed to
allow processing of visual and kinaesthetic information
concomitantly, since performance was better in retention
tests than after training with full visual feedback or without
visual feedback. The weak visual feedback could provide
guidance to complete the task, in principle, but also did not
prevent the development of a motor program and, thus,
according to the specificity of the learning hypothesis,
resulted in the most optimal source of afferent information
(Robin et al., 2005).
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53
25

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Visual feedback in complex tasks
In contrast to simple motor tasks, learning of complex tasks
with concurrent visual feedback has predominantly been
reported to be effective. In physical therapy, practice of
complex mobilization skills was facilitated by concurrently
displayed bars or force-time plots indicating the deviation
from the target force: Snodgrass, Rivett, Robertson, and
Stojanovski (2010) compared a group receiving combined
concurrent and terminal feedback with a no-feedback group
and reported superiority of the feedback group in retention
tests (Snodgrass et al., 2010). In the study by Lee, Moseley,
and Refshauge (1990), the concurrent feedback group also
outperformed the no-feedback group (Lee et al., 1990).
Chang, Chang, Chien, Chung, and Hsu (2007) reported that
subjects benefited equally from terminal and concurrent
feedback (Chang et al., 2007). Indeed, these studies in
physical therapy showed that concurrent feedback can con-
tribute to enhancement of motor learning. However, it was
not shown to be more effective than terminal feedback.
Swinnen, Lee, Verschueren, Serrien, and Bogaerds
(1997) reported that concurrent feedback can enhance learn-
ing of a 90° interlimb out-of-phase coordination task,
whereas Maslovat, Brunke, Chua, and Franks (2009)
reported negative effects of concurrent feedback on the
same task. Both studies applied the same feedback visuali-
zation in the form of Lissajous figures. Lissajous figures
display the displacement of one limb on the abscissa and the
displacement of the other limb on the ordinate. Consequent-
ly, 90° out-of-phase movements would result in a perfect
circle. Maslovat et al. (2009) assumed that the contradictory
outcome of the studies originates from the fact that in the
study of Swinnen et al. (1997), feedback trials alternated
with no-feedback trials. Indeed, also for interlimb 90° rela-
tive phase coordination, augmented feedback in the form of
Lissajous figures was stated to be very effective if no-
feedback trials are considered to ensure that the learner
can develop an internal movement representation (Kovacs
& Shea, 2011). A recent study by Ronsse, Puttemans, et al.
(2011), again on interlimb out-of-phase coordination,
revealed that young subjects became dependent on visual
feedback in the form of Lissajous figures. These findings
and, consequently, the guidance hypothesis were corrobo-
rated by results from functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) (Ronsse, Puttemans, et al., 2011).
In a study by Wishart, Lee, Cunningham, and Murdoch
(2002) of the same task, younger adults could profit from
both terminal and concurrent feedback, whereas older adults
could profit from concurrent visual feedback only (Wishart
et al., 2002). Thus, older adults may experience the task as
more complex than younger adults. Since older adults may
remain in an attention-demanding phase of learning longer,
concurrent feedback can help them to grasp the general
movement pattern. However, once the general movement
pattern is learned, in the second phase of learning, feedback
trials need to be mixed with no-feedback trials of terminal
feedback, which is superior to building up a movement
representation relying on feedforward control and online
correction based on proprioceptive afferences.
In general, for complex tasks, it is favorable to decrease
cognitive demands to prevent cognitive overload. Concur-
rent feedback may decrease cognitive load since it attracts
an external focus of attention (Wulf, 2007a), which has been
confirmed in a balancing task on a stabilometer (Shea &
Wulf, 1999). Similarly, more frequent, as well as blocked,
feedback can also decrease cognitive load (Wulf & Shea,
2002). For learning a complex slalom type movement on the
ski simulator, concurrent visual feedback on every trial was
more effective than feedback on every second trial (Wulf et
al., 1998), and concurrent blocked feedback tended to be
superior to concurrent serial (random) feedback (Wulf,
Hörger, & Shea, 1999). These studies point out that the
application not only of either terminal or concurrent feed-
back has an impact on learning, but also of feedback fre-
quency—fixed, reduced over time, or self-controlled.
Reduced feedback frequency—that is, fading feedback—
seems beneficial for both terminal feedback and concurrent
feedback, as was shown in studies on training running
technique (Crowell & Davis, 2011) and interlimb out-of-
phase coordination (Kovacs & Shea, 2011).
Augmented reality—that is, superposition of visualiza-
tions on the real environment—is a very popular technology
in medicine for enhancing pre- and intraoperative proce-
dures (Sielhorst, Feuerstein, & Navab, 2008). However,
concurrent visual feedback provided by a head-mounted
display did not enhance learning of a complex hand move-
ment, as compared with instruction only (watch and repro-
duce) (Yang & Kim, 2002). As also was noted by the
authors, the applied superposition of the target movement
with a ghost by the head-mounted display might not be
optimal for this task, since the field of view was limited
and forced frequent head movements. A converse tendency
was shown for complex ball-throwing tasks. The concurrent
superposition of target angles over the real video image
tended to improve performance (Schack, Bockemühl,
Schütz, & Ritter, 2008; Schack & Heinen, 2007).
Instead of using augmented reality to provide feedback
on top of the real environment, Todorov, Shadmehr, and
Bizzi (1997) built a virtual table tennis simulator, which
rendered not only concurrent feedback, but the whole train-
ing environment. In an experiment, learning of a specific
target shot was supported by concurrent visual feedback—
that is, superposition of the virtual racket movement on
virtual reference racket movement. Thereby, simulator train-
ing with concurrent feedback was more efficient than actu-
ally hitting more real balls under the supervision of a real
26
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53

----- Page 7 (native) -----
trainer (Todorov et al., 1997). Augmented reality or virtual
reality simulators seem to have a great potential to facilitate
motor learning. However, to date, knowledge about how to
design simulators including augmented feedback in order to
exploit their potential is still limited.
In summary, it seems that the more complex a task is, the
more the learner can profit from concurrent visual feedback.
Positive effects of concurrent feedback have been demonstrated
in quite different tasks, such as mobilization in physical therapy
(Chang et al., 2007; Lee et al., 1990; Snodgrass et al., 2010),
interlimb out-of-phase coordination tasks (Kovacs & Shea,
2011; Swinnen et al., 1997; Wishart et al., 2002), a slalom type
movement on a ski simulator (Wulf et al., 1999; Wulf et al.,
1998), a balancing task on a stabilometer (Shea & Wulf, 1999),
ball throwing (Schack et al., 2008; Schack & Heinen, 2007),
running (Crowell & Davis, 2011), indoor rowing (however,
without testing retention) (Anderson, Harrison, & Lyons,
2005), and table tennis (Todorov et al., 1997). In early learning
phases of complex task learning, concurrent visual feedback
can prevent cognitive overload (Wulf & Shea, 2002), make the
relevant information more accessible, and help the learner to
build up a first movement representation/motor program. If
concurrent feedback is provided in subsequent phases, where
the motor program is refined, wrong error detection/correction
mechanisms are trained because of the dominant visual modal-
ity, which is detrimental once the specific source is withdrawn.
Commonly, the effects of concurrent visual feedback have
been investigated in complex tasks that are rather artificial than
related to any sport, with a few exceptions (Eaves, Breslin, van
Schaik, Robinson, & Spears, 2011; Todorov et al., 1997; Wulf et
al., 1999; Wulf et al., 1998). Although a few sport simulators
incorporating augmented or virtual reality have been developed,
such as for rowing (Frisoli et al., 2008; Ruffaldi, Gonzales, et al.,
2009; von Zitzewitz et al., 2008), canoeing (Tang, Carignan, &
Olsson, 2006), bicycling (Carraro, Cortes, Edmark, & Ensor,
1998; Mestre, Maïano, Dagonneau, & Mercier, 2011), bobsled-
ding (Kelly & Hubbard, 2000), archery (Göbel, Geiger, Heinze,
& Marinos, 2010), gymnastics (Multon, Hoyet, Komura, &
Kulpa, 2007), and dancing (Drobny & Borchers, 2010; Drobny,
Weiss, & Borchers, 2009; Nakamura, Tabata, Ueda, Kiyofuji, &
Kuno, 2005), these simulators have not been used to examine
the effectiveness of augmented feedback for motor learning or to
evaluate different visual feedback designs. The design of a
visual feedback may have a significant impact on the outcome;
for example, reduced visibility fostered learning more than did
fully visible feedback (Robin et al., 2005). Approaches to the
design of visual feedback will be reviewed in the next section.
Design aspects of visual feedback
In general, the impact of the type of error visualization—that
is, of the actual and the desired motor behavior—on the
effectiveness of visual augmented feedback has not been
systematically evaluated so far. Many possibilities exist for
visualizing errors in kinematic or kinetic variables, ranging
from abstract visualizations, such as simple plots, gauges,
bars, lines, or numbers, to less abstract (natural) visualiza-
tions, such as 3-D animations or virtual mirrors. A system-
atic comparison of different visualizations has rarely been
done in the field of motor learning: To instruct movement
tasks, abstract sketches have been shown to be more effec-
tive than real pictures, but also more effective than a very
abstract stickman illustration (Kruber, 1984). Animations
can have an advantage over real videos, because the anima-
tions can be reduced to the most relevant information, as has
been shown in an assembly task (Petzold et al., 2004). Since
humans can recognize complex biological motions by ob-
serving only a few point lights placed on a moving body
(Giese & Poggio, 2003), point lights can also provide effec-
tive feedback, as has been shown for dancing (Eaves et al.,
2011). However, feedback about other complex multidimen-
sional movements in 3-D space might require more natural
visualizations. In this section, different types of abstract and
natural augmented feedback visualizations are discussed in
relation to their effectiveness in enhancing motor learning.
Abstract visualizations
In many simple tasks, the task-relevant variable has been
represented on a normal screen in form of lines, curves,
gauges, bars, or points (Eriksson, Halvorsen, & Gullstrand,
2011; Morris, Tan, Barbagli, Chang, & Salisbury, 2007;
Park et al., 2000; Ranganathan & Newell, 2009; Ruffaldi,
Filippeschi, et al., 2009; Schmidt & Wulf, 1997; Shea &
Wulf, 1999; Van der Linden et al., 1993; Yang, Bischof, &
Boulanger, 2008). In some studies, the actual variable was
plotted simultaneously with the target trajectory that was
displayed completely at the beginning of the trial (Park et
al., 2000; Van der Linden et al., 1993; Yang et al., 2008). In
other studies, the target trajectory emerged during the task
execution (Morris et al., 2007; Schmidt & Wulf, 1997). An
arrow indicating the current score on a scale served as con-
current feedback for a simple weight-bearing task (Winstein et
al., 1996). For simple tasks, abstract visualizations might be
sufficient, since the small number of relevant variables can be
meaningfully represented and cognitively mastered.
In complex tasks, visual feedback has also been provided
by abstract visualizations (Crowell & Davis, 2011; Debaere,
Wenderoth, Sunnaert, Van Hecke, & Swinnen, 2003, 2004;
Eaves et al., 2011; Eriksson et al., 2011; Hurley & Lee,
2006; Kovacs & Shea, 2011; Lee et al., 1990; Lee, Swinnen,
& Verschueren, 1995; Maslovat et al., 2009; Shea & Wulf,
1999; Smethurst & Carson, 2001; Snodgrass et al., 2010;
Swinnen et al., 1998; Swinnen et al., 1997; Wishart et al.,
2002; Wulf et al., 1999; Wulf et al., 1998). For complex
interlimb coordination tasks, a displacement–displacement
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53
27

----- Page 8 (native) -----
plot (Lissajous figure) has been used in many studies as an
abstract concurrent feedback (Debaere et al., 2003, 2004; Kovacs
& Shea, 2011; Maslovat et al., 2009; Ronsse, Puttemans, et al.,
2011; Smethurst & Carson, 2001; Swinnen et al., 1998; Swinnen
et al., 1997). Usually, the displacement of one limb was repre-
sented on the abscissa, the displacement of the other limb on the
ordinate. Consequently, for example, a 90° out-of-phase inter-
limb coordination resulted in a circle configuration; a 135° out-
of-phase pattern resulted in an ellipse configuration. For a com-
plex 2-D out-of-phase coordination task, Lissajous-type feedback
that displayed relative phase of both hands facilitated perfor-
mance dramatically, but learning was not assessed (Boyles,
Panzer, & Shea, 2012). Reference trajectories complemented
the Lissajous figure in some studies, giving additional informa-
tion about the range of the movement (Hurley & Lee, 2006;
Kovacs & Shea, 2011; Lee et al., 1995; Maslovat et al., 2009;
Maslovat, Chua, Lee, & Franks, 2004, 2006; Wishart et al.,
2002). In general, concurrent visual feedback in the form of
Lissajous figures was reported to be beneficial for learning a
complex coordination pattern. Note that Lissajous figures are
commonly not purely concurrent, since the trace of the move-
ment is usually displayed for some time; thus, terminal feedback
is provided as well. The challenge of out-of-phase coordination
tasks is that two independent effectors have to be controlled in
accordance with a common movement plan. The Lissajous
figure facilitates this process because it provides a single outcome
parameter capturing the relation of both limbs. In these situations,
an abstract visualization such as a Lissajous figure seems to be
sufficient because the number of relevant movement variables is
relatively small.
Similarly, abstract visualizations were shown to be sufficient
to enhance learning of other complex motor tasks also with a
small number of relevant variables. An oscilloscope could
effectively give feedback about the force onset on a skiing
simulator (Wulf et al., 1999; Wulf et al., 1998). Acceleration-
time plots taught runners how to reduce excessive impact forces
(Crowell & Davis, 2011). Force-time plots that indicated the
deviation from the target force zone (colored or shaded band)
were beneficial in teaching skills in manual therapy (Lee et al.,
1990; Snodgrass et al., 2010). In a balancing task on a stabil-
ometer, a bar representing the platform orientation was dis-
played in relation to horizontal reference bars in order to give
effective concurrent feedback about the deviation from the
equilibrium (Shea & Wulf, 1999). In a ball-throwing task,
concurrently displayed bars representing actual and target joint
angles were also shown to be effective in enhancing complex
motor learning (Schack et al., 2008). Concurrent visual feed-
back about relevant rowing variables—for example, in the form
of force-angle plots—could enhance rowing performance
(Spinks & Smith, 1994), could help to maintain consistency
of good rowing performance (Fothergill, 2010), and was valued
by rowers and coaches (Smith & Loschner, 2002). To teach
dancing skills, superposition of four limb end-effector positions
in the form of point lights on a prerecorded video of expert
movements was beneficial. Interestingly, giving feedback about
end-effector positions only was more effective than feedback
about 12 joint centers (or video instruction only) (Eaves et al.,
2011). The study indicates that it is important to determine
relevant key features of the task (as also was suggested by
Huegel, Celik, Israr, & O’Malley, 2009; Todorov et al., 1997)
and to provide feedback only about these key features, in order
to not overwhelm the learner with irrelevant information. In
realistic virtual reality systems, abstract augmented concurrent
feedback has been reported to be detrimental to manual dex-
terity training of dental students (Wierinck, Puttemans, Swin-
nen, & van Steenberghe, 2005) but has been rated to be
beneficial by medical educators and students for learning clin-
ical breast exams (Kotranza, Lind, Pugh, & Lok, 2009) and has
been shown to be effective for robotic laparoscopy training
(Judkins, Oleynikov, & Stergiou, 2006).
Abstract visualizations seem to be efficient, since they
can represent a key feature of a movement in an unambig-
uous way. Nevertheless, one should contrast different ab-
stract visualizations prior to their application, in order to
prevent any misinterpretation of the design. Moreover, com-
mon metaphors should be respected, such as red color
standing for “wrong” and green for “correct.” However,
there are two main disadvantages of abstract feedback
designs. First, in the long run, they might become boring
and, thus, hinder the learning process by demotivation.
Second, feedback about complex multidimensional move-
ments in 3-D space can hardly be abstracted but must be
displayed in a more natural way.
Natural visualizations
Natural visualizations incorporate superposition or side-by-
side 3-D perspectives of a reference and the corresponding
user’s part. This section reviews the effectiveness of such
visualizations, starting with superposition. To pass virtual
sliding doors in the correct moment while walking on a
treadmill, a superposition of ghost doors with “real” doors
(natural visualization) was less effective than gauges (abstract
visualization). The authors assumed that the inefficiency of
the superposition with respect to feedback errors in walking
speed resulted from an interference with the optic flow infor-
mation (Huet et al., 2009). It may have been more useful to
superimpose a virtual ghost avatar walking correctly on the
subject’s avatar. Such virtual teacher approaches are very
popular and, also, effective, as the subsequently discussed
studies verify.
In a virtual table tennis environment, the superposition of
the performer’s racket and the prerecorded expert’s racket
allowed concurrent feedback about the multidimensional
racket movement. The group practicing a table tennis shot
in the virtual environment learned the target shot more
28
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53

----- Page 9 (native) -----
quickly than did the group practicing with a real coach
(Todorov et al., 1997). Displaying the movements of the body,
limb, or end-effector of the learner simultaneously with those
of a virtual trainer—that is, of the target movements—forces
learning by imitation. No mental rotations are needed, since the
learner can place himself/herself virtually inside the teacher in
the same coordinate frame (Holden & Dyar, 2002). Accord-
ingly, a virtual teacher has effectively instructed a step-in-place
task (Koritnik, Bajd, & Munih, 2008; Koritnik, Koenig, Bajd,
Riener, & Munih, 2010), and others have successfully been
applied in rehabilitation, focusing also on limb and end-
effector movements (Duschau-Wicke, von Zitewitz, Caprez,
Lunenburger, & Riener, 2010; Holden & Dyar, 2002; Holden,
Todorov, Callahan, & Bizzi, 1999). In contrast, whole-body
superposition of learner and trainer did not enhance perfor-
mance in the case of Tai Chi postures and gestures. Tai Chi was
more efficiently learned when the virtual trainer was displayed
beside or in front of the learner (Chua et al., 2003). In another
study on Tai Chi, a similar visualization—that is, 3-D repre-
sentations of the teacher and learner next to each other in a
virtual reality scenario—was more effective than when the
learner was asked to mimic the teacher’s movement presented
on a video (Patel, Bailenson, Hack-Jung, Diankov, & Bajcsy,
2006). Thus, efficiency of superposition may depend on the
amount of superimposed body parts. Too many superimposed
parts may overwhelm the learner with too much information;
as a consequence, he/she cannot focus on the most relevant
ones (Eaves et al., 2011). Focusing on end-effector move-
ments, besides forcing an external focus of attention, might
also be beneficial, since end-effector kinematics are believed to
play a key role in motor control (Todorov et al., 1997). How-
ever, the same goal or end-effector movement can be achieved
by different solutions (Todorov, 2004). Thus, in some cases,
not only the end-effector, but also the whole-body or limb
movement must be optimized to prevent learning of uneco-
nomic and compensatory movements. These assumptions have
to be clarified in future studies in order to warrant superposi-
tion designs that optimally enhance motor learning.
It might also be important to figure out in which perspec-
tive a virtual teacher is most effective in enhancing motor
learning. Recent results suggest an advantage of third- over
first-person perspectives in a ball-catching task (Salamin,
Tadi, Blanke, Vexo, & Thalmann, 2010). Indeed, it was found
that first-person views involve other neural processes than do
third-person perspectives (David et al., 2006; Kockler et al.,
2010; Vogeley et al., 2004). However, virtual teachers for
complex motor tasks have rarely been developed, and their
design should be systematically evaluated.
In rehabilitation, provision of abstract visual feedback in
a realistic, natural virtual environment has also been real-
ized: Instead of a superposition of a virtual reference arm on
the patient’s virtual arm shown in a natural virtual environ-
ment, augmented feedback was given by a semitransparent
visualization of a cone and line to display the deviation of
the patient’s virtual arm from the target trajectory. The
patients performed smoother hand movements while being
provided with the augmented visual (in combination with
auditory) feedback (Huang et al., 2005). The same research
group presented an aesthetic feedback design approach,
again for a reaching and grasping task. Through exploration
of the virtual environment by moving the arm, the user
could recognize some embedded rules in the audiovisual
feedback, which is the way the authors refer to a “semantic
of action” approach. An image assembled or disassembled
into particles in the direction of the deviation from the target
position, and supination of the forearm was mapped onto the
image rotation. Simultaneously, audio features were mapped
onto distance, velocity, synchrony, and shoulder extension.
The audiovisual feedback assisted subjects in reaching the
movement goal (Chen et al., 2006; Wallis et al., 2007). Such
an aesthetic feedback approach may motivate the learner to
train longer than with a simple and abstract visualization.
However, as in many studies involving visual feedback, a
comparison with other feedback designs has not been
reported, and retention was not tested; thus, conclusions
on how visualizations should be designed cannot be drawn
in general.
In general, visual concurrent feedback designs are desir-
able that guide the learner toward the optimal movement
without causing a dependency on the feedback. In other
words, visual feedback designs are effective when they
enable parallel processing of visual and kinesthetic informa-
tion relevant for movement generation (Wei & Körding,
2009). Thereby, the visual feedback calibrates kinesthetic
information (Robin et al., 2005). Visual concurrent feedback
may also emphasize the linkage of landmarks or key fea-
tures of the motor task to kinesthetic information, which
may facilitate a recall in no-feedback conditions. Moreover,
to reduce dependency on concurrent feedback, the addition
of very frequent terminal feedback seems to be helpful
(Blandin et al., 2008), which might also be realized by
displaying lasting visual traces. These approaches should
be evaluated in future studies.
Conclusion on concurrent visual feedback
In simple tasks, the guidance hypothesis as well as the
specificity-of-learning hypothesis were confirmed, since con-
current visual feedback increased performance during acqui-
sition, but not during retention tests (Blandin et al., 2008;
Proteau, 2005; Proteau & Isabelle, 2002; Ranganathan &
Newell, 2009; Robin et al., 2005; Schmidt & Wulf, 1997;
Van der Linden et al., 1993). Contradicting the guidance
hypothesis, most studies on more complex tasks showed
positive effects of concurrent visual feedback (Lee et al.,
1990; Shea & Wulf, 1999; Snodgrass et al., 2010; Swinnen
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53
29

----- Page 10 (native) -----
et al., 1997; Todorov et al., 1997; Wishart et al., 2002; Wulf et
al., 1999; Wulf et al., 1998). Concurrent visual feedback was
suggested to help the learner to access the specific information
of the complex task quickly (Camachon, Jacobs, Huet,
Buckers, & Montagne, 2007; Huet et al., 2009). Especially in
very early learning phases, learners seem to benefit from con-
current feedback (Todorov et al., 1997) because it seems to
decrease cognitive load (Wulf & Shea, 2002). If the design—
that is, the visualization of the concurrent feedback—is inap-
propriate, positive effects are inhibited even though concurrent
visual feedback would actually be effective for learning the
task. A next step should be to investigate in parallel the effec-
tiveness of abstract visualizations, natural visualizations such as
virtual teachers, weak visualizations that do not block process-
ing of kinesthetic information, and aesthetic, motivating
approaches to enhance motor learning. Kinematic and kinetic
variables in different tasks should be systematically evaluated
prior to a comparison with other feedback strategies.
Auditory feedback: Three different approaches
to enhancing motor learning
Auditory perception contributes to elite performance in
sports. For instance, top performance in table tennis requires
auditory information about the ball bouncing on the table
and racket (Hermann, Honer, & Ritter, 2006). Returning a
tennis service successfully benefits also from auditory in-
formation (Takeuchi, 1993). Although auditory information
has an impact on performance, most sports are cognitively
mastered in response to visually perceived information. As a
consequence, providing additional visual augmented con-
current feedback may overload capacities of visual percep-
tion and cognitive processing. To minimize perceptual
overload, concurrent feedback could also be displayed
acoustically (or haptically). Auditory feedback may not only
reallocate perceptual and cognitive workload, but also re-
duce distraction, since, unlike visual perception, auditory
perception requires neither specific athlete orientation nor
a focus of attention (Eldridge, 2006; Grond, Hermann,
Verfaille, & Wanderley, 2010; Secoli, Milot, Rosati, &
Reinkensmeyer, 2011). However, the impact of an auditory
feedback depends considerably on the intuitive and correct
interpretation of the applied mapping functions and
metaphors. Applied functions and metaphors have to
be carefully selected, since listening to auditory displays
is less common than viewing visual displays.
In the first part of this section, auditory feedback that has
been applied in motor learning will be reviewed in the
following order. First, the section focuses on studies using
an auditory alarm; that is, a sound without any kind of
modulation is played as soon as, and as long as, the related
movement variable exceeds a predefined threshold.
Thereafter, studies are discussed in which movement varia-
bles are represented by sonification; that is, their magnitudes
and changes over time are represented by nonspeech audio.
Finally, studies are reviewed in which the movement error—
that is, auditory feedback about the deviation between the
actual performance and the target performance—is sonified.
Existing ideas for designing a valuable auditory feed-
back are reviewed in the second part of this section. In
the end of the section, an outlook on possible future
research directions in the field of concurrent auditory
feedback is given.
Auditory alarms
In recent years, auditory alarms have found their way into
rehabilitation. For instance, to regain a physiological gait pat-
tern, an auditory alarm was presented to the patient when muscle
activity of the affected leg was lower than that of the healthy leg
(Petrofsky, 2001), or pressure sensors were placed under the foot
sole, providing an auditory alarm when unphysiological loading
was present (Batavia, Gianutsos, Vaccaro, & Gold, 2001). When
multiple areas under one foot or under both feet were of interest,
more than one pressure sensor was integrated in the feedback,
and accordingly, multiple alarms differing in frequency were
presented to the user (Fernery et al., 2004). On the basis of the
first pilot studies, such a kind of auditory feedback about
unphysiological loading is said to have the potential to immedi-
ately alter gait patterns (Batavia et al., 2001; Fernery, Moretto,
Hespel, Thevenon, & Lensel, 2004). This potential has recently
been confirmed by a study showing that subjects immediately
altered their gait pattern in response to an alarm occurring when
predefined angular knee joint positions or accelerations were
exceeded (Riskowski, Mikesky, Bahamonde, & Burr, 2009).
This immediate modulation of a gait pattern by an auditory
alarm was later confirmed for both knee flexion (Helmer et al.,
2011) and vertical displacement of the center of mass during
treadmill running (Eriksson & Bresin, 2010). However, learning
was not assessed in these studies.
Alternations of a movement due to the presentation of an
auditory alarm are still present when no feedback is
available—for example, during catch trials, or even in transfer
tests: After training of a barre exercise in dance, subjects, who
had received auditory feedback about excessive foot prona-
tion, significantly reduced the time spent in excessive foot
pronation on catch trials, as compared with subjects receiving
no feedback (Clarkson, Robert, Watkins, & Foley, 1986).
Furthermore, after 2 weeks of training of circles on a pommel
horse, an experimental group, which had received an alarm
indicating hip flexion greater than 20°, could significantly
improve their hip extension, in contrast to a control group,
which had trained without feedback. This improvement was
still present after 2 further weeks of training without feedback
(Baudry, Leroy, Thouvarecq, & Chollet, 2006).
30
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53

----- Page 11 (native) -----
The training of professionals in shooting has also been
assisted by auditory alarms that were provided when rifle
movements or loading of the front leg exceeded a prede-
fined threshold. The professionals could not improve their
shooting performance (Underwood, 2009). It seems that in
contrast to beginners, professionals may benefit more from
specific information, such as angular displacements in a
single joint, than from general information about the end-
effector affected by multiple joints and represented by only
one alarm.
In summary, an alarm is simple to interpret; athletes can
immediately recognize in which direction they have to cor-
rect their movement and when the intended performance is
gained. However, on the basis of such a discrete feedback,
athletes cannot recognize to what extent they have to correct
their movement. Recognition of the extent requires a con-
tinuous representation of movement data values. Such rep-
resentations are reviewed in the next section.
Sonification of movement variables
Data values can be used to change the parameters of a
sound. This method is termed audification if the data values
are directly transferred to sound. For instance, the frequency
spectrum of electromyographic data is perceivable for
humans and can therefore serve as a direct input for loud-
speakers. The term sonification is used if variables are
mapped to sound parameters by a function; for example,
each change in force development results in a defined
change of the amplitude or frequency.
Sonification is generally applied to explore large amounts
of data—for example, to quickly detect irregularities or
specific patterns (Kramer, 1994; Walker & Nees, 2011). In
this general sense, sonification has also been applied in
human movement science: Age-dependent characteristics
in electromyographic data have been perceived after assign-
ing a frequency to each surface electrode placed on the
quadriceps femoris and after mapping monitored activity
to the amplitude (Pauletto & Hunt, 2006).
Not only the analysis of movement data can be facilitated by
sonification, but also the motor learning itself—in particular,
the time-dependent dynamic coordination of the movement
(Effenberg & Mechling, 1998). The auditory demonstration
of the targeted sequential timing prior to a keypressing task on
a keyboard effectively enhanced learning of the relative timing
pattern, which has been consistently shown in a few studies
(e.g., Han & Shea, 2008; Lai, Shea, & Little, 2000; Shea, Wulf,
Park, & Gaunt, 2001). In contrast to these fundamental studies
on motor learning, the effect of concurrently presented sonified
movement data on sport performance has only rarely been
investigated. Chollet, Micallef, and Rabischong (1988)
reported on crawl swimmers who could immediately—that
is, within the same training session—improve their stability
in velocity on the basis of sonified hydrodynamic pressure at
hand paddles. Later on, Chollet, Madani, and Micallef (1992)
mapped also the velocity of the waist during crawl to the
frequency of a tone, and the training period was extended to
4 days. In a test session on the fifth day, athletes reduced their
time to crawl 100 m more than the control group when they
received general information first (i.e., about the waist veloc-
ity) and general and specific information later (i.e., about waist
velocity and pressure at hand paddles). The improved perfor-
mance associated with an improved coordination of the move-
ment was still present 10 days later—that is, on Day 15.
Further experimental groups, which received information in
other combinations, showed better performance than the con-
trol group only on Day 15. Chollet et al. (1992) concluded that
assimilation of information was facilitated when general infor-
mation was provided prior to other types of information. Since,
during the 10 days without training, which were not monitored,
other random effects may have influenced the results, this
conclusion has to be proven in further studies.
It may also be speculated that the sonified movement moti-
vated subjects in the experimental groups to enhance their effort
during the training period. Accordingly, the positive effect of
triggering the onsets of elbow and wrist extension by percus-
sions found in a netball task (Helmer, Farrow, Lucas, Higgerson,
& Blanchonette, 2010) could be explained: The subjects receiv-
ing the auditory feedback were more motivated to repeat the
task more often. Motivational effects, as well as emotive effects,
are considered in current designs of movement sonifications
(Schaffert, Barrass, & Effenberg, 2009). Accordingly, the results
of Chollet et al. (1992) may therefore also be explained by
improved physiological abilities that would not have been ob-
servable immediately after the training period, but a few days
later. Although this explanation is only speculative, it still high-
lights an important issue of future studies on the effect of
sonified movements or augmented concurrent feedback: An
experimental design should be set up so that it distinguishes
between enhanced technical skills and enhanced motivation
resulting in enhanced physiological abilities.
Movement variables have also been sonified in sports
other than crawl—for example, breast stroke (arm, leg, waist
movement; Effenberg, 2000b), karate (timing of wrist and
ankle movement; Yamamoto, Shiraki, Takahata, Sakane, &
Takebayashi, 2004), ski carving (lateral displacement of ski;
Kirby, 2009), rowing (boat acceleration; Schaffert, Mattes,
& Effenberg, 2009), and German wheel (its three dimen-
sional orientation; Hummel, Hermann, Frauenberger, &
Stockman, 2010). Athletes appreciated the developed
sonification and mostly stated that the sonification may
have helped them to improve their skills. However,
corresponding motor learning studies have not been
published so far. Only a movement task on the German
wheel was evaluated for novices and experts: Experts
could benefit from the sonified movement, but novices
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53
31

----- Page 12 (native) -----
could not (Hummel et al., 2010). Although this state-
ment is based on a limited statistical analysis, it outlines
one major limitation of sonified movement variables to
be used by novices: If they have no idea of the correct
movement sonification, they will not benefit from it.
In general, current literature lacks both a comprehensive
identification of movement variables that can be sonified in
order to facilitate motor learning and a systematic evaluation
of the design of movement data sonification. Movement soni-
fication is useful for facilitating motor learning only if it can be
linked to a relatively precise movement representation. To
achieve this also at a beginner’s stage, a visual or haptic
display could guide the learner through the optimal move-
ment, whereby the optimal sonification could be internalized
and recalled in no-feedback conditions. Motor learning may
be facilitated even more if the optimal movement is displayed
simultaneously with the actual movement or if the current
deviation between the actual movement and optimal move-
ment is acoustically presented—that is, the movement error is
sonified. Studies on this kind of concurrent auditory feedback
in human movement science are reviewed in the next section.
Sonification of movement error
Effects of sports training facilitated by auditory feedback,
which represents the actual deviation with respect to a
reference instead of making the athlete just aware of an error
by an alarm, have rarely been investigated. In speed skating,
a case study reported that during training, the athlete could
benefit from the sonified deviation from a one-dimensional
target ankle movement (a harsh sawtooth tone made the
athlete aware of the wrong movement; its intensity was
proportional to the deviation) (Godbout & Boyd, 2010). In
shooting, a one dimensional mapping has also been devel-
oped: The deviation of the actual aiming point with respect
to the target was mapped to the frequency of a pure tone.
The higher the frequency, the smaller was the deviation. A
group of conscripts received this feedback in 50 % of 440
training shots, which were distributed over 11 sessions over
4 weeks. As compared with a group of conscripts that saw
only the shooting score (knowledge of results), the auditory
feedback group improved the shooting score already during
the training sessions. Interestingly, the higher score was
present in shots both with and without auditory feedback.
Besides this immediate benefit of auditory feedback, a sig-
nificant higher improvement was also observed in retention
tests performed 2, 10, and 40 days after the training period.
Subjects clearly benefited from auditory feedback, and not
by knowledge of results, since in comparison with subjects
without any training, improvements based on knowledge of
results were not present any more after the first retention test
(Konttinen, Mononen, Viitasalo, & Mets, 2004; Mononen,
2007).
Multidimensional error sonification has been reported for
a rowing-type movement (Sigrist, Schellenberg, et al.,
2011). Subjects could easily interpret and immediately use
an auditory feedback on the deviation of the oar position. In
this study, deviations in the horizontal plane were mapped to
stereo balance, deviations in the vertical plane were mapped
to pitch, and deviations about the oar’s longitudinal axis
were mapped to timbre. When volume was additionally
mapped to the total deviation, almost all subjects were able
to follow the target movement as accurately as with an
abstract visual feedback providing a similar amount of in-
formation on the error. Although this study highlights the
immediate reduction of movement errors enabled by a rather
unfamiliar auditory display (familiarization time was only
about 8 min, which is quite short, as compared with our
common familiarity with visual displays), effectiveness of
the auditory display has to be proven in a study on motor
learning.
In general, it becomes evident that the auditory display
has to be designed appropriately in order to reduce the time
needed for familiarization: Unfamiliar displays require a
certain period of time before athletes can benefit from it,
as has been seen in other studies (Baudry et al., 2006; Wulf
et al., 1999). Interestingly, related motor learning theories
such as the guidance and specificity-of-learning hypotheses
have not been examined with auditory feedback, except for
auditory demonstration of targeted rhythm prior to the task
itself (e.g., Han & Shea, 2008; Shea et al., 2001). The
question remains of whether augmented auditory feedback
per se induces a dependency on this afferent information, as
has been shown for visual feedback, a dependency that is
detrimental to performance when the feedback is with-
drawn. It is unclear whether auditory feedback per se is as
dominant as visual feedback or whether it can provoke a
better linkage to kinaesthetic information (with an appropri-
ate design). Existing ideas for designing a valuable auditory
feedback in general are discussed in the next section.
Design aspects of auditory feedback
The high number of sound dimensions such as loudness,
pitch, or timbre, combined with auditory display attributes
such as timing and localization, enable auditory feedback of
high-dimensional data (Hermann & Hunt, 2005). This pos-
sibility of presenting movement data by a variety of sound
dimensions requires a systematic approach to designing an
auditory display (Effenberg, 2000a). However, auditory dis-
plays were often not systematically evaluated (Dubus, 2012)
but, rather, selected in an ad hoc manner (Bonebright,
Miner, Goldsmith, & Caudell, 2005). Arbitrarily designed
displays may constrain motor learning by reduced motiva-
tion, distraction, or misinterpretation. In this section, after
presenting a starting point for auditory displays in general,
32
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53

----- Page 13 (native) -----
applicable mappings based on timbre and pitch to one
movement variable are presented, followed by suggestions
on mappings to more than one movement variable. There-
after, the impact of the chosen polarity and the potential of
music as a carrier signal are elaborated. Finally, the need for
a systematic evaluation of the effectiveness of auditory dis-
plays is pointed out.
A good starting point for developing an auditory display
facilitating motor learning is given by design principles of
auditory graphs, which have recently been summarized by
Flowers (2005): Perception of data profile changes is facilitated
by mapping changes in numeric values to pitch height. Time
information is more efficiently provided by rhythmic patterning
of a pitch-mapped stream instead of by a stream of clicks or
percussion instruments (Smith & Walker, 2005). Key events
should be presented by volume changes. Studies on data soni-
fication have revealed that changes in numerical values are
preferably not mapped to loudness changes, in order to mini-
mize concerns about interactions between pitch and loudness
(Neuhoff, Kramer, & Wayand, 2002). However, studies on
error sonification have successfully mapped the total amount
of deviation with respect to a target movement to loudness
(Drobny et al., 2009; Eriksson et al., 2011; Godbout & Boyd,
2010; Kleimann-Weiner & Berger, 2006; Vogt, Pirró, Kobenz,
Höldrich, & Eckel, 2010).
To minimize perceptual grouping, separate continuous
data streams should be mapped to different timbres, rather
than to different rhythms (Dürrer, 2001). To choose distin-
guishable timbres, the equally spaced timbre-circle provided
by Barrass (2005), based on the work of Grey (1975), could
be applied: Opposite timbres—for example, soprano sax
and flute—should be easily discriminated.
Pitch height may be an intuitive choice for displaying
vertically aligned data—for example, vertical movement
position. Accordingly, different pitch heights were used to
display obstacle clearance (and subjects could benefit from
it) (Erni & Dietz, 2001; Wellner, Schaufelberger, Zitewitz,
& Riener, 2008). Furthermore, velocity and acceleration
have also been successfully mapped to pitch height:
Swimmers improved their performance after training
assisted by sonified waist velocity (Chollet et al.,
1992), and rowers confirmed that sonified boat acceler-
ation represents the characteristic phases of boat motion
(Schaffert, Mattes, & Effenberg, 2009).
While pitch height has also been mapped to one movement
variable elsewhere (Ohta, Umegaki, Murofushi, Komine, &
Sakurai, 2009), an additional movement variable has often been
mapped to loudness (Fox & Carlile, 2005; Ghez, Rikakis,
DuBois, & Cook, 2000). However, an evaluation of the inter-
pretability and practicability of such a sonification of multiple
movement variables has rarely been done. An exception in
view of two sonified dimensional movement variables is given
by Effenberg (2000b), reporting on a high acceptance rate of a
sonified breaststroke in terms of longitudinal wrist mo-
tion and velocity mapped to pitch and loudness, respec-
tively (Effenberg, 2000b).
One of the most complex, real-time sonifications reported
so far was applied to arm movement. Harmonics were used
to represent arm position, rhythm represented the smooth-
ness of the movement, and auditory alarms were used to
indicate a successful movement, as well as a compensatory
movement (the severity of the compensation was mapped to
loudness) (Chen et al., 2006; Huang et al., 2005). A pilot
study revealed that stroke patients were able to improve the
movement of their impaired arm—for example, in terms of
smoothness (Wallis et al., 2007). However, the impact of the
additionally available visual display (described in the visual
section before) remains unclear, and a comparison with
differently designed auditory feedbacks in order to evaluate
its effectiveness has neither been reported by this research
group.
A valuable auditory feedback for motor learning may also
be based on the parallel display of the actual movement and
the target movement. Different timbres enable parallel dis-
playing of different data streams as seen for auditory graphs
(Brown, Brewster, Ramloll, Burton, & Riedel, 2003) and for
different frequency bands of an electroencephalography
(Hinterberger & Baier, 2005). A further parallel display
method presents actual movement data to one ear and target
movement data to the other ear. This method was applied in
a rowing task without explicitly reporting on its effective-
ness (Gauthier, 1985). However, displaying different data
streams to each ear might be limited: After two different
sequences of words had been presented to each ear, subjects
could not report on words heard in the nonattended ear
(Bergman, 1994). Displaying data sequentially may over-
come this limitation. However, in a sequential display, the
duration of the presented movement data is a critical issue,
due to the limits of the working memory and of the auditory
sensory memory (Flowers, 2005).
Instead of sonifying the actual movement and the target
movement in parallel, the difference between them—that is,
the error—can also be sonified. Besides pitch height and
loudness (Kleimann-Weiner & Berger, 2006; Konttinen et
al., 2004), further sound dimensions may then work intui-
tively, such as stereo balance for deviations in the horizontal
plane (applied by Sigrist, Schellenberg, et al., 2011), rhythm
for deviations in time, or reverb for the distance to the target
(Sigrist, Schellenberg, et al., 2011).
Other design aspects must also be determined with caution—
for example, the polarity. Should the feedback indicate where
you are relative to the target movement (i.e., provide state-
indicative information), or should it indicate how to correct
the movement (i.e., provide direction-indicative information)?
One may speculate that the direction-indicative polarity will
facilitate a corrective movement more than will the state-
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53
33

----- Page 14 (native) -----
indicative polarity, since the required movement direction is
directly presented. This hypothesis is supported by a recent
study on immediate effects of multidimensional feedback on a
rowing-type movement: When allowed, most subjects chose the
state-indicative polarity, which seems to be more intuitive at first
glance. However, movement errors were more reduced when
direction-indicative polarity was chosen or prescribed (Sigrist,
Schellenberg, et al., 2011).
Not only sound dimensions, but also the carrier signal
itself can be the subject of auditory feedback design. Most
of the reported auditory displays were based on a steady
signal, which may get annoying after some time. Music may
provide feedback in a more pleasant way, and its modulation
has already been successfully applied in a movement syn-
chronization task (Varni et al., 2011). However, if multiple
aspects of a movement should be mapped, music as a carrier
signal is limited, since continuity is hardly given in its
features; thus, multiple error sonification seems hardly pos-
sible. An annoying steady signal can also be avoided by a
carrier signal based on semantic sounds—for example, rep-
resent a high arm position by birds whistling and a low arm
position by a frog croaking (Vogt, Pirró, Kobenz, Höldrich,
& Eckel, 2009). Such a carrier signal may work for auditory
alarms, but neither for movement sonification nor for error
sonification, since those sonifications require a continuous
mapping to facilitate continuous movement corrections.
In general, several auditory feedback designs have been
presented for motor learning, but their interpretability and
effectiveness have rarely been evaluated. To establish a
general guideline for auditory displays in motor learning,
differently designed auditory feedbacks should be compared
with each other. Among others, such comparisons may re-
veal whether abstract sounds facilitate a movement more
than do natural sounds (Rath & Rohs, 2006). Additionally,
differently designed auditory feedbacks must be evaluated in
different movement tasks, since the efficiency of an auditory
display is task dependent (Flowers, 2005). The interpretability
and effectiveness of the display depend further on the athlete,
particularly with respect to age, gender, skill level, and musi-
cal abilities (Effenberg & Mechling, 1999). Rhythm and pitch
height discrimination depend not on age (as long as young
children are not compared with the elderly) but on gender,
since females have shown better discrimination abilities
(Mauney & Walker, 2007). Higher musical abilities afford a
better pitch discrimination (Neuhoff & Wayand, 2002), but in
principle, pitch changes of 10 % should be noticeable by
almost every healthy learner.
Conclusion on concurrent auditory feedback
Concurrent auditory feedback has been successfully applied
in motor learning. In comparison with visual feedback,
auditory feedback may hinder processing of other sensory
afferences to a lesser extent, and thereby, it could still be used to
calibrate the motor program like sparse visual information.
Success of auditory feedback may also originate from the fact
that most studies on auditory alarms and movement sonifica-
tion have investigated fast repetitive tasks. Such tasks limit
online movement corrections—that is, corrections of irrelevant
errors caused by sensory–motor noise; instead, the auditory
information supports the feedforward control.
However, the literature lacks a systematic evaluation of
the interpretability and effectiveness of different feedback
designs, not only in terms of mapped movement variables,
but also in terms of the abilities of the learner itself. Recent
technological developments such as real-time monitoring of
kinematic data have already found their way into the devel-
opment of auditory displays (Chen et al., 2006; Rauter et al.,
2009; Sigrist, Schellenberg, et al., 2011; Vogt, 2008). These
technologies will contribute to overcoming the current ini-
tial stage of concurrent auditory feedback in motor learning.
Haptic feedback: Many concepts, few proofs
Especially in human newborns and infants, haptic interac-
tion has a considerable impact on the development and on
the motor learning process (Rochat & Senders, 1991).
Infants up to 5 months perceive and understand their phys-
ical world through their hands without visual control (Sann
& Streri, 2007). In our early days, the haptic sense lays the
foundation for sensory integration—that is, the organization
of sensory information for use in daily life (Ayres, 2005).
This is because the haptic sense is the only one that enables
us to interact with the world around us and, at the same time,
to perceive these interactions (Minogue & Jones, 2006).
This unique characteristic is called the bidirectional proper-
ty of the haptic sense, which provides the basis to further
enhance motor learning through haptic interactions (Hale &
Stanney, 2004). Thus, it seems natural to investigate the
effectiveness of haptic interactions in motor learning: Which
haptic interactions enhance learning best for which type of
motor task (e.g., simple vs. complex or cyclic vs. acyclic)
and for whom (e.g., beginner, expert; or child, adult, elderly)?
These questions are addressed in different fields of research:
haptic rendering (Höver, Kósa, Székely, & Harders, 2009;
McNeely, Puterbaugh, & Troy, 2005, 2006; Salisbury
& Srinivasan, 1997), robot-assisted training and rehabil-
itation (Duschau-Wicke et al., 2010; Emken, Benitez, &
Reinkensmeyer, 2007; Lambercy et al., 2007; Marchal-
Crespo & Reinkensmeyer, 2009; Metzger, Lamberby, &
Gassert, 2012; Nef, Mihelj, & Riener, 2007; Prange,
Jannink, Groothuis-Oudshoorn, Hermens, & IJzerman,
2006; Reinkensmeyer, Emken, & Cramer, 2004), motor
learning through haptic augmented feedback (Feygin et
al., 2002; Flash & Hogan, 1985; Marchal-Crespo &
34
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Reinkensmeyer, 2008b; Reinkensmeyer et al., 2004;
Reinkensmeyer & Patton, 2009; Wolpert, Ghahramani,
& Flanagan, 2001), and human motor control (Feygin et
al., 2002; Flash & Hogan, 1985; Haruno, Wolpert, &
Kawato, 2001; Todorov, 2004; Viviani & Flash, 1995).
Among other topics, research on human motor control fo-
cuses on motor adaptation within a changing environment (e.g.,
Shadmehr & Mussa-Ivaldi, 1994), age-related learning (e.g.,
Takahashi et al., 2003), generalization and transfer of skills
from one movement to another (e.g., Conditt, Gandolfo, &
Mussa-Ivaldi, 1997; Oakley & O’Modhrain, 2005), in-
ternal versus external focus during task execution (e.g.,
Criscimagna-Hemminger, Donchin, Gazzaniga, & Shadmehr,
2003; Shadmehr & Moussavi, 2000), and internal movement
representation (e.g., Haruno et al., 2001; Todorov, 2004). To
investigate these topics, researchers have developed devices
that provide haptic interaction and assess a subject’s perfor-
mance simultaneously. To study human multijoint limb move-
ment, in the 1980s, the first haptic device with two degrees of
freedom (DOF) was built by Mussa-Ivaldi, Hogan, and Bizzi
(1985). Since then, many haptic human–machine interfaces
have been developed to haptically support and to investigate
human motor learning. It is now even possible to use several
commercially available haptic interfaces, such as desktop
systems, ground and wall-mounted systems, portable systems,
and tactile systems. Examples for desktop systems are, for
example, the PHANTOM® Desktop™Haptic Device
(www.sensable.com), the 3-DOF omega haptic device and
6-DOF delta haptic device (www.forcedimension.com),
Virtuose™haptic devices (www.haption.com), Novint Falcon
(home.novint.com), and Freedom 7S (www.mpb-
technologies.ca). An example for the class of ground
and wall-mounted systems is the HapticMaster (Van der
Linde, Lammertse, Frederiksen, & Ruiter, 2002). An example
for portable systems is the CyberGrasp, and examples for
tactile systems are CyberTouch (www.cyberglovesystems.com),
STRess (laterotactile.com), and TouchSense® (www.
immersion.com) devices.
In this section, haptic strategies are reviewed whose aim is
to facilitate human motor learning on the basis of haptic
augmented feedback. In particular, the potential of different
control strategies for facilitating motor learning is discussed.
Since the effectiveness of many control strategies have solely
been tested in rehabilitation applications, this section also
refers to studies that have been conducted with patients.
Detailed design rules for haptic interfaces have already been
published elsewhere (O’Malley & Gupta, 2008).
Position-control-based haptic guidance: Feasible
for movement instruction?
To facilitate robot-assisted human motor learning, position
control is the most restrictive haptic guidance control
strategy in terms of position and time. Position control
enforces a predefined reference movement of the robot
regardless of what the human user intends to do. Thus, from
the robot’s point of view, the human represents only an
external disturbance that has to be compensated for in order
to decrease position errors. However, research on motor
learning has shown that preventing humans from making
errors can be detrimental. It was shown that the process of
successful motor learning was prolonged by about 15 times
if subjects were prevented from making errors (Scheidt,
Reinkensmeyer, Conditt, Rymer, & Mussa-Ivaldi, 2000).
Thus, making errors drives motor learning (Emken et al.,
2007; Emken & Reinkensmeyer, 2005; Patton, Stoykov,
Kovic, & Mussa-Ivaldi, 2006; Reisman, Wityk, Silver, &
Bastian, 2007; Thoroughman & Shadmehr, 2000; van
Beers, 2009). Nevertheless, position control may be useful
for novices who do not know the desired movement at all or
for less skilled or impaired subjects who are not phys-
ically able to perform a movement task. This hypothesis
is supported by the challenge point theory, which states
that novices or less skilled subjects may not improve if
the task level is too challenging (Guadagnoli & Lee,
2004). Yet the potential of position control to facilitate
motor learning has rarely been tested but should be
evaluated. Especially in early learning of complex motor
tasks, position control may help to acquire a first move-
ment representation.
One of the few studies focusing on position control inves-
tigated training of 3-D trajectories with the PHANTOM®
device (Feygin et al., 2002). Three different conditions were
studied: (1) visual instruction, allowing the subject to watch
the end of the robotic arm moving through the target motion;
(2) position control guiding the subject, who grasped the end
of the visually hidden robotic arm, through the target motion;
and (3) a combination of both, enabling the subject to see the
robotic arm while being guided through the target motion.
Training with vision resulted in a more accurate learning of the
trajectory shape than did position control, whereas position
control facilitated timing best—that is, the temporal aspects of
the trajectory. The best results for shape and timing were
obtained when vision was combined with position control.
In another study focusing on somehow complex and random
movements (without any relation to functional movements),
both visual and visuo-haptic training improved short-term
retention of a novel path, whereas position control did not
result in any significant improvement (Liu, Cramer, &
Reinkensmeyer, 2006). In visuo-manual writing tasks,
the impact of position control has also been contrasted
with force control—that is, when the robot follows a
predefined force profile instead of a predefined path
(Bluteau, Coquillart, Payan, & Gentaz, 2008). Neither of
the controllers facilitated learning of shape aspects of the
writing task. However, force control facilitated learning of
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53
35

----- Page 16 (native) -----
kinematic aspects in terms of movement fluidity—that is,
number of velocity peaks and mean velocity.
In general, the experiments applying position control did
not reveal any significant advantage of position control, as
compared with other feedback strategies. This could be due
to the instructional character of position control, which
might be useful only in an early learning phase. Position
control is assumed to be ineffective for motor learning
because those motor control loops in the central nervous
system between proprioceptive input and motor output are
not strengthened even though they are important especially
for improving dynamic tasks (Shadmehr & Mussa-Ivaldi,
1994). Furthermore, users behave passively and exert less
energy (Israel, Campbell, Kahn, & Hornby, 2006) due to
slackness when they execute movements guided by a posi-
tion controller (Reinkensmeyer, Akoner, Ferris, & Gordon,
2009). Still, position controllers have constituted a basis for
more complex control algorithms; thus, some researchers
have presented the design of a position controller only as a
proof of concept, without further using it in studies related to
motor learning (Kousidou, Tsagarakis, Smith, & Caldwell,
2007; Loureiro & Harwin, 2007; Nef et al., 2007; Rauter,
von Zitzewitz, Duschau-Wicke, Vallery, & Riener, 2010).
However, using position control as a haptic augmented
feedback strategy may still be of use in rehabilitation—for
example, through mobilization with a high number of rep-
etitions and to reestablish normative patterns of motor out-
put (Marchal-Crespo & Reinkensmeyer, 2009). In general,
position control has the potential to demonstrate an a priori
unknown movement to the user, and thus, it has an instruc-
tional character. As an instruction, position control may
represent the first impetus that starts the process of motor
learning, since the need for support depends on the user’s
skill level (Cesqui et al., 2008).
Haptic guidance beyond position control: Many
suggestions, no systematic evaluation
Haptic guidance is an umbrella term for various kinds of
haptic augmented feedback strategies that all have in com-
mon guiding the human subject through the ideal motion by
a haptic interface (Feygin et al., 2002). Commonly, a cor-
recting force pushes the user’s limb toward a physiological
reference trajectory or posture; for example, the correcting
force increases with the deviation from the reference trajec-
tory. Haptic guidance may lead to (1) strengthening of
muscles and connective tissue, provoking motor plasticity
and preventing stiffening; (2) somatosensory stimulation
inducing brain plasticity; (3) reinforcement of the movement
pattern by movement repetitions; (4) prolonged trainings by
relieving therapists from back-breaking work; and (5) in-
creased motivation due to successful active task completion
(Marchal-Crespo & Reinkensmeyer, 2009). Haptic guidance
strategies that allow irrelevant errors caused by noise in the
sensory–motor system may mediate not only the new motor
program in an early learning phase, but also the improve-
ment of correct error detection/correction mechanisms in a
later phase.
Control strategies used for haptic guidance beyond posi-
tion control are impedance control (Hogan, 1985), admit-
tance control (Van der Linde et al., 2002), path control
(Vallery, Duschau-Wicke, & Riener, 2009) (also known as
virtual tunnel; Mihelj, Nef, & Riener, 2007), force fields
(Vallery, Duschau-Wicke, & Riener, 2009), performance-
based adaptive control (Krebs et al., 2003), or combinations
of these control strategies. These haptic guidance strategies
provide a certain amount of freedom in terms of position
and/or timing to the user, in contrary to position control.
This freedom may facilitate motor learning (Scheidt et al.,
2000) and can vary from completely unconstrained move-
ments in terms of position and timing errors (e.g., provided
by zero impedance control; Blaya & Herr, 2004) to com-
pletely restricted movements as provided by position con-
trol. Intermediate steps from zero-impedance control to
position control range from constraints in position (e.g.,
provided by path control; Khatib, 1986; Vallery, Guidali,
Duschau-Wicke, & Riener, 2009), and further over prede-
fined position and soft time constraints (e.g., provided by
path control with a flux; Marchal-Crespo, Rauter, Wyss, von
Zitzewitz, & Riener, 2012), and further over predefined
position and hard time constraints (e.g., provided by path
control with a moving time window; Duschau-Wicke et al.,
2010), to completely restricted movements in space and
time, such as position control. Moreover, haptic guidance
can also be provided in temporally (Endo, Kawasaki,
Kigaku, & Mouri, 2007; Powell & O’Malley, 2011) or
spatially (Gillespie, O’Modhrain, Tang, Zaretzky, & Pham,
1998; Powell & O’Malley, 2011) separated cues (Powell &
O’Malley, 2012). Spatial separation of haptic guidance and
task-inherent forces could be of importance, since combin-
ing those forces might lead to learning the wrong task
(Marchal-Crespo & Reinkensmeyer, 2008a). Temporarily
separating haptic guidance and task forces, to the contrary,
might be important for reducing the user’s reliance on the
feedback (Li, Patoglu, & O’Malley, 2009; Marchal-Crespo
& Reinkensmeyer, 2009). Reliance on haptic guidance
might be reduced using paradigms like assist-as-needed or
fading feedback (Marchal-Crespo & Reinkensmeyer, 2009;
Patoglu, Li, & O’Malley, 2009; Powell & O’Malley, 2012).
In general, control parameters are fixed prior to a study.
However, control parameters like stiffness may also be a
function of the pose of the haptic interface (Vallery,
Duschau-Wicke, & Riener, 2009). Control parameters may
further be a function of time or performance; for example,
controller stiffness can be adapted in response to the user’s
current performance and need, which has already been done
36
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53

----- Page 17 (native) -----
(see Krebs et al., 2003; Marchal-Crespo & Reinkensmeyer,
2008b). A further possibility is to vary the control parame-
ters over time and space as a function of the user’s perfor-
mance (e.g., Rauter, von Zitzewitz, et al., 2010).
The control of most haptic guidance feedback strategies
is based upon reference trajectories, except for zero imped-
ance control and a few model-based control algorithms
(Ronsse, Koopman, et al., 2011; Ronsse et al., 2010;
Ronsse, Vitiello, et al., 2011). The reference trajectories
are either recorded and postprocessed or artificially gener-
ated. Often, the artificially generated trajectories are smooth
functions that are based on optimality principles approxi-
mating human motor control, such as minimal jerk, minimal
torque, and minimal torque change (Todorov, 2004). In a
recent control concept, the haptic controller does not rely on
reference trajectories and supports arbitrary rhythmic move-
ments of the user. To do so, the controller uses adaptive
oscillators that synchronize with the sinusoidal high-level
features of the user’s movements (Ronsse, Koopman et al.,
2011; Ronsse et al., 2010; Ronsse, Vitiello, et al., 2011).
Such strategies can be seen as a trade-off between leaving
the user in full control of the movement features—that is,
trajectory and movement frequency—while still providing a
certain amount of assistance/guidance.
Until now, haptic guidance has been successfully applied
mainly in simple motor tasks, such as guided point-to-point
movements or reaching tasks (e.g., Amirabdollahian, Loureiro,
& Harwin, 2002; Flash & Gurevich, 1991; Goodbody &
Wolpert, 1998; Loureiro, Amirabdollahian, Coote, Stokes, &
Harwin, 2001; Loureiro, Amirabdollahian, Topping, Driessen,
& Harwin, 2003; Sainburg & Ghez, 1995; Todorov,
2004), but rarely in complex tasks (except by Brickman
et al., 1996; Chen & Agrawal, 2012; Chen, Ragonesi,
Agrawal, & Galloway, 2010; Ho, Basdogan, Slater, Durlach,
& Srinivasan, 1998; Lewiston, 2009; Marchal-Crespo,
Furumasu, & Reinkensmeyer, 2010; Marchal-Crespo et al.,
2012; Marchal-Crespo & Reinkensmeyer, 2008b; Oakley,
Brewster, & Gray, 2001; Rauter, von Zitzewitz, et al., 2010).
The lack of studies on healthy subjects using haptic
guidance in complex tasks might be caused by hardly avail-
able or affordable haptic interfaces supporting complex tasks
in several DOFs and insufficient computer performance to
control the desired number of DOFs.
The few existing studies on complex motor tasks
revealed that haptic guidance reduces the perceived work-
load, improves the current performance, and enhances mo-
tor learning (Brickman et al., 1996). Furthermore, haptic
feedback has been shown to enhance the user’s presence
and cooperation (Ho et al., 1998; Oakley et al., 2001), which
is of great importance for motor learning. For instance,
haptic guidance enhanced motor learning in a steering
task (Marchal-Crespo & Reinkensmeyer, 2008b) and motor
adaption in wheelchair driving (Marchal-Crespo et al., 2010).
In the steering task, haptic guidance was shown to outperform
the condition without haptic guidance significantly in
terms of driving accuracy. However, users seemed to
become dependent on feedback through haptic guidance,
promoting the guidance hypothesis. In the wheelchair
driving task, haptic guidance was gradually adapted to
performance in terms of errors in look-ahead distance
and direction and direction change of the users. The
results in 22 healthy children and 1 impaired child
showed significantly higher learning rates when steering
was supported by gradually adapted haptic guidance than
without haptic guidance. In a task that required develop-
mentally delayed infants to find their way through a maze
while sitting on a mobile robot, haptic guidance by force
fields displayed by a joystick was also more effective than
no haptic guidance (Chen et al., 2010). All infants who
obtained haptic feedback learned to drive through the
maze more quickly and more accurately than the control
group. These results have been recently extended in a
study that showed improvement in driving skills of two
subject groups that were trained in wheelchair driving
using assist-as-needed and repelling force paradigms, as
compared with a control group that did not receive any
haptic feedback (Chen & Agrawal, 2012).
Sequential finger-pressing movements in piano playing
have also been guided by a haptic device employing mag-
netic forces. In several experiments and retention tests on
auditory–motor short-term memory tasks, the advantage of
haptic guidance over auditory feedback and audio-haptic
feedback over haptic guidance could be demonstrated
(Lewiston, 2009). In future experiments, it would be
interesting to see whether the effectiveness of haptic
guidance in sequential tasks like piano playing can also
be transferred to other tasks.
During the last few years, haptic guidance was also
applied in the field of robot-assisted therapy. However, the
results are controversial: Some studies reported that patients
profit more from conventional therapy than from robot-
aided therapy (Hidler et al., 2009; Hornby et al., 2008),
whereas others reported the opposite (Husemann, Muller,
Krewer, Heller, & Koenig, 2007; Lo et al., 2010; Mayr et al.,
2007). The reason why conventional therapy through human
physiotherapists can still be more effective than robot-aided
therapy seems to be based on the fact that a human therapist
can adapt his strategy and amount of haptic guidance.
This hypothesis seems further to be supported by the
results from the steering and the wheelchair experiments
described above (Marchal-Crespo et al., 2010; Marchal-
Crespo & Reinkensmeyer, 2008b). Thus, feedback adaptation
might have in general a large impact on motor learning and
should be investigated more intensely in future.
Haptic guidance has not been applied for complex motor
task learning in the field of sports, except for a rowing-type
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53
37

----- Page 18 (native) -----
and a tennis-type task. In the rowing task, a conservative
force field displayed a virtual tunnel with elastic walls to
guide the movement of the oar. The results of a pilot study
revealed that the force field was able to compliantly guide a
naive subject through a desired trajectory (Rauter, von
Zitzewitz, et al., 2010). In the tennis-type task, three different
control concepts were implemented—position control, path
control, and guidance-as-needed controller—in order to
investigate the influence of different haptic guidance
concepts on task timing, whereby learning was not
assessed (Marchal-Crespo et al., 2012).
Haptic guidance may help beginners to learn complex
(sportive) movements in a safe and self-explanatory way
(Powell & O’Malley, 2012). For experts, haptic guidance
could be effective in teaching detailed technique aspects that
can make the difference in professional sports. Since only a
few studies have applied haptic guidance on complex motor
tasks, which were also quite diverse, the general potential of
haptic guidance to facilitate motor learning of complex
movements remains open.
Vibrotactile feedback systems need to be evaluated in motor
learning
In general, vibrotactile displays have mainly been developed
to improve navigation and orientation in order to reduce
workload of the visual and auditory system—for example,
for steering an airplane (van Erp et al., 2006). Applications
in sports are diverse: Vibrotactile displays have been applied
to give information about tactics in soccer (van Erp et al.,
2006), about the aerodynamic posture in skating and cycling
(van Erp, Saturday, & Jansen, 2006), about the coordination of
multiple dancers (van Erp et al., 2006), about dancing skills
(Nakamura et al., 2005, Rosenthal et al., 2011), or about
snowboarding skills (Spelmezan, Hilgers, & Borchers, 2009;
Spelmezan, Jacobs, Hilgers, & Borchers, 2009). However, in
the field of sports, only in rowing have the effects of vibro-
tactile feedback on motor learning been evaluated. In a pilot
study, learning of an abstract oar trajectory on a rowing
simulator was slightly more enhanced by visuo-vibrotactile
feedback than by visual or vibrotactile feedback alone
(Ruffaldi, Filippeschi, et al., 2009). In another study
with expert rowers, no difference between vibrotactile
feedback and visual feedback in enhancing timing of
knee and back extension could be shown. However, a
ceiling effect was present and was assumed to impede
learning in either condition (van Erp et al., 2006).
The development of meaningful vibrotactile feedback, as
well as practical systems, is challenging (Bark et al., 2011;
Rosenthal et al., 2011). Appropriate sites on the body for the
vibrators must be found; for example, the vibration must be
easy to perceive, and at the same time, the vibrators should
not hinder movement. Interestingly, some sites might have
an initial advantage in representing specific information,
due to its naturalness; however, the advantage dissolves
when users are given enough time to become familiar with
less intuitive sites (Stepp & Matsuoka, 2011). Moreover,
appropriate signal ranges and modulations (e.g., pulse or
amplitude modulation) of the vibration must be evaluated
(Stepp & Matsuoka, 2012). The signal should be clear but
not irritating or harming. And, as has already been discussed
for auditory feedback design, the polarity of the signal must
be considered (Bark et al., 2011; Spelmezan, Hilgers, &
Borchers, 2009; Spelmezan, Jacobs, et al., 2009). The vi-
bration can be meant either to pull the body part toward the
signal (attractive, direction indicative) or to push it away
(repulse, state indicative). Intuitive responses to vibrations
on different body parts revealed that polarity preferences are
mainly individual (Spelmezan, Jacobs, et al., 2009). In a
study on learning arm movements with visuo-vibrotactile
feedback, neither the attractive nor the repulsive mode was
preferred (Bark et al., 2011). In contrast, a preference for the
attractive mode was found for initiation of wrist rotations
(Jansen, Oving, & Van Veen, 2004) and also for auditory
feedback guiding oar movements in rowing (Sigrist,
Schellenberg, et al., 2011). The preference for the re-
pulsive or attractive mode might also depend on the
vibration properties, since unpleasant vibrations are
meant to be avoided, whereas neutral or even pleasant
vibrations could attract a movement direction.
Applying a meaningful, intuitive metaphor is believed to
be crucial for vibrotactile feedback (Spelmezan, Hilgers, &
Borchers, 2009; Spelmezan, Jacobs, et al., 2009), especially
if the task becomes more complex (Jansen et al., 2004).
Lieberman and Breazeal (2007) took advantage of the sen-
sory saltation phenomenon to give feedback about errone-
ous arm movements. Thereby, four vibrators around a
rotational joint (e.g., wrist rotation) were sequentially puls-
ing to give a feeling of a rotating signal. A simpler mapping
was used for hinge joints; that is, too far inward bending of
the wrist resulted in more intense vibration of the actuator
placed below the wrist. Results were less promising for
feedback for the rotational joints when the rotational signal
was applied than with the simpler mapping on the hinge
joints (Lieberman & Breazeal, 2007). However, other
designs that are also effective for rotational movements
can still be found. Detailed studies focusing on design,
long-term learning, and practicability of vibrotactile feed-
back in sports are needed to rate its value. To date, many
vibrotactile systems are still in their early phase.
Augmenting the movement errors or the environment
In the last sections, strategies that guided the user to the
correct movement (haptic guidance), as well as vibrotactile
feedback, were reviewed. In this section, haptic strategies
38
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53

----- Page 19 (native) -----
that augment the environmental conditions to optimally
challenge or support the user are reviewed.
In general, the optimal learning condition may be given in
an environment that challenges users depending on actual
performance, learning progress, individual skills, and biome-
chanics. Such a challenging environment could be obtained by
a controller that can modify spatial and/or temporal features of
the target trajectory automatically. To our knowledge, to date,
only once has such an approach been realized: a planar tele-
operated system that adapted trajectory boundaries online for
visuomanual tracking (Garcia-Hernandez & Parra-Vega,
2009). However, the trajectory boundaries in this teleoperated
system are obtained by interpolation from a human master’s
trajectory, not by an automated system.
Another approach that accounts for the demand to sup-
port or challenge each user adaptively in an optimal manner
has been presented recently. The controller can modify its
behavior continuously from haptic guidance by path control
to error augmentation through continuous scaling of a
torque field (Rauter et al., 2011). So far, a proof-of-
concept has been provided; the impact of this controller on
motor learning has yet to be evaluated.
Error augmentation, also known as error amplification,
amplifies the movement error by disturbing force fields. Since
errors drive motor learning (Emken et al., 2007; Emken &
Reinkensmeyer, 2005; Patton et al., 2006; Reisman et al.,
2007; Thoroughman & Shadmehr, 2000; van Beers, 2009),
error augmentation seems to be promising by definition.
However, it has been shown that skilled subjects may
profit from learning with error amplification rather than
from haptic guidance, in contrast to less skilled subjects
(Cesqui et al., 2008; Milot, Marchal-Crespo, Green,
Cramer, & Reinkensmeyer, 2010). These results are also
supported by the challenge point theory stating that
advanced users can profit from challenging feedback
but novices cannot (Guadagnoli & Lee, 2004). Random
noise-based perturbations were shown to be more effective
than haptic guidance in one experiment on a path-following
task in healthy subjects (Lee & Choi, 2010). For stroke
patients, error augmentation in the form of speed-dependent
disturbance forces was shown to be more effective than haptic
guidance for learning a reaching task (Patton et al.,
2006). It has further been found that limb impedance
is increased in order to limit movement variations due
to perturbations through error augmentation (Takahashi,
Scheidt, & Reinkensmeyer, 2001).
In the context of challenging control concepts, control
strategies that apply resistance against the executed motion—
that is, constraint-induced control concepts—also could en-
hance motor learning. For example in rehabilitation, such
controllers can hinder patients from executing wrong move-
ment patterns, or even restrain the use of single body parts.
Due to training against resistances, subjects can increase
muscle strength and self-reported function and further reduce
disabilities (Lambercy et al., 2011; Ouellette et al., 2004).
Restraining movements of nonimpaired limbs may reduce
hyperreliance on healthy limbs and improved impaired limbs
(Kolb, 1995; Ogden & Franz, 1917; Ostendorf & Wolf, 1981;
Royet, 1991; Sterr et al., 2002; Wolf, Lecraw, Barton, & Jann,
1989). Due to increased motor function, increased functional
potential for motor learning, especially in the impaired limbs,
could be expected.
Another principle for haptic augmented feedback ampli-
fies the environmental dynamics of a task so that the sub-
jects experience the task dynamics more intensely (Emken
& Reinkensmeyer, 2005). The benefit of this “amplification
of movement dynamics” has been exemplified in a walking
task during which a force field was applied in an upward
direction depending on the horizontal velocity of the foot
during the swing phase. Subjects were able to adapt 26 %
faster to the force field when it was transiently amplified,
instead of being kept constant.
Counterbalance-based control—that is, gravity compen-
sation—does not guide the human subject, but it cancels or
reduces the experience of the earth’s gravitational field. This
type of control relieves the human subject from the burden
of his/her own limb weight and helps the subject to focus on
the motor task. This form of haptic support is mostly used in
locomotion training for patients in an orthotic device such as
the Lokomat (Hidler et al., 2009; Hornby et al., 2008;
Husemann et al., 2007; Mayr et al., 2007). It was not till
counterbalance-based controllers had been applied that even
heavily impaired subjects could profit from automated
treadmill training.
For motor learning, processing of proprioceptive informa-
tion should be forced when the key features of the movement
are performed correctly, and not when they are performed
incorrectly (Chiviacowsky & Wulf, 2007; Winstein, 1991).
This can be addressed by haptic feedback strategies—for
example, error augmentations or emphasizing control. How-
ever, until now, such emphasizing control strategies have been
neither developed nor investigated in a systematic way.
Conclusion on concurrent haptic feedback
Position control strategies characterize the simplest form of
haptic augmented feedback. Especially in patients, they
seem to be useful in motor (re-)learning because of their
motivational aspect provided through successful task com-
pletion and increased training duration and intensity. Still,
the strongest feature of position control is its instructional
character, which has hardly been investigated and might
have been underestimated in the field of motor learning to
date. A variety of haptic guidance control strategies have
revealed promising results, especially if an adaption to the
skill level of the learner was considered. Error augmentation
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53
39

----- Page 20 (native) -----
was shown to outperform other haptic control strategies,
since it intensifies error-based learning. Similarly, control
concepts that modify the environment seem promising,
since the task-inherent dynamics become more obvious to
the learner. Other control strategies relieve subjects from
their own weight and, thus, might enable learning of tasks
that would exceed the learner’s physical abilities.
Most results on the effectiveness of haptic feedback have
emerged from studies of simple motor tasks, and only a few
from complex motor tasks, such as in sports. Vibrotactile
feedback devices have been applied in sports, but learning
has generally not been assessed. In general, haptic feedback
has hardly been tested to be more or less effective than other
feedback modalities. There is a need for a more systematic
evaluation of haptic feedback in dependence on the task, the
subject’s current performance, and skill level.
Multimodal feedback is promising
As has been shown in the previous sections, concurrent aug-
mented unimodal visual, auditory, or haptic feedback has been
reported to be able to accelerate complex motor learning.
However, in daily life, multimodal, rather than unimodal,
stimuli are present. Not only are humans used to processing
stimuli in different modalities at the same time, but also
multimodal information even facilitates acting in the world.
For example, seeing a person talking makes understanding
easier, as compared with only hearing the person talking
(Campbell, Dodd, & Burnham, 1998; Munhall, Gribble,
Sacco, & Ward, 1996). Hence, it can be hypothesized that in
motor learning, augmented multimodal feedback is more ef-
ficient than unimodal feedback. In this section, a theoretical
examination for concurrent multimodal feedback in motor
learning is given first. Then studies are reviewed that applied
audiovisual feedback and visuohaptic feedback. To our
knowledge, concurrent augmented audiohaptic, or even
audiovisuohaptic feedback, for motor learning has not been
investigated so far.
Theoretical considerations promoting multimodal feedback
Researchers have suggested that the threshold of neural acti-
vation is reached earlier by multimodal learning than by
unimodal learning (Seitz & Dinse, 2007; Shams & Seitz,
2008). Multimodal stimuli are typically perceived more pre-
cisely and faster than unimodal stimuli (Doyle & Snowden,
2001; Forster, Cavina-Pratesi, Aglioti, & Berlucchi, 2002;
Fort, Delpuech, Pernier, & Giard, 2002; Giard & Peronnet,
1999). This holds true even during active movements (Hecht,
Reiner, & Karni, 2008), an effect commonly described as
sensory enhancement or intersensory facilitation (Carson &
Kelso, 2004). Importantly, it has also been suggested that
multimodal learning strengthens multimodal representations
and the connections between the unimodal areas (Shams &
Seitz, 2008). Researchers have assumed that, after training
with multimodal stimuli, multimodal processing is activated
even if only unimodal stimuli are present (Kim et al., 2008;
Seitz et al., 2006; Shams & Seitz, 2008). In fact, after training
with audiovisual feedback, learning of motion perception
tasks was still enhanced even though auditory feedback was
withdrawn (Kim, Seitz, & Shams, 2008; Seitz, Kim, & Shams,
2006). Moreover, it has been shown that enhanced perfor-
mance with multimodal stimuli does not originate from addi-
tional alerting effects. Evidence for this conclusion is given by
experiments showing that congruent audiovisual feedback
was effective for learning the task, whereas incongruent au-
diovisual feedback was not (Kim et al., 2008). If alerting
effects had existed, both conditions would have led to en-
hanced learning. Related results were presented in brain re-
search. Congruent multimodal stimuli increased cellular
activity in a supra-additive manner, which was greater than
the sum of individual stimuli. This phenomenon is known as
response amplification, which is especially pronounced when
cross-modal stimuli are derived from the same events and
have a spatiotemporal linkage (Carson & Kelso, 2004). In
contrast, incongruent multimodal stimuli led to a subadditive
response (Calvert, Campbell, & Brammer, 2000). These
findings suggest that multimodal learning can be superior to
unimodal learning, due to optimized neural activation and
neural representation.
Many researchers believe that the positive effect of mul-
timodal learning originates from a reduction of the cognitive
load due to a distribution of information processing. For
instance, Burke et al. (2006) has stated that people have
different cognitive resources for information processing,
even though not all can be used simultaneously without
interference. This theory refers to the multiple-resource the-
ory of Wickens (2002), which states that a distribution of
information to different modalities is superior than provid-
ing the same amount of information in one modality. The
multiple-resource theory is in line with Baddeley’s (1992)
theory of working memory; visual-spatial information is
maintained in one area, and auditory-verbal information in
another area of the working memory. Both unimodal pro-
cessors are believed to be controlled by the central execu-
tive, declared to be an attentional-controlling system, but
being largely functionally independent. This allows extend-
ing the working memory by the provision of multimodal
information inputs (Baddeley, 1992). Indeed, users preferred
multimodal to unimodal interaction when complexity of a
task was increased, which indicates that users self-manage
resources of the working memory by shifting from unimodal
to multimodal interaction with increasing cognitive
demands (Oviatt, Coulston, & Lunsford, 2004). All these
findings on memory and cognitive load imply that if
40
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53

----- Page 21 (native) -----
workload is high in one modality, augmented feedback
should be given in another modality or in a multimodal
way. This might prevent cognitive overload and, therefore,
might enhance motor learning.
The human senses differ in their capabilities. Vision is
very precise in the perception of spatial information, where-
as hearing is very precise in the perception of temporal
information (Freides, 1974; Nesbitt, 2003; Welch & Warren,
1980). In particular, sound is effective for perceiving peri-
odicity, regularity, and speed of motion (Kapur, Tzanetakis,
Virji-Babul, Wang, & Cook, 2005; Kramer, 1994; Nesbitt,
2003). The perception of haptics can fulfill relatively high
demands on processing both temporal and spatial informa-
tion (Nesbitt, 2003) and is believed to be the most direct
form of motor information (Lieberman & Breazeal, 2007),
because haptic feedback can mechanically change the
movement by applying forces on the body. Therefore, it is
suggested that augmented information should be displayed
in the appropriate modality (Huang et al., 2005), according
to the modality appropriateness hypothesis (Welch &
Warren, 1980), or in a multimodal way, since imperfect esti-
mations gained by one modality can be improved by more
precise information in another modality (Hecht & Reiner,
2009; van Beers, Sittig, & Gon, 1999). Multimodal integration
is believed to follow a general principle; thus, the nervous
system weights the information available in each modality in
an optimal way (reducing final estimation variance), whereas
attention can influence these weights (Alais & Burr, 2004;
Ernst & Banks, 2002; van Beers et al., 1999). Designs of
augmented multimodal feedback should exploit the
modality-specific advantages. The optimal display modality
or modalities should be chosen in order to gain the most
precise perception, but, thereby, the challenge is to prevent a
dependency on the augmented feedback. Moreover, a possible
trade-off between performance and comfort should be consid-
ered. For instance, moving a pen inside a cyclic path was rated
to be most comfortable with audiovisual alarm-type feedback,
but accuracy was best with tactile or audiovisuotactile feed-
back (Sun, Ren, & Cao, 2011).
The study of Ronsse, Puttemans, et al. (2011) highlights
the importance of choosing the right modality. A visual
group was asked to learn an interlimb out-of-phase coordi-
nation task with Lissajous figures and could not benefit in
terms of learning. For the auditory group, the turning points
of the wrist movement were represented by tones during
training. Their rhythm should have matched a target rhythm
resembling the pattern of a galloping horse, which they
could listen to prior to the training. The auditory group did
learn; thus, they showed correct coordination even in a
retention test. It might be that the auditory group could keep
in mind the target rhythm and move their wrist accordingly,
even without auditory feedback in retention tests (Ronsse,
Puttemans, et al., 2011). Therefore, it might be very
effective to combine movement sonification with either
visual or haptic concurrent feedback for learning move-
ments with complex temporal patterns, such as rowing or
swimming, since the now well-known sonification might be
kept in mind on no-feedback trials.
On the basis of research on learning related to information
processing and motion perception, positive effects of the
provision of information in a multimodal way can be
expected. The question arises as to whether multimodal con-
current feedback also has a positive effect on motor learning.
According to the guidance hypothesis and specificity-of-
learning hypothesis, how multimodal feedback can be used
to calibrate kinesthetic afferent information for later recall—
that is, after training—should be examined. Since few studies
on augmented concurrent multimodal feedback in motor
learning have been published, in the following sections, not
only studies on motor learning, but also studies with multi-
modal feedback on interaction or motor–perception are dis-
cussed. The latter studies did not apply augmented feedback
about a kinematic or kinetic variable of a human movement,
but about a variable of the environment that was relevant for
the task.
Audiovisual feedback enhances perception
A meta-analysis on audiovisual (and visuotactile) feedback
in tasks activities such as alert, warning, interruption, target
acquisition, communication, navigation, and driving or ve-
hicle operation revealed that audiovisual feedback is most
effective in single tasks under normal workload conditions.
In tasks with a high workload, audiovisual feedback is rather
detrimental. In that meta-analysis, it is suggested that the use
of both the auditory and the visual channel increases work-
load because the two modalities are cognitively linked
(Burke et al., 2006). However, in interaction tasks studied
with navigation simulators, the provision of augmented
information in an audiovisual way increased flight perfor-
mance (Bronkhorst, Veltman, & Van Breda, 1996; Tannen,
Nelson, Bolia, Warm, & Dember, 2004) or driving perfor-
mance (Liu, 2001). These findings are in agreement with the
multiple-resource theory described earlier (Wickens, 2002):
Since vision is highly loaded in navigation tasks, a distribu-
tion of augmented information to the visual and auditory
modalities is appropriate. Note that a flight or a drive task
has a high demand on cognition, whereas the motor task is
quite simple (Todorov et al., 1997).
Not only the representation of audiovisual information in
navigation tasks, but also the representation of a movement
in an audiovisual way seems to be superior to visual or
auditory representation only. In the studies reported by
Effenberg (2005), the subjects were asked to estimate the
height of a countermovement jump (Effenberg, 2005). The
countermovement jump was presented visually on a screen
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53
41

----- Page 22 (native) -----
and/or by sonification of the force on the force plate by
loudness and pitch. The audiovisual condition led to the best
estimation of the jump height and to the highest reproduc-
ibility. Besides the sonification, the no-sound-period during
the flying phase of the jump could have facilitated the
estimation, since the pause was directly correlated with the
jump height. In some cases, temporal aspects of a movement
can imply spatial properties of a movement (Liebermann et
al., 2002). However, multimodal information could have
enhanced performance, due to increased precision of per-
ception, neural activity, and neural representation.
For movements with a small number of relevant varia-
bles, such as countermovement jumps, the representation of
a single variable by visual and auditory features at the same
time can increase task performance. For movements with a
high number of relevant variables, providing feedback on
different variables in different modalities might be effective.
Such an approach was applied in a reaching task: Kinematic
variables were each represented in a unimodal way, either
by visual feedback (e.g., on hand orientation) or by sonifi-
cation (e.g., of elbow flexion). Therewith, an engaging,
multimodal feedback design was present that enhanced per-
formance during the reaching task (Chen et al., 2006; Huang
et al., 2005; Wallis et al., 2007).
Regarding the reviewed studies, it is conceivable that
audiovisual concurrent feedback could have positive effects
on motor learning. However, in general, retention tests
without audiovisual feedback have not been done so far
but should be included in future studies in order to assess
the impact of audiovisual feedback on motor learning. A
systematic evaluation of the effectiveness of audiovisual
feedback in motor learning may also complement the theo-
ries on multimodal information processing.
Visuohaptic feedback can be effective for spatiotemporal
learning
Visuohaptic information was used to enhance task realism,
rather than to give augmented feedback. In simple targeting
tasks, visuotactile information decreased error rate, as com-
pared with visual information only (Oakley, McGee, Brewster,
& Gray, 2000). During navigation in a driving simulator,
reaction time and mental effort decreased when visual and
vibrotactile displays were present (Van Erp & Van Veen,
2004). In a simple ball-balancing computer game, subjects
preferred combined haptic and visual feedback to visual feed-
back only; however, performance was not enhanced, due to the
addition of haptic feedback (Swindells, Unden, & Sang, 2003).
Visuotactile displays were reported to be most effective in
various tasks with high workload (Burke et al., 2006).
In particular, learning of temporal aspects can be accelerated
with haptic guidance (Marchal-Crespo, McHughen, Cramer, &
Reinkensmeyer, 2009), which seems also to be true if haptic
guidance is added to visual feedback. In a study on drawing
different shapes, Bluteau et al. (2008) showed that the addition
of haptic to visual concurrent feedback did not further enhance
learning of shape drawing. Instead, movement fluidity was
improved by additional haptic guidance, but only if it was
force controlled and not position controlled (Bluteau et al.,
2008). For visual feedback, the line drawn by the subject was
superimposed on the target figure. Haptic feedback was ap-
plied when the end-effector movement deviated from the target
movement in order to guide the subject back to the target
trajectory. Fluidity and speed were also enhanced for hand-
writing after children had trained with visuohaptic feedback, as
compared with classical handwriting training (Palluel-Germain
et al., 2007). For learning of a 3-D hand movement, haptic
guidance combined with watching the target trajectory was
more effective than unimodal training only. Interestingly, train-
ing with haptic guidance alone enhanced the timing-related
performance, whereas visual training alone facilitated learning
of position and shape (Feygin et al., 2002). In dancing, perfor-
mance was more enhanced while having vibrotactile timing
cues than by video instruction; however, retention was not
tested (Nakamura et al., 2005).
For trajectory learning, the use of visuohaptic displays to
provide augmented information was reported to be benefi-
cial mainly in reducing spatial errors, but not exclusively. In
a small study on a simple arm movement, subjects benefited
slightly more from visuo-vibrotactile feedback than from
visual feedback only and least from vibrotactile feedback
only (Ruffaldi, Filippeschi, et al., 2009). To teach children
handwriting, visuohaptic feedback training was more effective
than visual feedback only (Garcia-Hernandez & Parra-Vega,
2009). In a study on shape drawing, visual and visuohaptic
feedback enhanced learning similarly (Yang et al., 2008).
Haptic guidance combined with visual instruction was even
marginally less effective in teaching a 3-D hand movement
than was visual instruction alone (Liu et al., 2006). Since the
design of visual and haptic feedback can further be explored
and improved, it might be too early to draw strong conclusions
on the effectiveness of visuohaptic feedback. In general, re-
lated studies suggest superiority over unimodal feedback,
especially for training temporal aspects of a movement.
So-called patient-cooperative haptic control strategies
have been successfully applied in combination with visual
feedback in gait rehabilitation. The haptic assist-as-needed
strategy allows patients to control their movements, while
still being provided sufficient guidance and support depend-
ing on the deviation from the target movement (Duschau-
Wicke et al., 2010). Visual feedback incorporated the legs of
an avatar of the patient and a second pair of semitransparent
legs that indicated the target movements. The impact of the
visual feedback and that of the haptic feedback were not
assessed separately. Visuohaptic feedback strategies might
also be applicable to the field of sports. The lack of studies
42
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53

----- Page 23 (native) -----
in this area might originate from the huge technical effort
that is needed to provide augmented haptic feedback for
complex movements in sports.
Conclusions on multimodal feedback
The reviewed studies and related theories reveal that multi-
modal feedback can enhance motor learning. The positive
effects are often explained by a reduction of workload,
which is believed to be beneficial during complex motor
task learning. Relevant information should be provided in
an interpretable way and should not overwhelm the learner
(Guadagnoli & Lee, 2004), which could be achieved by
multimodal feedback designs taking advantage of each mo-
dality. Another benefit of multimodal concurrent feedback
may be its support of learning of several aspects of a
movement simultaneously. For example, augmented visual
feedback could facilitate learning of spatial aspects of the
movement effectively, and at the same time, auditory feed-
back could support learning of temporal aspects. However,
prior to any comparison of multimodal augmented feedback
strategies, feedback designs should be optimized and sys-
tematically evaluated.
General suggestions on future application of augmented
feedback
Earlier studies on simple tasks found that concurrent feedback
is detrimental for motor learning, but more recent studies have
revealed that concurrent feedback can be effective if the motor
task to be learned is complex (Fig. 1). Particularly in the early,
attention-demanding learning phase, concurrent augmented
feedback may help the novice to understand the new structure
of the movement faster and prevent cognitive overload, which
may accelerate the learning process. Concurrent augmented
feedback may also be beneficial for experts, since learning of
specific details of the movement can be complex, when the
expert has to overcome automated but incorrect movement.
Consequently, we suggest that complex motor learning
should start with concurrent feedback in order to facilitate
an understanding of the movement in principle. Thereafter,
it should be switched to lower frequency of concurrent
feedback or to terminal feedback to facilitate automation
of the movement. Self-controlled feedback offers one pos-
sibility for adapting the feedback to the current phase of the
learner. The learner decides by himself/herself when he/she
wants feedback, about what, and how—for example, in
which modality. Besides the self-regulation of feedback
frequency, self-controlled feedback has the advantage that
it highly involves and motivates the learner (Wulf, 2007b)
and may also promote self-efficacy. It might be necessary to
let the learner select feedback within some constraints that
are based on motor learning theories—for example, selec-
tion of movement features that are meaningful for the cur-
rent skill level, a feedback frequency within a specified
range, or a modality or combination of modalities that is
appropriate. Still, selections might not be optimal, because
learners’ self-estimation of their current performance might
be wrong and learners might not have the valuable expertise
of a trainer who knows which actions are needed to make
progress. Thus, the learner might stick at a certain skill level.
A solution to overcoming stagnation in learning is to mon-
itor the learning process and switch the feedback according-
ly. An intelligent virtual trainer feedback system, introduced
by Rauter, Baur, Sigrist, Riener, and Wolf (2010) can switch
feedback modality, feedback variables or movement fea-
tures, and target thresholds in order to provide optimized
and individualized training. With such a system, learners
can always be challenged adequately, which is important for
successful motor learning (Guadagnoli & Lee, 2004).
In order to prevent cognitive overload in a complex
motor task, either augmented feedback may be provided in
a modality that has free capacities, or it may be provided in a
multimodal way. Multimodal feedback can be applied to
exploit the specific advantages of each modality, such as
the aptitude of visualizations to display spatial aspects and
of sound or haptic feedback to display temporal aspects. In
general, it should be started from the relevant variable of the
movement (Spinks & Smith, 1994; Wulf et al., 1998) or
relevant key features (Huegel et al., 2009; Todorov et al.,
1997; Wolpert & Flanagan, 2010). Thereafter, an appropri-
ate modality and augmented feedback design can be select-
ed. It might also be interesting to investigate whether
distinct feedback design in a specific modality can lead to
a faster minimization of cost functions discussed in optimal
motor control theories (Friston, 2011; Todorov, 2004;
Todorov & Jordan, 2002). Thus, in terms of future feedback
strategies, we suggest evaluating feedback designs in each
modality on their interpretability, practicability, and motiva-
tional character first.
This review highlights the importance of a comparison of
the effectiveness of different feedback strategies presented
in different modalities. It also discusses important conse-
quences that can influence the effectiveness of a feedback
strategy. Since an external focus was stated to be more
beneficial than an internal focus for motor learning (Shea
& Wulf, 1999; Wulf, 2007a; Wulf & Shea, 2002; Wulf et al.,
2010), feedback should be given about a variable that can
force an external focus of attention. Moreover, the provision
of feedback about a general variable in early learning phases
and about more specific aspects in later phases is advised
(Chollet et al., 1992). The feedback should not force the
learner to correct task-irrelevant errors (Liu & Todorov,
2007; Todorov, 2004; Todorov & Jordan, 2002; Wei &
Körding, 2009; Wolpert et al., 2011). The mapping function
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53
43

----- Page 24 (native) -----
of the feedback should be carefully treated, since a change
in perceptual information can alter motor control (Fernandez
& Bootsma, 2008; Kovacs, Buchanan, & Shea, 2008). It
should be examined whether visual, auditory, and haptic
feedback induce a similar dependency, whereby measuring
brain activation in different feedback conditions (e.g., Carel
et al., 2000; Mima et al., 1999; Weiller et al., 1996), as
compared with no-feedback conditions (e.g., Debaere,
Wenderoth, Sunaert, Van Hecke, & Swinnen, 2003,
2004) can lead to fundamental insights. Accordingly, it
should be explored how this dependency can be mini-
mized, without losing the information that is relevant to
calibrating the movement (Robin et al., 2005). In some
cases, it can be effective in conveying an effective
cognitive strategy to the learners to simplify motor
control (Carson & Kelso, 2004), which may be achieved
by mediating a metaphor for their pattern of action in a
prescriptive way (Schmidt & Wrisberg, 2008). Recently,
Krakauer and Mazzoni (2011) suggested that an explicit
strategy may help to solve the task, or explicit cognitive
processes could enhance implicit processes. Accordingly,
augmented feedback might be very effective if it pro-
vides information (explicitly) that mediates the relevant
aspects of the movement implicitly to best enhance
performance in no-feedback conditions.
General conclusions
To date, general conclusions on the efficiency of concurrent
feedback cannot be drawn, due to the following main rea-
sons. First, a large diversity of movements have been inves-
tigated so far, but a systematic evaluation within movement
classes is lacking. Within movement classes, it might be
possible to transfer gained knowledge about effectiveness
of a certain augmented feedback strategy in the future.
Second, a systematic comparison of concurrent feedback
with other feedback strategies, such as terminal feedback,
is often missing but is necessary to find the best strategy.
Third, feedback designs within a modality should be evalu-
ated prior to a comparison with feedback displayed in other
modalities. Conclusions such as “visual feedback is more
effective than auditory feedback” are weak if the auditory
feedback is not well designed. Fourth, this review shows
that research on multimodal feedback in complex motor
learning is still in its early phases, since not many studies
have been reported.
Up to now, mostly low-dimensional, simple, and rather
artificial labor tasks have been investigated even though, in
real life, most motor tasks are multidimensional and com-
plex (Winstein, 1991; Wulf & Shea, 2002). It is questionable
how many of the insights gained from laboratory task can be
transferred to other tasks (Krakauer & Mazzoni, 2011) and
whether the results gained from motor control studies are
also true for complex learning with augmented feedback.
The low number of studies in real-world tasks might be
explained by the huge (technical) effort that is needed to
cope with the given complexity (Wolpert et al., 2011),
especially to provide haptic feedback. However, simulators
in virtual environments can facilitate research about aug-
mented unimodal and multimodal feedback in motor learn-
ing in sports and rehabilitation (Holden, 2005). Simulators
in virtual environments, with their displays providing unim-
odal and multimodal concurrent and terminal feedback,
enable investigation in a safe, modifiable, and realistic en-
vironment. Task complexity, feedback designs, feedback
variables, and modalities can be manipulated in order to
optimally challenge the learner, a main factor for accelerat-
ing motor learning (Guadagnoli & Lee, 2004). An optimized
combination of simulator training with augmented feedback
and real training may be very effective (Todorov et al.,
1997) and might be the key for a successful inclusion of
simulator training in different sports, such as that suggested
for rowing (Smith & Loschner, 2002; Ruffaldi et al., 2011;
Sigrist, Rauter, et al., 2011) and skiing (Kirby, 2009). As has
been highlighted recently, there is a strong need to more
carefully validate the effectiveness of (sports) simulator
training—that is, the transferability of the trained skills to
the real world (Miles, Pop, Watt, Lawrence, & John, 2012;
Ruffaldi et al., 2011).
Acknowledgments
Many thanks go to James Sulzer for proofread-
ing the manuscript, to Laura Marchal-Crespo and Olivier Lambercy for
the valuable inputs about haptic feedback strategies, and to Prof.
Nicole Wenderoth for enriching comments.
References
Alais, D., & Burr, D. (2004). The ventriloquist effect results from near-
optimal bimodal integration. Current Biology, 14(3), 257–262.
Amirabdollahian, F., Loureiro, R., & Harwin, W. (2002). Minimum
jerk trajectory control for rehabilitation and haptic applications. In
Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE International Conferene on Robot-
ics & Automation (Vol. 4, pp. 3380–3385). IEEE.
Anderson, R., Harrison, A., & Lyons, G. M. (2005). Rowing:
Accelerometry-based feedback – can it improve movement con-
sistency and performance in rowing? Sports Biomechanics, 4(2),
179–195.
Ayres, A. J. (2005). Sensory integration and the child. Western
Psychological Services.
Baddeley, A. D. (1992). Working memory. Science, 255, 556–559.
Bark, K., Khanna, P., Irwin, R., Kapur, P., Jax, S. A., Buxbaum, L. J.,
& Kuchenbecker, K. J. (2011). Lessons in using vibrotactile
feedback to guide fast arm motions. In IEEE World Haptics
Conference 2011 (pp. 355–360.
Barrass, S. (2005). A perceptual framework for the auditory display of
scientific data. ACM Transactions on Applied Perception (TAP), 2
(4), 389–402.
44
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53

----- Page 25 (native) -----
Batavia, M., Gianutsos, J. G., Vaccaro, A., & Gold, J. T. (2001). A do-
it-yourself membrane-activated auditory feedback device for
weight bearing and gait training: A case report. Archives of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 82(4), 541–545.
Baudry, L., Leroy, D., Thouvarecq, R., & Chollet, D. (2006). Auditory
concurrent feedback benefits on the circle performed in gymnastics.
Journal of Sports Sciences, 24(2), 149–156.
Bergman, A. (1994). Auditory scene analysis. MIT Press.
Bernier, P. M., Chua, R., & Franks, I. M. (2005). Is proprioception
calibrated during visually guided movements? Experimental
Brain Research, 167(2), 292–296.
Blandin, Y., Toussaint, L., & Shea, C. H. (2008). Specificity of practice:
Interaction between concurrent sensory information and terminal
feedback. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 34(4), 994–1000.
Blaya, J. A., & Herr, H. (2004). Adaptive control of a variable-
impedance ankle-foot orthosis to assist drop-foot gait. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering,
12(1), 24–31.
Bluteau, J., Coquillart, S., Payan, Y., & Gentaz, E. (2008). Haptic
guidance improves the visuo-manual tracking of trajectories.
PLoS One, 3(3), e1775.
Bonebright, T., Miner, N., Goldsmith, T., & Caudell, T. (2005). Data
collection and analysis techniques for evaluating the perceptual
qualities of auditory stimuli. ACM Transactions on Applied
Perception (TAP), 2(4), 505–516.
Boyles, J., Panzer, S., & Shea, C. H. (2012). Increasingly complex
bimanual multi-frequency coordination patterns are equally easy
to perform with on-line relative velocity feedback. Experimental
Brain Research, 216(4), 515–525.
Braun, D. A., Mehring, C., & Wolpert, D. M. (2010). Structure learning in
action. Behavioural Brain Research, 206(2), 157–165.
Brickman, B. J., Hettinger, L. J., Roe, M. M., Lu, L., Repperger, D. W.,
& Haas, M. W. (1996). Haptic specification of environmental
events: Implications for the design of adaptive, virtual interfaces.
In Proceedings of the IEEE 1996 Virtual Reality Annual Interna-
tional Symposium, 1996 (pp. 147–153).
Bronkhorst, A. W., Veltman, J. A., & Van Breda, L. (1996). Applica-
tion of a three-dimensional auditory display in a flight task.
Human Factors, 38(1), 23–33.
Brown, L. M., Brewster, S. A., Ramloll, S. A., Burton, R., & Riedel, B.
(2003). Design guidelines for audio presentation of graphs and
tables. In Proceedings of the 2003 International Conference on
Auditory Display.
Burke, J. L., Prewett, M. S., Gray, A. A., Yang, L., Stilson, F. R. B.,
Coovert, M. D., . . . Redden, E. (2006). Comparing the effects of
visual-auditory and visual-tactile feedback on user performance:
A meta-analysis. In Proceedings of the 8th international confer-
ence on Multimodal interfaces (pp. 108–117). New York, NY,
USA: ACM.
Calvert, G. A., Campbell, R., & Brammer, M. J. (2000). Evidence from
functional magnetic resonance imaging of crossmodal binding in
the human heteromodal cortex. Current Biology, 10(11), 649–
657.
Camachon, C., Jacobs, D. M., Huet, M., Buekers, M., & Montagne, G.
(2007). The role of concurrent feedback in learning to walk
through sliding doors. Ecological Psychology, 19(4), 367–382.
Campbell, R., Dodd, B., & Burnham, D. K. (1998). Hearing by eye II:
Advances in the psychology of speechreading and auditory-visual
speech. Psychology Press.
Carel, C., Loubinoux, I., Boulanouar, K., Manelfe, C., Rascol, O.,
Celsis, P., & Chollet, F. (2000). Neural substrate for the effects
of passive training on sensorimotor cortical representation: A
study with functional magnetic resonance imaging in healthy
subjects. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, 20
(3), 478–484.
Carraro, G. U., Cortes, M., Edmark, J. T., & Ensor, J. R. (1998). The
peloton bicycling simulator. In Proceedings of the third symposium
on Virtual reality modeling language (pp. 63–70). ACM New York,
NY, USA.
Carson, R. G., & Kelso, J. A. S. (2004). Governing coordination:
Behavioural principles and neural correlates. Experimental Brain
Research, 154(3), 267–274.
Cesqui, B., Aliboni, S., Mazzoleni, S., Carrozza, M., Posteraro, F., &
Micera, S. (2008). On the use of divergent force fields in robot-
mediated neurorehabilitation. In 2nd IEEE RAS EMBS Interna-
tional Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics,
2008. BioRob 2008 (pp. 854–861). IEEE.
Chang, J. Y., Chang, G. L., Chien, C. J. C., Chung, K. C., & Hsu, A. T.
(2007). Effectiveness of two forms of feedback on training of a
joint mobilization skill by using a joint translation simulator.
Physical Therapy, 87(4), 418–430.
Chen, X., & Agrawal, S. (2012). Assisting versus repelling force-
feedback for human learning of a line following task. In 4th IEEE
RAS EMBS International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and
Biomechatronics (BioRob), 2012 (pp. 344–349), Rome, Italy.
IEEE.
Chen, Y., Huang, H., Xu, W., Wallis, R. I., Sundaram, H., Rikakis, T., .
. . He, J. (2006). The design of a real-time, multimodal biofeed-
back system for stroke patient rehabilitation. In Proceedings of the
14th annual ACM International Conference on Multimedia (pp.
763–772).
Chen, X., Ragonesi, C., Agrawal, S., & Galloway, J. (2010). Training
toddlers seated on mobile robots to drive indoors amidst
obstacles. In 3rd IEEE RAS and EMBS International Conference
on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics (BioRob), 2010
(pp. 576–581). IEEE.
Chiviacowsky, S., & Wulf, G. (2002). Self-controlled feedback: Does
it enhance learning because performers get feedback when they
need it? Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 73(4), 408–
415.
Chiviacowsky, S., & Wulf, G. (2005). Self-controlled feedback is
effective if it is based on the learner’s performance. Research
Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 76(1), 42–48.
Chiviacowsky, S., & Wulf, G. (2007). Feedback after good trials
enhances learning. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport,
78, 40–47.
Chollet, D., Madani, M., & Micallef, J. P. (1992). Biomechanics and
medicine in swimming, chapter Effects of two types of biome-
chanical bio-feedback on crawl performance (pp. 57–62). Lon-
don: E & FN Spon.
Chollet, D., Micallef, J. P., & Rabischong, P. (1988). Swimming Sci-
ence V, chapter Biomechanical signals for external biofeedback to
improve swimming techniques (pp. 389–396). Champaign, Illi-
nois: Human Kinetics Books.
Chua, P., Crivella, R., Daly, B., Hu, N., Schaaf, R., Ventura, D., . . .
Pausch, R. (2003). Training for physical tasks in virtual environ-
ments: Tai chi. In Virtual Reality Conference, IEEE (pp. 87–94).
Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE Computer Society.
Clarkson, P. M., Robert, J., Watkins, A., & Foley, P. (1986). The effect
of augmented feedback on foot pronation during barre exercise in
dance. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 57(1), 33–40.
Conditt, M., Gandolfo, F., & Mussa-Ivaldi, F. (1997). The motor
system does not learn the dynamics of the arm by rote memori-
zation of past experience. Journal of Neurophysiology, 78(1), 554.
Criscimagna-Hemminger, S., Donchin, O., Gazzaniga, M., &
Shadmehr, R. (2003). Learned dynamics of reaching movements
generalize from dominant to nondominant arm. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 89(1), 168.
Crowell, H. P., & Davis, I. S. (2011). Gait retraining to reduce lower
extremity loading in runners. Clinical Biomechanics, 26(2), 78–
83.
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53
45

----- Page 26 (native) -----
David, N., Bewernick, B. H., Cohen, M. X., Newen, A., Lux, S., Fink,
G. R., Shah, N. J., Vogeley, K. (2006). Neural representations of
self versus other: Visual-spatial perspective taking and agency in a
virtual ball-tossing game. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18
(6), 898–910.
Debaere, F., Wenderoth, N., Sunaert, S., Van Hecke, P., & Swinnen, S.
P. (2003). Internal vs external generation of movements: Differ-
ential neural pathways involved in bimanual coordination per-
formed in the presence or absence of augmented visual
feedback. Neuropsychologia, 19(3), 764–776.
Debaere, F., Wenderoth, N., Sunaert, S., Van Hecke, P., & Swinnen, S.
P. (2004). Changes in brain activation during the acquisition of a
new bimanual coordination task. Neuropsychologia, 42(7), 855–
867.
Doyle, M. C., & Snowden, R. J. (2001). Identification of visual stimuli
is improved by accompanying auditory stimuli: The role of eye
movements and sound location. Perception, 30(7), 795–810.
Drobny, D., & Borchers, J. (2010). Learning basic dance choreographies
with different augmented feedback modalities. In Proceedings of the
28th of the international conference extended abstracts on Human
factors in computing systems (pp. 3793–3798). ACM.
Drobny, D., Weiss, M., & Borchers, J. (2009). Saltate!: A sensor-based
system to support dance beginners. In Proceedings of the 27th
international conference extended abstracts on Human factors in
computing systems (pp. 3943–3948). ACM.
Dubus, G. (2012). Evaluation of four models for the sonification of
elite rowing. Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces, 1–14.
Dürrer, B. (2001). Investigations into the design of auditory displays.
PhD thesis, University of Bochum.
Duschau-Wicke, A., von Zitzewitz, J., Caprez, A., Lunenburger, L., &
Riener, R. (2010). Path control: A method for patient-cooperative
robot-aided gait rehabilitation. IEEE Transactions on Neural
Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, 18(1), 38–48.
Eaves, D. L., Breslin, G., van Schaik, P., Robinson, E., & Spears, I. R.
(2011). The short-term effects of real-time virtual reality feedback
on motor learning in dance. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments, 20(1), 62–77.
Effenberg, A. O. (2000a). Medien im Sport - zwischen Phänomen und
Virtualität, chapter Der bewegungsdefinierte Sound: Ein akus-
tisches Medium für die Darstellung, Vermittlung und Exploration
motorischer Prozesse (pp. 67–76). Schorndorf.
Effenberg, A. O. (2000b). Zum Potential komplexer akustischer Bewe-
gungsinformationen für die Technikansteuerung. Leistungssport,
5, 19–25.
Effenberg, A. O. (2005). Movement sonification: Effects on perception
and action. IEEE Multimedia, 12(2), 53–59.
Effenberg, A., & Mechling, H. (1999). Zur Funktion audiomotorischer
Verhaltenskomponenten. Sportwissenschaft, 29, 200–215.
Effenberg, A. O., & Mechling, H. (1998). Bewegung hörbar machen
— Warum? Zur Perspektive einer systematischen Umsetzung von
Bewegung in Klänge. Psychologie und Sport, 5(1), 28–38.
Eldridge, A. (2006). Issues in auditory display. Artificial Life, 12(2),
259–274.
Emken, J. L., Benitez, R., & Reinkensmeyer, D. J. (2007). Human-
robot cooperative movement training: Learning a novel sensory
motor transformation during walking with robotic assistance-as-
needed. Journal of Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation, 4(1), 8.
Emken, J., & Reinkensmeyer, D. (2005). Robot-enhanced motor learning:
Accelerating internal model formation during locomotion by tran-
sient dynamic amplification. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems
and Rehabilitation Engineering, 13(1), 33–39.
Endo, T., Kawasaki, H., Kigaku, K., & Mouri, T. (2007). Transfer
method of force information using five-fingered haptic interface
robot. In EuroHaptics Conference, 2007 and Symposium on Haptic
Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems. World
Haptics 2007. Second Joint (pp. 599–600). IEEE.
Eriksson, M., & Bresin, R. (2010). Improving running mechanics by
use of interactive sonification. In Proceedings of ISon 2010, 3rd
Interactive Sonification Workshop (pp. 95–98). Stockholm,
Sweden.
Eriksson, M., Halvorsen, K., & Gullstrand, L. (2011). Immediate effect
of visual and auditory feedback to control the running mechanics
of well-trained athletes. Journal of Sports Sciences, 29(3), 253–
262.
Erni, T., & Dietz, V. (2001). Obstacle avoidance during human
walking: Learning rate and cross-modal transfer. The Journal
of Physiology, 534(1), 303.
Ernst, M. O., & Banks, M. S. (2002). Humans integrate visual and
haptic information in a statistically optimal fashion. Nature, 415
(6870), 429–433.
Fernandez, L., & Bootsma, R. J. (2008). Non-linear gaining in preci-
sion aiming: Making fitts’ task a bit easier. Acta Psychologica,
129(2), 217–227.
Fernery, V. G., Moretto, P. G., Hespel, J. M. G., Thevenon, A., &
Lensel, G. (2004). A real-time plantar pressure feedback
device for foot unloading. Archives of Physical Medicine
and Rehabilitation, 85(10), 1724–1728.
Feygin, D., Keehner, M., & Tendick, R. (2002). Haptic guidance:
Experimental evaluation of a haptic training method for a percep-
tual motor skill. In Proceedings of the 10th Symposium on Haptic
Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems (pp.
40–47), Orlando, FL, USA.
Fitts, P. M., & Posner, M. I. (1967). Human performance. Brooks/Cole
Publishing Co.
Flash, T., & Gurevich, I. (1991). Human motor adaptation to external
loads (Vol. 13).
Flash, T., & Hogan, N. (1985). The coordination of arm movements:
An experimentally confirmed mathematical model. Journal of
Neuroscience, 5, 1688–1703.
Flowers, J. H. (2005). Thirteen years of reflection on auditory
graphing: Promises, pitfalls, and potential new directions. In
First International Symposium on Auditory Graphs (AGS2005)
(pp. 1–5).
Forster, B., Cavina-Pratesi, C., Aglioti, S. M., & Berlucchi, G. (2002).
Redundant target effect and intersensory facilitation from visual-
tactile interactions in simple reaction time. Experimental Brain
Research, 143(4), 480–487.
Fort, A., Delpuech, C., Pernier, J., & Giard, M. H. (2002). Dynamics of
cortico-subcortical cross-modal operations involved in audio-
visual object detection in humans. Cerebral Cortex, 12(10),
1031–1039.
Fothergill, S. (2010). Examining the effect of real-time visual feedback
on the quality of rowing technique. In Procedia Engineering (Vol.
2, pp. 3083–3088). Elsevier.
Fox, J., & Carlile, J. (2005). SoniMime: Movement sonification for
real-time timbre shaping. In Proceedings of the 2005 Conference
on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (pp. 242–243).
Singapore: National University of Singapore.
Freides, D. (1974). Human information processing and sensory mo-
dality: Cross-modal functions, information complexity, memory,
and deficit. Psychological Bulletin, 81(5), 284–310.
Frisoli, A., Ruffaldi, E., Bagnoli, L., Filippeschi, A., Avizzano, C. A.,
Vanni, F., & Bergamasco, M. (2008). Preliminary design of rowing
simulator for in-door skill training. In Proceedings of the 2008
Ambi-Sys Workshop on Haptic User Interfaces in Ambient Media
Systems (pp. 1–8). Quebec City, Canada: ICST Institute for Com-
puter Sciences, Social-Informatics and Telecommunications
Engineering.
Friston, K. (2011). What is optimal about motor control? Neuron, 72
(3), 488–498.
Garcia-Hernandez, N., & Parra-Vega, V. (2009). Active and efficient
motor skill learning method used in a haptic teleoperated system.
46
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53

----- Page 27 (native) -----
In The 18th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human
Interactive Communication, 2009. RO-MAN 2009 (pp. 915–920).
IEEE.
Gauthier, G. (1985). Visually and acoustically augmented performance
feedback as an aid in motor control learning: A study of selected
components of the rowing action. Journal of Sports Sciences, 3
(1), 3–26.
Ghez, C., Rikakis, T., DuBois, R., & Cook, P. (2000). An auditory
display system for aiding interjoint coordination. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Auditory Displays, Atlanta,
Georgia.
Giard, M. H., & Peronnet, F. (1999). Auditory-visual integration
during multimodal object recognition in humans: A behavioral and
electrophysiological study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 11
(5), 473–490.
Giese, M. A., & Poggio, T. (2003). Neural mechanisms for the
recognition of biological movements. Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
4(3), 179–192.
Gillespie, R., O’Modhrain, M., Tang, P., Zaretzky, D., & Pham, C.
(1998). The virtual teacher. In Proceedings of the ASME Dynamic
Systems and Control Division (Vol. 64, pp. 171–178).
Göbel, S., Geiger, C., Heinze, C., & Marinos, D. (2010). Creating a
virtual archery experience. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces (pp. 337–340), Rome,
Italy. ACM.
Godbout, A., & Boyd, J. (2010). Corrective sonic feedback for speed
skating: A case study. In Proceedings of the 16th International
Conference on Auditory Display.
Goodbody, S., & Wolpert, D. (1998). Temporal and amplitude
generalization in motor learning. Journal of Neurophysiology,
79(4), 1825.
Grey, J. M. (1975). An Exploration of Musical Timbre. PhD thesis,
CCRMA Dept. of Music, Stanford University.
Grond, F., Hermann, T., Verfaille, V., & Wanderley, M. (2010). Gesture
in embodied communication and human computer interaction,
LNAI 5934, chapter Methods for Effective Sonification of Clari-
netists’ Ancillary Gestures (pp. 171–181). Springer.
Guadagnoli, M., & Kohl, R. (2001). Knowledge of results for motor
learning: Relationship between error estimation and knowledge of
results frequency. Journal of Motor Behavior, 33(2), 217–224.
Guadagnoli, M. A., & Lee, T. D. (2004). Challenge point: A
framework for conceptualizing the effects of various practice
conditions in motor learning. Journal of Motor Behavior, 36
(2), 212–224.
Hale, K., & Stanney, K. (2004). Deriving haptic design guidelines from
human physiological, psychophysical, and neurological founda-
tions. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 24(2), 39.
Han, D.-W., & Shea, C. H. (2008). Auditory model: Effects on learning
under blocked and random practice schedules. Research Quarterly
for Exercise and Sport, 79(4), 476–486.
Haruno, M., Wolpert, D., & Kawato, M. (2001). Mosaic model for
sensorimotor learning and control. Neural Computation, 13(10),
2201–2220.
Hecht, D., & Reiner, M. (2009). Sensory dominance in combinations
of audio, visual and haptic stimuli. Experimental Brain Research,
193(2), 307–314.
Hecht, D., Reiner, M., & Karni, A. (2008). Enhancement of response
times to bi-and tri-modal sensory stimuli during active move-
ments. Experimental Brain Research, 185(4), 655–665.
Helmer, R., Farrow, D., Ball, K., Phillips, E., Farouil, A., & Blanchonette,
I. (2011). A pilot evaluation of an electronic textile for lower limb
monitoring and interactive biofeedback. Procedia Engineering, 13,
513–518.
Helmer, R., Farrow, D., Lucas, S., Higgerson, G., & Blanchonette, I.
(2010). Can interactive textiles influence a novice’s throwing
technique? Procedia Engineering, 2(2), 2985–2990.
Hermann, T., Honer, O., & Ritter, H. (2006). Acoumotion-an interac-
tive sonification system for acoustic motion control. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, 3881, 312–323.
Hermann, T., & Hunt, A. (2005). Guest editors’ introduction: An intro-
duction to interactive sonification. IEEE Multimedia, 12(2), 20–24.
Heuer, H., & Hegele, M. (2008). Constraints on visuo-motor
adaptation depend on the type of visual feedback during
practice. Experimental Brain Research, 185(1), 101–110.
Hidler, J., Nichols, D., Pelliccio, M., Brady, K., Campbell, D. D.,
Kahn, J. H., & Hornby, T. G. (2009). Multicenter randomized
clinical trial evaluating the effectiveness of the lokomat in subacute
stroke. Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair, 23(1), 5.
Hinder, M. R., Tresilian, J. R., Riek, S., & Carson, R. G. (2008). The
contribution of visual feedback to visuomotor adaptation: How
much and when? Brain Research, 1197, 123–134.
Hinterberger, T., & Baier, G. (2005). Parametric orchestral sonification
of eeg in real time. IEEE Multimedia, 12(2), 70–79.
Ho, C., Basdogan, C., Slater, M., Durlach, N., & Srinivasan, M.
(1998). An experiment on the influence of haptic communication
on the sense of being together. In BT Presence Workshop.
Citeseer.
Hogan, N. (1985). Impedance control: An approach to manipulation:
Part III—Applications. Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measure-
ment, and Control, 107, 17–24.
Holden, M. K. (2005). Virtual environments for motor rehabilitation:
Review. Cyberpsychology & Behavior, 8, 187–211.
Holden, M. K., & Dyar, T. (2002). Virtual environment training: A new
tool for neurorehabilitation. Journal of Neurologic Physical Therapy,
26(2), 62–71.
Holden, M., Todorov, E., Callahan, J., & Bizzi, E. (1999). Virtual
environment training improves motor performance in two patients
with stroke: Case report. Journal of Neurologic Physical Therapy,
23(2), 57–67.
Hornby, T. G., Campbell, D. D., Kahn, J. H., Demott, T., Moore, J. L.,
& Roth, H. R. (2008). Enhanced gait-related improvements after
therapist-versus robotic-assisted locomotor training in subjects
with chronic stroke: A randomized controlled study. Stroke; A
Journal of Cerebral Circulation, 39(6), 1786–1792.
Höver, R., Kósa, G., Székely, G., & Harders, M. (2009). Data-driven
haptic rendering—from viscous fluids to visco-elastic solids.
IEEE Transactions on Haptics, 2(1), 15–27.
Huang, H., Ingalls, T., Olson, L., Ganley, K., Rikakis, T., & He, J.
(2005). Interactive multimodal biofeedback for task-oriented
neural rehabilitation. In 27th Annual International Conference
of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2005.
IEEE-EMBS 2005 (pp. 2547–2550), Shanghai.
Huang, H., Wolf, S. L., & He, J. (2006). Recent developments in
biofeedback for neuromotor rehabilitation. Journal of Neuroen-
gineering and Rehabilitation, 3(1), 1–12.
Huegel, J. C., Celik, O., Israr, A., & O’Malley, M. K. (2009).
Expertise-based performance measures in a virtual training
environment. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments,
18(6), 449–467.
Huegel, J., & O’Malley, M. K. (2010). Progressive haptic and visual
guidance for training in a virtual dynamic task. In Haptics Sym-
posium, 2010 IEEE (pp. 343–350). IEEE.
Huet, M., Camachon, C., Fernandez, L., Jacobs, D. M., & Montagne,
G. (2009). Self-controlled concurrent feedback and the education
of attention towards perceptual invariants. Human Movement
Science, 28(4), 450–467.
Hummel, J., Hermann, T., Frauenberger, C., & Stockman, T. (2010).
Interactive sonification of german wheel sports movement. In
Proceedings of ISon 2010, 3rd Interactive Sonification Workshop.
Hurley, S. R., & Lee, T. D. (2006). The influence of augmented
feedback and prior learning on the acquisition of a new bimanual
coordination pattern. Human Movement Science, 25(3), 339–348.
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53
47

----- Page 28 (native) -----
Husemann, B., Muller, F., Krewer, C., Heller, S., & Koenig, E. (2007).
Effects of locomotion training with assistance of a robot-driven
gait orthosis in hemiparetic patients after stroke: A randomized
controlled pilot study. Stroke; A Journal of Cerebral Circulation,
38(2), 349–354.
Israel, J., Campbell, D., Kahn, J., & Hornby, T. (2006). Metabolic costs
and muscle activity patterns during robotic-and therapist-assisted
treadmill walking in individuals with incomplete spinal cord
injury. Physical Therapy, 86(11), 1466–1478.
Janelle, C. M., Barba, D. A., Frehlich, S. G., Tennant, L. K., &
Cauraugh, H. (1997). Maximizing performance feedback
effectiveness through videotape replay and a self-controlled
learning environment. Research Quarterly for Exercise and
Sport, 68(4), 269–279.
Janelle, C. M., Kim, J., & Singer, R. N. (1995). Subject-controlled
performance feedback and learning of a closed motor skill.
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 81(2), 627–634.
Jansen, C., Oving, A., & Van Veen, H. (2004). Vibrotactile movement
initiation. In Proceedings of Eurohaptics (pp. 110–117).
Judkins, T., Oleynikov, D., & Stergiou, N. (2006). Real-time augmented
feedback benefits robotic laparoscopic training. Studies in Health
Technology and Informatics, 119, 243.
Kapur, A., Tzanetakis, G., Virji-Babul, N., Wang, G., & Cook, P. R.
(2005). A framework for sonification of vicon motion capture
data. In Proceedings of the 8th Conference on Digital Audio
Effects, Madrid, Spain.
Kelly, A., & Hubbard, M. (2000). Design and construction of a bobsled
driver training simulator. Sports Engineering, 3(1), 13–24.
Khatib, O. (1986). Real-time obstacle avoidance for manipulators and
mobile robots. International Journal of Robotics Research, 5(1), 90.
Kim, R. S., Seitz, A. R., & Shams, L. (2008). Benefits of stimulus
congruency for multisensory facilitation of visual learning. PLoS
One, 3(1), e1532.
Kirby, R. (2009). Development of a real-time performance measure-
ment and feedback system for alpine skiers. Sports Technology, 2
(1–2), 43–52.
Kleimann-Weiner, J., & Berger, J. (2006). The sound of one arm
swinging: A model for multidimensional auditory display of
physical motion. In Proceedings of the 12th International
Conference on Auditory Display. ICAD (pp. 278–280).
Kockler, H., Scheef, L., Tepest, R., David, N., Bewernick, B. H.,
Newen, A., Schild H. H., May, M., Vogeley, K. (2010). Visuo-
spatial perspective taking in a dynamic environment: Perceiving
moving objects from a first-person-perspective induces a disposi-
tion to act. Consciousness and Cognition, 19(3), 690–701.
Kolb, B. (1995). Brain plasticity and behavior. Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Konttinen, N., Mononen, K., Viitasalo, J., & Mets, T. (2004). The
effects of augmented auditory feedback on psychomotor skill
learning in precision shooting. Journal of Sport & Exercise
Psychology, 26(2), 306–316.
Koritnik, T., Bajd, T., & Munih, M. (2008). Virtual environment for
lower-extremities training. Gait & Posture, 27(2), 323–330.
Koritnik, T., Koenig, A., Bajd, T., Riener, R., & Munih, M. (2010).
Comparison of visual and haptic feedback during training of
lower extremities. Gait & Posture.
Kotranza, A., Lind, D., Pugh, C., & Lok, B. (2009). Real-time in-situ
visual feedback of task performance in mixed environments for
learning joint psychomotor-cognitive tasks. In Proceedings of the
2009 8th IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augment-
ed Reality (pp. 125–134). IEEE Computer Society.
Kousidou, S., Tsagarakis, N. G., Smith, C., & Caldwell, D. G. (2007).
Task-orientated biofeedback system for the rehabilitation of
the upper limb. In IEEE 10th International Conference on
Rehabilitation Robotics, ICORR (pp. 376–384). Noordwijk,
Netherlands.
Kovacs, A. J., Boyle, J., Grutmatcher, N., & Shea, C. H. (2010).
Coding of on-line and pre-planned movement sequences. Acta
Psychologica, 133(2), 119–126.
Kovacs, A., Buchanan, J., & Shea, C. (2008). Perceptual influences on
fitts’ law. Experimental Brain Research, 190(1), 99–103.
Kovacs, A. J., & Shea, C. H. (2011). The learning of 90° continuous
relative phase with and without lissajous feedback: External and
internally generated bimanual coordination. Acta Psychologica,
136(3), 311–320.
Krakauer, J., & Mazzoni, P. (2011). Human sensorimotor learning:
Adaptation, skill, and beyond. Current Opinion in Neurobiology,
21(4), 636–644.
Kramer, G. (1994). Auditory display: Sonification, audification, and
auditory interfaces. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. An introduc-
tion to auditory display.
Krebs, H. I., Palazzolo, J. J., Dipietro, L., Ferraro, M., Krol, J.,
Rannekleiv, K., Volpe, B. T., Hogan, N. (2003). Rehabilitation
robotics: Performance-based progressive robot-assisted therapy. Au-
tonomous Robots, 15(1), 7–20.
Kruber, D. (1984). Untersuchung zur visuellen Gestaltung von Arbeitskarten
im Sport. In R. Daugs (Ed.), 1. Berliner Workshop Medien im Sport:
Visualisation sensomotorischer Lehrmedien (pp. 67–79). Berlin,
Germany: Akademieschrift der FVA des DSB.
Lai, Q., Shea, C., & Little, M. (2000). Effects of modeled auditory
information on a sequential timing task. Research Quarterly for
Exercise and Sport, 71(4), 349.
Lambercy, O., Dovat, L., Gassert, R., Burdet, E., Teo, C., & Milner, T.
(2007). A haptic knob for rehabilitation of hand function. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering,
15(3), 356–366.
Lambercy, O., Dovat, L., Yun, H., Wee, S., Kuah, C., Chua, K.,
Gassert, R., Milner, T., Teo, C., Burdet, E. (2011). Effects of a
robot-assisted training of grasp and pronation/supination in
chronic stroke: A pilot study. Journal of Neuroengineering
and Rehabilitation, 8(63), 1–11.
Lee, J., & Choi, S. (2010). Effects of haptic guidance and disturbance
on motor learning: Potential advantage of haptic disturbance. In
Haptics Symposium, 2010 IEEE (pp. 335–342). IEEE.
Lee, M., Moseley, A., & Refshauge, K. (1990). Effect offeedback on learning
a vertebral joint mobilization skill. Physical Therapy, 70(2), 97–102.
Lee, T., Swinnen, S., & Verschueren, S. (1995). Relative phase
alterations during bimanual skill acquisition. Journal of Motor
Behavior, 27(3), 263–274.
Lewiston, C. (2009). MaGKeyS: A haptic guidance keyboard system
for facilitating sensorimotor training and rehabilitation. PhD
thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Li, Y., Patoglu, V., & O’Malley, M. (2009). Negative efficacy of fixed gain
error reducing shared control for training in virtual environments.
ACM Transactions on Applied Perception (TAP), 6(1), 1–21.
Lieberman, J., & Breazeal, C. (2007). TIKL: Development of a
wearable vibrotactile feedback suit for improved human motor
learning. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 23, 919–926.
Liebermann, D. G., Katz, L., Hughes, M. D., Bartlett, R. M., McClements,
J., & Franks, I. M. (2002). Advances in the application of information
technology to sport performance. Journal of Sports Sciences, 20(10),
755–769.
Liu, Y. C. (2001). Comparative study of the effects of auditory, visual
and multimodality displays on drivers performance in advanced
traveller information systems. Ergonomics, 44(4), 425–442.
Liu, J., Cramer, S., & Reinkensmeyer, D. (2006). Learning to perform
a new movement with robotic assistance: Comparison of haptic
guidance and visual demonstration. Journal of Neuroengineering
and Rehabilitation, 3(1), 20.
Liu, D., & Todorov, E. (2007). Evidence for the flexible sensorimotor
strategies predicted by optimal feedback control. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 27(35), 9354–9368.
48
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53

----- Page 29 (native) -----
Liu, J., & Wrisberg, C. A. (1997). The effect of knowledge of results
delay and the subjective estimation of movement form on the
acquisition and retention of a motor skill. Research Quarterly
for Exercise and Sport, 68(2), 145–151.
Lo, A. C., Guarino, P. D., Richards, L. G., Haselkorn, J. K., Wittenberg,
G. F., Federman, D. G., . . ., Volpe, B. T., et al. (2010). Robot-
assisted therapy for long-term upper-limb impairment after stroke.
The New England Journal of Medicine.
Loureiro, R., Amirabdollahian, F., Coote, S., Stokes, E., & Harwin, W.
(2001). Using haptics technology to deliver motivational therapies
in stroke patients: Concepts and initial pilot studies. Master’s thesis.
Loureiro, R., Amirabdollahian, F., Topping, M., Driessen, B., & Harwin,
W. (2003). Upper limb robot mediated stroke therapy—gentle/s
approach. Autonomous Robots, 15(1), 35–51.
Loureiro, R. C. V., & Harwin, W. S. (2007). Reach & grasp therapy:
Design and control of a 9-DOF robotic neuro-rehabilitation system.
In IEEE 10th International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics,
ICORR (pp. 757–763), Noordwijk, Netherlands.
Marchal-Crespo, L., Furumasu, J., & Reinkensmeyer, D. J. (2010). A
robotic wheelchair trainer: Design overview and a feasibility
study. Journal of Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation, 7(1),
40–51.
Marchal-Crespo, L., McHughen, S., Cramer, S. C., & Reinkensmeyer,
D. J. (2009). The effect of haptic guidance, aging, and initial skill
level on motor learning of a steering task. Experimental Brain
Research, 201(2), 209–220.
Marchal-Crespo, L., Rauter, G., Wyss, D., von Zitzewitz, J., & Riener,
R. (2012). Synthesis and control of a parallel tendon-based robotic
tennis trainer. In 4th IEEE RAS EMBS International Conference on
Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics (BioRob), 2012 (pp.
355–360), Rome, Italy. IEEE.
Marchal-Crespo, L., & Reinkensmeyer, D. (2008a). Effect of robotic
guidance on motor learning of a timing task. In 2nd IEEE RAS
EMBS International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and
Biomechatronics, 2008. BioRob 2008 (pp. 199–204). IEEE.
Marchal-Crespo, L., & Reinkensmeyer, D. (2008b). Haptic guidance
can enhance motor learning of a steering task. Journal of Motor
Behavior, 40(6), 545–557.
Marchal-Crespo, L., & Reinkensmeyer, D. J. (2009). Review of control
strategies for robotic movement training after neurologic injury.
Journal of Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation, 6(1), 20.
Marschall, F., Bund, A., & Wiemeyer, J. (2007). Does frequent
feedback really degrade learning? A meta analysis. E-Journal
Bewegung und Training, 1, 75–86.
Maslovat, D., Brunke, K. M., Chua, R., & Franks, I. M. (2009).
Feedback effects on learning a novel bimanual coordination
pattern: Support for the guidance hypothesis. Journal of
Motor Behavior, 41(1), 45–54.
Maslovat, D., Chua, R., Lee, T., & Franks, I. (2006). Anchoring
strategies for learning a bimanual coordination pattern. Journal
of Motor Behavior, 38(2), 101–117.
Maslovat, D., Chus, R., Lee, T., & Franks, I. (2004). Contextual
interference: Single task versus multi-task learning. Motor
Control, 8(2), 213.
Mauney, L. M., & Walker, B. N. (2007). Individual differences and the
field of auditory display: Past research, a present study, and an
agenda for the future. In 13th International Conference on Audi-
tory Display, Montreal, Canada.
Mayr, A., Kofler, M., Quirbach, E., Matzak, H., Frohlich, K., & Saltuari,
L. (2007). Prospective, blinded, randomized crossover study of gait
rehabilitation in stroke patients using the lokomat gait orthosis.
Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair, 21(4), 307–314.
McNeely, W. A., Puterbaugh, K. D., & Troy, J. J. (2005). Six degree-
of-freedom haptic rendering using voxel sampling. In ACM SIG-
GRAPH 2005 Courses (pp. 401–408), New York, NY, USA.
ACM.
McNeely, W. A., Puterbaugh, K. D., & Troy, J. J. (2006). Voxel-based
6-DOF haptic rendering improvements. Haptics-e, 3(7).
Mestre, D., Maïano, C., Dagonneau, V., & Mercier, C. (2011). Does
virtual reality enhance exercise performance, enjoyment, and
dissociation? an exploratory study on a stationary bike apparatus.
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 20(1), 1–14.
Metzger, J., Lambercy, O., & Gassert, R. (2012). High-fidelity rendering
of virtual objects with the rehapticknob-novel avenues in robot-
assisted rehabilitation of hand function. In Haptics Symposium
(HAPTICS), 2012 IEEE (pp. 51–56). IEEE.
Mihelj, M., Nef, T., & Riener, R. (2007). A novel paradigm for patient-
cooperative control of upper-limb rehabilitation robots. Advanced
Robotics, 21(8), 843–867.
Miles, H. C., Pop, S. R., Watt, S. J., Lawrence, G. P., & John, N. W.
(2012). A review of virtual environments for training in ball
sports. Computers and Graphics, 36(6), 714–726.
Milot, M. H., Marchal-Crespo, L., Green, C. S., Cramer, S. C., &
Reinkensmeyer, D. J. (2010). Comparison of error-amplification
and haptic-guidance training techniques for learning of a timing-
based motor task by healthy individuals. Experimental Brain
Research, 201(2), 119–131.
Mima, T., Sadato, N., Yazawa, S., Hanakawa, T., Fukuyama, H.,
Yonekura, Y., & Shibasaki, H. (1999). Brain structures related to
active and passive finger movements in man. Brain, 122(10),
1989–1997.
Minogue, J., & Jones, M. G. (2006).Haptics in education: Exploring an
untapped sensory modality Review of Educational Research, 76
(3), 3–17.
Molier, B., Van Asseldonk, E., Hermens, H., & Jannink, M. (2010).
Nature, timing, frequency and type of augmented feedback; does it
influence motor relearning of the hemiparetic arm after stroke? A
systematic review. Disability and Rehabilitation, 32(22), 1799–1809.
Mononen, K. (2007). The effect of augmented feedback on motor skill
learning in shooting. PhD thesis, University of Jyväskylä, Finland.
Morris, D., Tan, H., Barbagli, F., Chang, T., & Salisbury, K. (2007).
Haptic feedback enhances force skill learning. In EuroHaptics
Conference, 2007 and Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual
Environment and Teleoperator Systems. World Haptics 2007.
Second Joint (pp. 21–26).
Multon, F., Hoyet, L., Komura, T., & Kulpa, R. (2007). Interactive
control of physically-valid aerial motion: Application to VR
training system for gymnasts. In Proceedings of the 2007
ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology
(pp. 77–80). ACM.
Munhall, K., Gribble, P., Sacco, L., & Ward, M. (1996). Temporal
constraints on the mcgurk effect. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 58, 351–362.
Mussa-Ivaldi, F. A., Hogan, N., & Bizzi, E. (1985). Neural, mechanical,
and geometric factors subserving arm posture in humans. Journal of
Neuroscience, 5(10), 2732–2745.
Nakamura, A., Tabata, S., Ueda, T., Kiyofuji, S., & Kuno, Y. (2005).
Multimodal presentation method for a dance training system. In
CHI’05 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing
systems (pp. 1685–1688). ACM.
Nef, T., Mihelj, M., & Riener, R. (2007). Armin: A robot for patient-
cooperative arm therapy. Medical and Biological Engineering and
Computing, 45(9), 887–900.
Nesbitt, K. (2003). Designing multi-sensory displays for abstract data.
PhD thesis, School of Information Technologies, University of
Sydney, Australia.
Neuhoff, J. G., Kramer, G., & Wayand, J. (2002). Pitch and loudness
interact in auditory displays: Can the data get lost in the map?
Journal of Experimental Psychology. Applied, 8(1), 17–25.
Neuhoff, J. G., & Wayand, J. (2002). Pitch change, sonification, and
musical expertise: Which way is up? In International Conference
on Auditory Displays, Kyoto, Japan.
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53
49

----- Page 30 (native) -----
O’Malley, M. K., & Gupta, A. (2008). Haptic interfaces (pp. 25–74).
Morgan-Kaufman Publisher.
Oakley, I., Brewster, S., & Gray, P. (2001). Can you feel the force? An
investigation of haptic collaboration in shared editors. In Proceedings
of EuroHaptics (pp. 54–59).
Oakley, I., McGee, M., Brewster, S., & Gray, P. (2000). Putting the feel
in ‘look and feel’. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 415–422). New York,
NY USA: ACM.
Oakley, I., & O’Modhrain, S. (2005). Tilt to scroll: Evaluating a
motion based vibrotactile mobile interface. In First Joint Euro-
haptics Conference and Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for
Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems (WHC’05) (pp.
40–49). Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE Computer Society.
Ogden, R., & Franz, S. (1917). On cerebral motor control: The recovery
from experimentally produced hemiplegia. Psychobiology, 1(1), 33.
Ohta, K., Umegaki, K., Murofushi, K., A., K., & Sakurai, S. (2009).
Training aid system for hammer throw based on accelerometry. In
Proceedings of the XXIInd Congress of the International Society
of Biomechanics.
Ostendorf, C. G., & Wolf, S. L. (1981). Effect of forced use of the
upper extremity of a hemiplegic patient on changes in function.
Physical Therapy, 61(7), 1022–1028.
Ouellette, M., LeBrasseur, N., Bean, J., Phillips, E., Stein, J., Frontera,
W., & Fielding, R. (2004). High-intensity resistance training
improves muscle strength, self-reported function, and disability
in long-term stroke survivors. Stroke; A Journal of Cerebral
Circulation, 35(6), 1404.
Oviatt, S., Coulston, R., & Lunsford, R. (2004). When do we interact
multimodally? Cognitive load and multimodal communication
patterns. In Proceedings of the 6th international conference on
Multimodal interfaces (pp. 129–136). ACM.
Palluel-Germain, R., Bara, F., de Boisferon, A. H., Hennion, B.,
Gouagout, P., & Gentaz, E. (2007). A visuo-haptic device -
telemaque - increases kindergarten children’s handwriting acqui-
sition. In World Haptics Conference (pp. 72–77), Los Alamitos,
CA, USA. IEEE Computer Society.
Park, J. H., Shea, C. H., & Wright, D. L. (2000). Reduced-frequency
concurrent and terminal feedback: A test of the guidance hypothesis.
Journal of Motor Behavior, 32(3), 287–296.
Patel, K., Bailenson, J., Hack-Jung, S., Diankov, R., & Bajcsy, R. (2006).
The effects of fully immersive virtual reality on the learning
of physical tasks. In Proceedings of the 9th Annual Interna-
tional Workshop on Presence, Ohio, USA (pp. 87–94).
Citeseer.
Patoglu, V., Li, Y., & O’Malley, M. (2009). On the efficacy of haptic
guidance schemes for human motor learning. In World Congress
on Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering (pp. 203–206).
Munich, Germany. Springer.
Patton, J., Stoykov, M., Kovic, M., & Mussa-Ivaldi, F. (2006). Evalu-
ation of robotic training forces that either enhance or reduce error
in chronic hemiparetic stroke survivors. Experimental Brain
Research, 168(3), 368–383.
Pauletto, S., & Hunt, A. (2006). The sonification of EMG data. In
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Auditory
Display, London, UK.
Petrofsky, J. (2001). The use of electromyogram biofeedback to reduce
trendelenburg gait. European Journal of Applied Physiology, 85
(5), 491–495.
Petzold, B., Zaeh, M. F., Faerber, B., Deml, B., Egermeier, H., Schilp,
J., & Clarke, S. (2004). A study on visual, auditory, and haptic
feedback for assembly tasks. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments, 13(1), 16–21.
Powell, D., & O’Malley, M. (2011). Efficacy of shared-control guidance
paradigms for robot-mediated training. In World Haptics Conference
(WHC), 2011 IEEE (pp. 427–432). IEEE.
Powell, D., & O’Malley, M. K. (2012). The task-dependent efficacy of
shared-control haptic guidance paradigms. IEEE Transactions on
Haptics, 5(3), 208–219.
Prange, G., Jannink, M., Groothuis-Oudshoorn, C., Hermens, H., &
Ijzerman, M. (2006). Systematic review of the effect of robot-aided
therapy on recovery of the hemiparetic arm after stroke. Journal of
Rehabilitation Research and Development, 43(2), 171.
Proteau, L. (1992). Vision and motor control, volume 85, chapter 4: On
the specificity of learning and the role of visual information for
movement control (pp. 67–103). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Proteau, L. (2005). Visual afferent information dominates other sources
of afferent information during mixed practice of a video-aiming
task. Experimental Brain Research, 161, 441–456.
Proteau, L., & Isabelle, G. (2002). On the role of visual afferent
information for the control of aiming movements toward targets
of different sizes. Journal of Motor Behavior, 34(4), 367–384.
Ranganathan, R., & Newell, K. M. (2009). Influence of augmented
feedback on coordination strategies. Journal of Motor Behavior,
41(4), 317–330.
Rath, M., & Rohs, M. (2006). Explorations in sound for tilting-based
interfaces. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Multimodal Interfaces (pp. 295–301). ACM New York, NY,
USA.
Rauter, G., Baur, K., Sigrist, R., Riener, R., & Wolf, P. (2010).
Robotergestütztes Bewegungslernen mit dem M3-Trainer —
Vorstellung des Konzepts. In Sportinformatik trifft Sporttech-
nologie: Tagung der dvs-Sektion Sportinformatik in Koopera-
tion mit der deutschen interdisziplinären Vereinigung für
Sporttechnologie, Darmstadt, Germany.
Rauter, G., Brunschweiler, A., Wellner, M., von Zitzewitz, J., Riener,
R., & Wolf, P. (2009). Rowing novices can only partly profit from
acoustic and visual display of a reference movement of an oar
blade. In Progress in Motor Control VII, Marseille, France.
Rauter, G., Sigrist, R., Marchal-Crespo, L., Vallery, H., Riener, R., &
Wolf, P. (2011). Assistance or challenge? Filling a gap in user-
cooperative control. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) (pp. 3068–3073).
Rauter, G., von Zitzewitz, J., Duschau-Wicke, A., Vallery, H., &
Riener, R. (2010). A tendon based parallel robot applied to motor
learning in sports. In 3rd IEEE RAS and EMBS International
Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics
(BioRob), 2010 (pp. 82–87), Tokyo, Japan.
Reinkensmeyer, D., Akoner, O., Ferris, D., & Gordon, K. (2009).
Slacking by the human motor system: Computational models
and implications for robotic orthoses. In Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society, 2009. EMBC 2009. Annual International
Conference of the IEEE (pp. 2129–2132). IEEE.
Reinkensmeyer, D. J., Emken, J. L., & Cramer, S. C. (2004). Robotics,
motor learning, and neurologic recovery. Annual Review of
Biomedical Engineering, 6, 497–525.
Reinkensmeyer, D. J., & Patton, J. L. (2009). Can robots help the
learning of skilled actions? Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews,
37(1), 43.
Reisman, D. S., Wityk, R., Silver, K., & Bastian, A. J. (2007). Locomotor
adaptation on a split-belt treadmill can improve walking symmetry
post-stroke. Brain, 130(7), 1861–1872.
Ribeiro, D. C., Sole, G., Abbott, J. H., & Milosavljevic, S. (2011).
Extrinsic feedback and management of low back pain: A critical
review of the literature. Manual Therapy, 16(3), 231–239.
Riskowski, J. L., Mikesky, A. E., Bahamonde, R. E., & Burr, D. B.
(2009). Design and validation of a knee brace with feedback to
reduce the rate of loading. Journal of Biomechanical Engineering,
131(8), 084503-1-6.
Robin, C., Toussaint, L., Blandin, Y., & Proteau, L. (2005). Specificity
of learning in a video-aiming task: Modifying the salience of
dynamic visual cues. Journal of Motor Behavior, 37(5), 367–376.
50
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53

----- Page 31 (native) -----
Rochat, P., & Senders, S. (1991). Active touch in infancy: Action
systems in development. Infant attention: Biological constraints
and the influence of experience (pp. 412–442).
Ronsse, R., Koopman, B., Vitiello, N., Lenzi, T., De Rossi, S. M. M.,
van den Kieboom, J., . . . Ijspeert, A. J. (2011). Oscillator-based
walking assistance: A model-free approach. In IEEE International
Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR) (pp. 1–6). IEEE.
Ronsse, R., Puttemans, V., Coxon, J. P., Goble, D. J., Wagemans, J.,
Wenderoth, N., & Swinnen, S. P. (2011b). Motor learning with
augmented feedback: Modality-dependent behavioral and neural
consequences. Cerebral Cortex, 21(6), 1283–1294.
Ronsse, R., Vitiello, N., Lenzi, T., van den Kieboom, J., Carrozza, M.
C., & Ijspeert, A. J. (2010). Adaptive oscillators with human-in-
the-loop: Proof of concept for assistance and rehabilitation. In 3rd
IEEE RAS and EMBS International Conference on Biomedical Ro-
botics and Biomechatronics (BioRob), 2010 (pp. 668–674). IEEE.
Ronsse, R., Vitiello, N., Lenzi, T., van den Kieboom, J., Carrozza, M.
C., & Ijspeert, A. J. (2011c). Human-robot synchrony: Flexible
assistance using adaptive oscillators. IEEE Transactions on Bio-
Medical Engineering, 58(4), 1001.
Rosenthal, J., Edwards, N., Villanueva, D., Krishna, S., McDaniel, T.,
& Panchanathan, S. (2011). Design, implementation, and case
study of a pragmatic vibrotactile belt. IEEE Transactions on
Instrumentation and Measurement, 60(1), 114–125.
Royet, J. (1991). Stereology: A method for analyzing images. Progress
in Neurobiology, 37(5), 433–474.
Ruffaldi, E., Filippeschi, A., Avizzano, C., Bardy, B., Gopher, D., &
Bergamasco, M. (2011). Feedback, affordances, and accelerators
for training sports in virtual environments. Presence: Teleopera-
tors and Virtual Environments, 20(1), 33–46.
Ruffaldi, E., Filippeschi, A., Frisoli, A., Sandoval, O., Avizzano, C., &
Bergamasco, M. (2009). Vibrotactile perception assessment for a
rowing training system. In EuroHaptics Conference, 2009 and
Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment and
Teleoperator Systems. World Haptics 2009. Third Joint (pp.
350–355). Salt Lake City, UT: IEEE Computer Society.
Ruffaldi, E., Gonzales, O., Filippeschi, A., Frisoli, A., Avizzano, C., &
Bergamasco, M. (2009). Integration of multimodal technologies
for a rowing platform. In Proceedings of the 5th IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Mechatronics, Malaga, Spain.
Sainburg, R. L., & Ghez, C. (1995). Limitations in the learning and
generalization of multijoint dynamics. 21, 686.
Salamin, P., Tadi, T., Blanke, O., Vexo, F., & Thalmann, D. (2010).
Quantifying effects of exposure to the third and first-person
perspectives in virtual-reality-based training. IEEE Transactions
on Learning Technologies, 3(3), 272–276.
Salisbury, J., & Srinivasan, M. (1997). Phantom-based haptic interaction
with virtual objects. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 17
(5), 6–10.
Salmoni, S. (1984). Knowledge of results and motor learning. A
review and critical reappraisal. Psychological Bulletin, 95(3),
355–386.
Sann, C., & Streri, A. (2007). Perception of object shape and texture in
human newborns: Evidence from cross-modal transfer tasks. De-
velopmental Science, 10(3), 399–410.
Schack, T., Bockemühl, T., Schütz, C., & Ritter, H. (2008).
Augemented Reality im Techniktraining — experimentelle
Implementation einer neuen Technologie in den Leistungss-
port. Technical report, BISp-Jahrbuch - Forschungsförderung.
Schack, T., & Heinen, T. (2007). Integriertes Online-Feedback im
Spitzensport — Neue Wege eines medienbasierten Techniktrainings
Int-O-Feed. Technical report, BISp-Jahrbuch - Forschungsförderung.
Schaffert, N., Barrass, K., & Effenberg, A. (2009). Exploring function
and aesthetics in sonification for elite sports. In Proceedings of the
Second International Conference on Music Communication
Science.
Schaffert, N., Mattes, K., & Effenberg, A. (2009). Sound design for the
purposes of movement optimisation in elite sport (using the
example of rowing). In Proceedings of the 15th International
Conference on Auditory Display, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Scheidt, R., Reinkensmeyer, D., Conditt, M., Rymer, W., & Mussa-Ivaldi,
F. (2000). Persistence of motor adaptation during constrained, multi-
joint, arm movements. Journal of Neurophysiology, 84(2), 853.
Schmidt, R. A. (1991). Frequent augmented feedback can degrade
learning: Evidence and interpretations. Tutorials in Motor Neuro-
science, 62, 59–75.
Schmidt, R., & Wrisberg, C. (2008). Motor learning and performance:
A situation-based learning approach. Human Kinetics Publishers.
Schmidt, R. A., & Wulf, G. (1997). Continuous concurrent feedback
degrades skill learning: Implications for training and simulation.
Human Factors, 39(4), 509–525.
Schmidt, R. A., Young, D. E., Swinnen, S., & Shapiro, D. C. (1989).
Summary knowledge of results for skill acquisition: Support for
the guidance hypothesis. Journal of Experimental Psychology.
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15(2), 352–359.
Secoli, R., Milot, M., Rosati, G., & Reinkensmeyer, D. (2011). Effect
of visual distraction and auditory feedback on patient effort during
robot-assisted movement training after stroke. Journal of Neuro-
engineering and Rehabilitation, 8(1), 1–10.
Seitz, A. R., & Dinse, H. R. (2007). A common framework for
perceptual learning. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 17(2),
148–153.
Seitz, A. R., Kim, R., & Shams, R. (2006). Sound facilitates visual
learning. Current Biology, 16(14), 1422–1427.
Shadmehr, R., & Moussavi, Z. M. K. (2000). Spatial generalization
from learning dynamics of reaching movements. Journal of
Neuroscience, 20(20), 7807–7815.
Shadmehr, R., & Mussa-Ivaldi, F. (1994). Adaptive representation of
dynamics during learning of a motor task. Journal of Neurosci-
ence, 14(5), 3208–3224.
Shams, L., & Seitz, A. R. (2008). Benefits of multisensory learning.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12(11), 411–417.
Shea, C. H., & Wulf, G. (1999). Enhancing motor learning through
external-focus instructions and feedback. Human Movement
Science, 18(4), 553–571.
Shea, C., Wulf, G., Park, J., & Gaunt, B. (2001). Effects of an auditory
model on the learning of relative and absolute timing. Journal of
Motor Behavior, 33(2), 127–138.
Shmuelof, L., Krakauer, J. W., & Mazzoni, P. (2012). How is a motor
skill learned? Change and invariance at the levels of task success
and trajectory control. Journal of Neurophysiology.
Sielhorst, T., Feuerstein, M., & Navab, N. (2008). Advanced medical
displays: A literature review of augmented reality. Journal of
Display Technology, 4(4), 451–467.
Sigrist, R., Rauter, G., Riener, R., & Wolf, P. (2011). Self-controlled
feedback for a complex motor task. In BIO Web of Conferences;
The International Conference SKILLS (Vol. 1), Montpellier,
France.
Sigrist, R., Schellenberg, J., Rauter, G., Broggi, S., Riener, R., & Wolf,
P. (2011b). Visual and auditory augmented concurrent feedback in
a complex motor task. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments, 20(1), 15–32.
Smethurst, C. J., & Carson, R. G. (2001). The acquisition of movement
skills: Practice enhances the dynamic stability of bimanual coor-
dination. Human Movement Science, 20(4–5), 499–529.
Smith, R. M., & Loschner, C. (2002). Biomechanics feedback for
rowing. Journal of Sports Sciences, 20(10), 783–791.
Smith, D. R., & Walker, B. N. (2005). Effects of auditory context cues
and training on performance of a point estimation sonification
task. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19(8), 1065–1087.
Snodgrass, S. J., Rivett, D. A., Robertson, V. J., & Stojanovski, E.
(2010). Real-time feedback improves accuracy of manually
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53
51

----- Page 32 (native) -----
applied forces during cervical spine mobilisation. Manual Therapy,
15, 19–25.
Spelmezan, D., Hilgers, A., & Borchers, J. (2009). A language of
tactile motion instructions. In Proceedings of the 11th Interna-
tional Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile
Devices and Services, MobileHCI ’09 (pp. 29:1–29:5). New York,
NY, USA: ACM.
Spelmezan, D., Jacobs, M., Hilgers, A., & Borchers, J. (2009). Tactile
motion instructions for physical activities. In Proceedings of the
27th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’09 (pp. 2243–2252), New York, NY, USA. ACM.
Spinks, W. L., & Smith, R. M. (1994). The effects of kinetic
information feedback on maximal rowing performance. Journal of
Human Movement Studies, 27(1), 17–36.
Stepp, C., & Matsuoka, Y. (2011). Object manipulation improvements
due to single session training outweigh the differences among
stimulation sites during vibrotactile feedback. IEEE Transactions
on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, 19(6), 677–
685.
Stepp, C., & Matsuoka, Y. (2012). Vibrotactile sensory substitution for
object manipulation: Amplitude versus pulse train frequency mod-
ulation. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering, 20(1), 31–37.
Sterr, A., Elbert, T., Berthold, I., Kölbel, S., Rockstroh, B., & Taub, E.
(2002). Longer versus shorter daily constraint-induced movement
therapy of chronic hemiparesis: An exploratory study. Archives of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 83(10), 1374–1377.
Sulzenbruck, S., & Heuer, H. (2011). Type of visual feedback during
practice influences the precision of the acquired internal model of a
complex visuo-motor transformation. Ergonomics, 54(1), 34–46.
Sun, M., Ren, X., & Cao, X. (2011). Effects of multimodal error
feedback on human performance in steering tasks. Information
and Media Technologies, 6(1), 193–201.
Swindells, C., Unden, A., & Sang, T. (2003). Torquebar: An
ungrounded haptic feedback device. In Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces (pp. 52–59).
New York, NY, USA: ACM.
Swinnen, S. P., Lee, T. D., Verschueren, S., Serrien, D. J., & Bogaerds,
H. (1997). Interlimb coordination: Learning and transfer under
different feedback conditions. Human Movement Science, 16(6),
749–785.
Swinnen, S. P., Schmidt, R. A., Nicholson, D. E., & Shapiro, D. C.
(1990). Information feedback for skill acquisition: Instantaneous
knowledge of results degrades learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16(4), 706–716.
Swinnen, S., Verschueren, S., Bogaerts, H., Dounskaia, N., Lee, T.,
Stelmach, G., & Serrien, D. (1998). Age-related deficits in motor
learning and differences in feedback processing during the
production of a bimanual coordination pattern. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 15(5), 439–466.
Takahashi, C. D., Nemet, D., Rose-Gottron, C. M., Larson, J. K.,
Cooper, D. M., & Reinkensmeyer, D. J. (2003). Neuromotor noise
limits motor performance, but not motor adaptation, in children.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 90(2), 703–711.
Takahashi, C. D., Scheidt, R. A., & Reinkensmeyer, D. J. (2001).
Impedance control and internal model formation when reaching
in a randomly varying dynamical environment. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 86(2), 1047–1051.
Takeuchi, T. (1993). Auditory information in playing tennis. Perceptual
and Motor Skills, 76, 1323–1328.
Tang, J., Carignan, C., & Olsson, P. (2006). Tandam canoeing over the
internet using haptic feedback. In Symposium on Haptic Interfa-
ces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems (pp. 281–
285). Alexandria, Virginia, USA.
Tannen, R. S., Nelson, W. T., Bolia, R. S., Warm, J., & Dember, W. N.
(2004). Evaluating adaptive multisensory displays for target
localization in a flight task. The International Journal of Aviation
Psychology, 14(3), 297–312.
Thoroughman, K., & Shadmehr, R. (2000). Learning of action through
adaptive combination of motor primitives. Nature, 407(6805),
742.
Timmermans, A. A. A., Seelen, H. A. M., Willmann, R. D., & Kingma,
H. (2009). Technology-assisted training of arm-hand skills in
stroke: Concepts on reacquisition of motor control and therapist
guidelines for rehabilitation technology design. Journal of Neuro-
engineering and Rehabilitation, 6, 1.
Todorov, E. (2004). Optimality principles in sensorimotor control.
Nature Neuroscience, 7, 907–915.
Todorov, E., & Jordan, M. I. (2002). Optimal feedback control as a
theory of motor coordination. Nature Neuroscience, 5, 1226–
1235.
Todorov, E., Shadmehr, R., & Bizzi, E. (1997). Augmented feedback
presented in a virtual environment accelerates learning of a difficult
motor task. Journal of Motor Behavior, 29(2), 147–158.
Tzetzis, G., Votsis, E., & Kourtessis, T. (2008). The effect of different
corrective feedback methods on the outcome and self confidence
of young athletes. Journal of Sports Science and Medicine, 7,
371–378.
Underwood, S. M. (2009). Effects of augmented real-time auditory
feedback on top-level precision shoting performance. Master’s
thesis, University of Kentucky.
Utley, A., & Astill, S. (2008). Motor control, learning and development.
Bios Instant Notes. Taylor & Francis.
Vallery, H., Duschau-Wicke, A., & Riener, R. (2009a). Generalized
elasticities improve patient-cooperative control of rehabilitation
robots. In IEEE International Conference on Rehabilitation
Robotics, ICORR 2009 (pp. 535–541).
Vallery, H., Guidali, M., Duschau-Wicke, A., & Riener, R. (2009b).
Patient-cooperative control: Providing safe support without
restricting movement. In World Congress on Medical Physics
and Biomedical Engineering (pp. 166–169). Munich, Germany:
Springer.
van Beers, R. J. (2009). Motor learning is optimally tuned to the
properties of motor noise. Neuron, 63(3), 406–417.
van Beers, R. J., Sittig, A. C., & Gon, J. J. (1999). Integration of
proprioceptive and visual position-information: An experimental-
ly supported model. Journal of Neurophysiology, 81(3), 1355.
Van der Linde, R. Q., Lammertse, P., Frederiksen, E., & Ruiter, B.
(2002). The hapticmaster, a new high-performance haptic
interface. In Proceedings of Eurohaptics (pp. 1–5). Citeseer.
Van der Linden, D. W., Cauraugh, J. H., & Greene, T. A. (1993). The
effect of frequency of kinetic feedback on learning an isometric
force production task in nondisabled subjects. Physical Therapy,
73(2), 79–87.
van Erp, J. B. F., Saturday, I., & Jansen, C. (2006). Application of
tactile displays in sports: Where to, how and when to move. In
Proceedings of the Eurohaptics International Conference.
Van Erp, J., & Van Veen, H. (2004). Vibrotactile in-vehicle navigation
system. Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour,
7(4–5), 247–256.
van Vliet, P. M., & Wulf, G. (2006). Extrinsic feedback for motor
learning after stroke: What is the evidence? Disability and
Rehabilitation, 28(13), 831–840.
Varni, G., Dubus, G., Oksanen, S., Volpe, G., Fabiani, M., Bresin,
R., . . . Camurri, A. (2011). Interactive sonification of syn-
chronisation of motoric behaviour in social active listening to
music with mobile devices. Journal on Multimodal User
Interfaces, 1–17.
Viviani, P., & Flash, T. (1995). Minimum-jerk, two-thirds power law,
and isochrony: Converging approaches to movement planning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human Perception and
Performance, 21(1), 32–53.
52
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53

----- Page 33 (native) -----
Vogeley, K., May, M., Ritzl, A., Falkai, P., Zilles, K., & Fink, G.
(2004). Neural correlates of first-person perspective as one
constituent of human self-consciousness. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 16(5), 817–827.
Vogt, K. (2008). Sonification in computational physics-qcd-audio. In
Proceedings of SysMus-1st International Conference of Students
of Systematic Musicology, Graz, Austria.
Vogt, K., Pirró, D., Kobenz, I., Höldrich, R., & Eckel, G. (2009).
Physiosonic — movement sonification as auditory feedback. In
Proceedings of the 15th International Conference of Auditory
Display, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Vogt, K., Pirró, D., Kobenz, I., Holdrich, R., & Eckel, G. (2010).
Physiosonic — evaluated movement sonification as auditory
feedback in physiotherapy. In S. Ystad, M. Aramaki, R.
Kronland-Martinet, & K. Jensen (Eds.), Auditory display (pp.
103–120). Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer.
von Zitzewitz, J., Wolf, P., Novakovic, V., Wellner, M., Rauter, G.,
Brunschweiler, A., & Riener, R. (2008). Real-time rowing simu-
lator with multimodal feedback. Sports Technology, 1(6), 257–
266.
Walker, B. N., & Nees, M. A. (2011). Theory of sonification, volume
The Sonification Handbook. New York: Academic Press.
Wallis, I., Ingalls, T., Rikakis, T., Olson, L., Chen, Y., Xu, W., &
Sundaram, H. (2007). Real-time sonification of movement for
an immersive stroke rehabilitation environment. In Proceedings
of the 13th International Conference on Auditory Display,
Montréal, Canada.
Wei, K., & Körding, K. (2009). Relevance of error: What drives motor
adaptation? Journal of Neurophysiology, 101(2), 655–664.
Weiller, C., Jüptner, M., Fellows, S., Rijntjes, M., Leonhardt, G.,
Kiebel, S., Müller, S., Diener, H., Thilmann, A., et al. (1996).
Brain representation of active and passive movements. Neuro-
Image, 4(2), 105–110.
Welch, R. B., & Warren, D. H. (1980). Immediate perceptual response to
intersensory discrepancy. Psychological Bulletin, 88(3), 638–667.
Wellner, M., Schaufelberger, A., Zitzewitz, J., & Riener, R. (2008).
Evaluation of visual and auditory feedback in virtual obstacle
walking. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 17
(5), 512–524.
Wickens, C. D. (2002). Multiple resources and performance prediction.
Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science, 3(2), 159–177.
Wierinck, E., Puttemans, V., Swinnen, S., & van Steenberghe, D.
(2005). Effect of augmented visual feedback from a virtual reality
simulation system on manual dexterity training. European Jour-
nal of Dental Education, 9(1), 10.
Winstein, C. J. (1991). Knowledge of results and motor learning —
implications for physical therapy. Physical Therapy, 71(2), 140–
149.
Winstein, C. J., Pohl, P. S., Cardinale, C., Green, A., Scholtz, L., &
Waters, C. S. (1996). Learning a partial-weight-bearing skill:
Effectiveness of two forms of feedback. Physical Therapy, 76
(9), 985–993.
Wishart, L. R., Lee, T. D., Cunningham, S. J., & Murdoch, J. E. (2002).
Age-related differences and the role of augmented visual feedback
in learning a bimanual coordination pattern. Acta Psychologica,
110(2–3), 247–263.
Wolf, S., Lecraw, D., Barton, L., & Jann, B. (1989). Forced use of
hemiplegic upper extremities to reverse the effect of learned
nonuse among chronic stroke and head-injured patients. Experi-
mental Neurology, 104(2), 125–132.
Wolpert, D. M., Diedrichsen, J., & Flanagan, J. R. (2011). Principles of
sensorimotor learning. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 12, 739–
749.
Wolpert, D., & Flanagan, J. (2010). Motor learning. Current Biology,
20(11), R467–R472.
Wolpert, D., Ghahramani, Z., & Flanagan, J. (2001). Perspectives and
problems in motor learning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5(11),
487–494.
Wulf, G. (2007a). Attentional focus and motor learning: A review of
10 years of research. E-Journal Bewegung und Training, 1, 4–14.
Wulf, G. (2007b). Self-controlled practice enhances motor learning:
Implications for physiotherapy. Physiotherapy, 93(2), 96–101.
Wulf, G., Hörger, M., & Shea, C. H. (1999). Benefits of blocked over
serial feedback on complex motor skill learning. Journal of Motor
Behavior, 31(1), 95–103.
Wulf, G., & Shea, C. H. (2002). Principles derived from the study of simple
skills do not generalize to complex skill learning. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 9(2), 185–211.
Wulf, G., Shea, C., & Lewthwaite, R. (2010). Motor skill learning and
performance: A review of influential factors. Medical Education,
44(1), 75–84.
Wulf, G., Shea, C. H., & Matschiner, S. (1998). Frequent feedback
enhances complex motor skill learning. Journal of Motor Behavior,
30(2), 180–192.
Yamamoto, G., Shiraki, K., Takahata, M., Sakane, Y., & Takebayashi,
Y. (2004). Multimodal knowledge for designing new sound envi-
ronments. In The International Conference on Human Computer
Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services. Citeseer.
Yang, X.-D., Bischof, W. F., & Boulanger, P. (2008). Validating the
performance of haptic motor skill training. In Proceedings of
Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment and
Teleoperator Systems Haptics 2008 (pp. 129–135), Reno, NE.
Yang, U., & Kim, G. (2002). Implementation and evaluation of “just
follow me”: An immersive, VR-based, motion-training system.
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 11(3), 304–
323.
Psychon Bull Rev (2013) 20:21–53
53