

----- Page 1 (native) -----
REVIEW
Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro*, A. Michiardi, O. Castan˜o and J. A. Planell
Biomaterials, Implants and Tissue Engineering,
Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia (IBEC), CIBER-BBN, 08028 Barcelona, Spain
At present, strong requirements in orthopaedics are still to be met, both in bone and joint
substitution and in the repair and regeneration of bone defects. In this framework,
tremendous advances in the biomaterials ﬁeld have been made in the last 50 years where
materials intended for biomedical purposes have evolved through three different generations,
namely ﬁrst generation (bioinert materials), second generation (bioactive and biodegradable
materials) and third generation (materials designed to stimulate speciﬁc responses at the
molecular level). In this review, the evolution of different metals, ceramics and polymers most
commonly used in orthopaedic applications is discussed, as well as the different approaches
used to fulﬁl the challenges faced by this medical ﬁeld.
Keywords: biomaterials; orthopaedics; tissue engineering; bioactive materials;
biodegradable materials; bioinert materials
1. INTRODUCTION
Bone and joint degenerative and inﬂammatory pro-
blems affect millions of people worldwide. In fact, they
account for half of all chronic diseases in people over 50
years of age in developed countries. In addition, it is
predicted that the percentage of persons over 50 years
of age affected by bone diseases will double by 2020
(Bone and Joint Decade’s Musculoskeletal Portal 2007,
http://www.boneandjointdecade.org). These diseases
often require surgery, including total joint replacement
in cases of deterioration of the natural joint. Besides,
numerous bone fractures, low back pain, osteoporosis,
scoliosis and other musculoskeletal problems need to be
solved by using permanent, temporary or biodegrad-
able devices. Therefore, orthopaedic biomaterials are
meant to be implanted in the human body as constitu-
ents of devices that are designed to perform certain
biological functions by substituting or repairing different
tissues such as bone, cartilage or ligaments and tendons,
and even by guiding bone repair when necessary.
During most of the twentieth century, the avail-
ability of materials for the elaboration of implants was
the same as for other industrial applications. Indeed,
pioneer surgeons designed their implants using
materials available and with a successful record of
industrial use such as in chemistry, energy, mechanical
and aerospace. Since the human body consists of a
highly corrosive environment, very stringent require-
ments are imposed on the candidate materials’ proper-
ties. Consequently, the ﬁrst generation of biomaterials
consisted of easily available materials of industrial use,
that were required to be as inert as possible in order
to reduce their corrosion and their release of ions and
particles after implantation. Mechanical properties
also play a leading role in the selection of candidate
materials for implant manufacture. The concept of
biocompatibility, associated with a set of in vitro and
in vivo standardized tests, was introduced in order to
assess the biological behaviour of synthetic materials.
When trying to understand the evolution of bioma-
terials research and their clinical availability during
the last 60 years, three different generations seem to
be clearly marked (Hench & Polak 2002): bioinert
materials (ﬁrst generation), bioactive and biodegrad-
able materials (second generation), and materials
designed to stimulate speciﬁc cellular responses at the
molecular level (third generation). These three gener-
ations should not be interpreted as chronological,
but conceptual, since each generation represents an
evolution on the requirements and properties of the
materials involved. This means that at present,
research and development is still devoted to biomater-
ials that, according to their properties, could be
considered to be of the ﬁrst or the second generation.
The materials that each new generation brings in do
not necessarily override the use of those of a previous
one. The present review is not meant to be a historical
account of biomaterials used in orthopaedics. This
review aims to set the point of view on the bio-
materials evolution and not on the orthopaedic appli-
cation or the type of device. This evolutionary
perspective, along with the three generations, may
provide a clearer insight into how biomaterials research
and evolution set up the ground for the design and
development of innovative devices for improved
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008) 5, 1137–1158
doi:10.1098/rsif.2008.0151
Published online 30 July 2008
*Author for correspondence (mnavarro@ibec.pcb.ub.es).
Received 17 April 2008
Accepted 18 June 2008
1137
This journal is q 2008 The Royal Society

----- Page 2 (native) -----
solutions to orthopaedic clinical problems. First-
generation materials are still successfully used in a
wide range of applications. Third-generation materials
will open new possibilities of treatments and appli-
cations, but they are not meant to substitute plainly
the materials from previous generations.
2. FIRST GENERATION
In engineering design, the selection of a material for
a speciﬁc application is governed by matching the
material properties with the requirements of this
application. In the case of biomaterials, biological
requirements have to be added to the common ones
(mechanical, chemical and physical). Consequently,
concepts such as foreign body reaction (particularly
due to wear debris), stress shielding, biocompatibility,
and, more recently, bioactivity and osteoinduction
have been gradually introduced as requirements for
biomaterials in the design of implantable devices.
When synthetic materials were ﬁrst used in biome-
dical applications, the only requirement was to ‘achieve
a suitable combination of physical properties to match
those of the replaced tissue with a minimal toxic
response of the host’ (Hench 1980). They were the
‘ﬁrst-generation biomaterials’, according to Hench’s
classiﬁcation, because they were ‘inert’ so as to reduce
the immune response and the foreign body reaction to
a minimum.
2.1. Metallic materials
The ﬁrst metallic materials successfully used during
the twentieth century in orthopaedic applications
were stainless steel and cobalt–chrome-based alloys.
Ti and Ti alloys were introduced by the 1940s. NiTi
shape memory alloys appeared by the 1960s and
they seemed to open a whole new range of applications,
due to their special mechanical behaviour, but the
properly unsolved allergenic effect of Ni has hampered
their use.
The ﬁrst really successful substitutive joint prosthe-
sis was the total hip prosthesis developed by Charnley
in the very late 1950s (Charnley 1960). This was a
cemented prosthesis with a stem made of stainless steel.
Stainless steel materials are resistant to a wide
range of corrosive agents due to their high Cr content
(more than 12 wt%), which allows the formation of a
strongly adherent, self-healing and corrosion resistant
coating oxide of Cr2O3. Several types of stainless steel
are available and the most widely used for implant
manufacture is austenitic stainless steel. In order to be
austenitic at room temperature, stainless steel needs to
contain a certain amount of austenite stabilizing
elements such as Ni or Mn. The stainless steel most
widely used in clinical applications is AISI 316L that
contains 0.03 wt% C, 17–20 wt% Cr, 12–14 wt% Ni,
2–3 wt% Mo and minor amounts of nitrogen, manga-
nese, phosphorus, silicon and sulphur (table 1).
Stainless steel is widely used in traumatological
temporary devices such as fracture plates, screws
and hip nails among others, owing to their relatively
low cost, availability and easy processing. Their use in
orthopaedic joint prosthesis is restricted because other
metallic alloys such as Ti-based and Co–Cr-based
alloys exhibit superior mechanical and corrosion
properties. At present, new austenitic stainless steel
with high Cr content (over 20%), where Ni has been
partially substituted by Mn and with a high N content
(between 0.3 and 0.4%), is being used in joint
prosthesis. N stabilizes the austenitic phase and induces
an increase in both the corrosion resistance and the
mechanical properties (yield stress). This is a clear
example of new materials with an improved per-
formance that have been developed chronologically
during the second generation, but that from a con-
ceptual point of view belong to the ﬁrst generation.
The wear resistance of austenitic stainless steel is
rather poor and this is the reason why the metal-
on-metal pairs in joints such as the hip (femoral head
and acetabular cup) were discarded, because of high
friction and the large number of wear debris particles
that were produced, which led to a rapid loosening. This
is one of the main reasons why the Co–Cr–Mo alloy
(ASTM F75, Vitallium) was introduced in hip pros-
theses (McKee & Watson-Farra 1966; Walker & Gold
1971). Co–Cr alloys have been also successfully used in
combination with polyethylene (PE) in the fabrication
of artiﬁcial disc prostheses such as the SB Charite´
artiﬁcial disc replacement system (Punt et al. 2008).
Co–Cr-based alloys exhibit an excellent corrosion
resistance, even in chloride environments, that they
combine with a good wear resistance. Their mechanical
properties are also superior, most signiﬁcantly their
fatigue strength. These materials have a high elastic
modulus (220–230 GPa) similar to that of stainless
steel (approx. 200 GPa), and an order of magnitude
higher than that of cortical bone (20–30 GPa). On
contact with bone, the metallic devices will take most
of the load due to their high modulus, producing
stress shielding in the adjacent bone. The lack of
mechanical stimuli on the bone may induce its
resorption that will lead to the eventual failure and
loosening of the implant (Huiskes et al. 1992; Bauer &
Schils 1999). The range of Co–Cr alloys used in clinical
applications includes wrought and cast alloys. Among
the wrought alloys those containing 33–37 wt% Ni
(ASTM F562, MP35N) are widely used in orthopaedic
devices (table 1).
Ti and its alloys, originally used in aeronautics,
became materials of great interest in the biomedical
ﬁeld, due to their excellent properties that include a
moderate elastic modulus of approximately 110 GPa, a
good corrosion resistance and a low density (approx.
4700 kg mK3).
It was after Branemark (Branemark et al. 1964)
discovered what he named the osseointegration
phenomenon for Ti implants that the exploration
of dental and surgical applications of Ti alloys
started. Titanium and its alloys are able to become
tightly integrated into bone. This property signi-
ﬁcantly improves the long-term behaviour of the
implanted devices, decreasing the risks of loosening
and failure.
Commercially pure Ti (CP Ti), grade 4 (ASTM F67)
and Ti6Al4V (ASTM F136) are the most common
1138
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 3 (native) -----
titanium alloys used in orthopaedics (table 2). For CP
Ti, four grades are available according to oxygen
content. CP Ti grade 4 contains the highest amount
of oxygen, up to 0.4 per cent, and consequently, the
highest tensile and yield strengths (Ratner et al. 2004).
The excellent corrosion resistance of Ti and Ti alloys
is due to the formation of an adhesive TiO2 oxide layer
at their surface. Other surface properties such as wear
are very poor due to the low shear resistance of Ti and
Ti alloys.
CP Ti, typically with single-phase alpha micro-
structure, is currently used in dental implants, while
Ti6Al4V, with a biphasic alpha–beta microstructure,
is most commonly used in orthopaedic applications.
The Al and V alloying elements stabilize the alpha–
beta microstructure, and improve the mechanical
properties, in relation to CP Ti (typically twice the
yield and ultimate strength values of CP Ti). These
properties can be modulated by heat treatment and
mechanical working. Despite Ti and Ti alloys com-
bining a range of excellent properties, i.e. mechanical
properties, corrosion resistance, fatigue–corrosion
resistance, low density and relatively low modulus,
their processing is not easy whether it is machining,
forging or heat treating.
Some studies have pointed out V as a potential
cytotoxic element (Friberg et al. 1979; Steinmann 1985;
Thompson & Puleo 1996; Daley et al. 2004). Recent
advances have been made in order to overcome these
concerns by developing new titanium alloy compo-
sitions (Long & Rack 1998). Particularly, Ti6Al7Nb
and Ti5Al2.5Fe, with properties similar to Ti6Al4V but
V-free, and TNZT alloys, based on the Ti Nb Ta Zr
system to achieve minimum elastic moduli and
excellent biocompatibility, should be pointed out. The
Ti35Nb5Ta7Zr and its variant Ti35Nb5Ta7Zr0.4O
show elastic moduli values as low as 55 and 66 GPa.
This new generation of Ti alloys is at present under
development and investigation, and it does not seem
to be commercialized yet. Here is again an example of
ﬁrst-generation biomaterials being developed when
third-generation biomaterials are already in use.
Aside from these conventional metallic materials,
another type appeared in the 1960s when the shape
memory effect was discovered in NiTi alloys by
Buehler & Wang (1967). The shape memory effect is
the ability of a material to recover its shape upon
heating after having been ‘plastically’ deformed. The
effect takes place by the transition from a low-
temperature microstructure to a high-temperature
one. Stress-induced martensite is responsible for the
superelastic behaviour exhibited by shape memory
alloys. Their elastic recoverable strain can reach up
to 10 per cent, while for elastic metallic materials it is
Table 1. Summary of different metallic materials used or developed for orthopaedic applications, including their elastic modulus,
yield strength and ultimate strength.
material
principal alloying
elements (weight %)
elastic modulus (GPa)
yield strength (MPa)
ultimate strength (MPa)
stainless steel 316L
balance Fe
205–210
170–750
465–950
17–20 Cr
12–14 Ni
2–3 Mo
max 0.03 C
CoCrMo
F75
balance Co
220–230
275–1585
600–1785
27–30 Cr
5–7 Mo
max 2.5 Ni
MP35N
balance Co
33–37 Ni
19–21 Cr
9–10.5 Mo
Ti grade 4
balance Ti
105
692
785
max 0.4 O
Ti4Al6V
balance Ti
110
850–900
960–970
5.5–6.5 Al
3.5–4.5 V
Ti6Al7Nb
balance Ti
105
921
1024
6 Al
7 Nb
Ti35Nb5Ta7Zr
(TNZT)
balance Ti
55
530
590
35 Nb
5 Ta
7 Zr
NiTi
55.9–56.1 Ni
20–70 (martensite)
50–300 (martensite)
755–960
balance Ti
70–110 (austenite)
100–800 (austenite)
TiNb
balance Ti
60–85
—
—
25–40 Nb
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
1139
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 4 (native) -----
Table 2. Summary of the metallic, ceramic and polymeric biomaterials used in orthopaedic applications.
material
orthopaedic applications
references
metals
stainless steel (316, 316L)
fracture plates, screws, hip nails
Co–Cr–Mo alloys
prostheses stems, load-bearing components in total
joint replacement
McKee & Watson-Farra (1966)
and Walker & Gold (1971)
HA-coated Ti alloys
hip and knee prostheses, screws and pins for bone
ﬁxation
Sun et al. (2001)
Ti6Al4V
prostheses stems
Long & Rack (1998)
TNZT alloys (Ti–Nb–Zr–Ta)
under investigation
Long & Rack (1998)
NiTi
internal ﬁxator for long bone shafts, spinal correctors,
vertebral spacer anchoring of prostheses and staples
Duerig et al. (1996),
Shabalovskaya (1996) and
Chu et al. (2000)
Ni-free shape memory alloys
under investigation
Suzuki et al. (2006)
ceramics
high alumina ceramics
orthopaedic load-bearing applications
Christel et al. (1988)
ISO alumina standard 6474
dental implants
PSZ
alveolar ridge augmentations
Christel et al. (1988)
otolaryngological
coatings for tissue ingrowth
maxillofacial reconstruction
calcium phosphate cements
R cement
cleft palate
Driessens et al. (2002)
apical barrier
H cement
periodontal pockets
Ginebra et al. (2007)
ﬁlling periapical
biopex
alveolar bone augmentation
Kurashina et al. (1997)
bony defects
bonesource
periodontal osseous defects
Chow et al. (1991)
repair of large periodefects
calcibonZbiocement D
periapical surgery
Khairoun et al. (1999)
cementek
Ratier et al. (2004)
fracture grout
Driessens et al. (1998)
KyphOs
Mulliez & Wenz (2002)
mimix
Goebel & Jacob (2005)
Norian SRS
Constantz et al. (1995)
rebone
Liu et al. (1997)
a-BSMZbiobonZembark
Toﬁghi et al. (2001)
bioglasses
45S5 BG
Filho et al. (1996)
45S5.4F BG
maxillofacial reconstruction
Jedlicka & Clare (2001)
45B15S5 BG
middle-ear reconstruction
Hench et al. (1975)
dental implants
52S4.6 BG
percutaneous access devices
Filgueiras et al. (1993)
junction of spinal vertebrae
S45P7
Andersson et al. (2004)
55S4.3 BG
glass–ceramics
KGC ceravital
Bromer et al. (1977)
KGS ceravital
Ohtsuki et al. (1991)
KGy213 ceravital
dental implants
Gross et al. (1988)
maxillofacial reconstruction
A/W GC
vertebral prosthesis devices
Kokubo et al. (1987)
MB GC
iliac crest prostheses
Ho¨hland et al. (1985)
Bioverit
Gummel et al. (1983)
polymers
polymethacrylic acid (PMMA)
acrylic bone cements
Lewis (1997a), Phillips (2003)
and Lewis (2006)
anchoring of hip prostheses
vertebroplasties and kyphoplasties
polyethylene (PE)
liner of acetabular cups in hip arthroplasties
Fisher & Dowson (1991) and
Lewis (1997b)
tibial insert and patellar components in total knee
arthroplasties
(Continued.)
1140
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 5 (native) -----
approximately 0.1 per cent. In addition, the shape
memory alloys can exhibit an elastic modulus as low as
30 GPa in the martensitic state, while it ranges between
70 and 110 GPa in the austenitic phase (Duerig &
Pelton 1994; Ryha¨nen 1999). Therefore, their use in
load-bearing applications seems more adequate than
other metallic materials. Their ability to deliver
a uniform compressive stress after the recovery of a
prestrain upon heating could make them useful in
applications such as staples for osteotomies, fracture
repair (Chu et al. 2000), internal ﬁxators for long bone
shafts, spinal correctors, vertebral spacers and anchor-
ing of prostheses (Duerig et al. 1996). Finally, the almost
constant force they can produce over a very large
displacement in their pseudo-elastic behaviour could be
also beneﬁcial for bone distraction devices.
However, there is a problem of allergy and toxicity
for NiTi alloys associated with the release of Ni ions.
The concern of Ni toxicity and potential carcinogeni-
city has limited the use of NiTi alloys in Europe and the
USA, but they have been successfully used for more
than 20 years in Russia (Shabalovskaya 1996) and
China (Chu et al. 2000) for biomedical devices. In order
to overcome this problem, several alternative Ni-free
alloys, mainly Nb-based, are currently under develop-
ment from the material science side although their long-
term biological performance will have to be assessed
(Suzuki et al. 2006).
Osseointegration being a very relevant issue for the
anchorage of implants in the surrounding bone, great
effort is being made in the design and optimization of
biomaterials’ surfaces. Advances in the study of the
interactions between biological entities (proteins and
cells) and surface materials have pointed out the
essential role of biomaterial surface parameters such
as roughness (Meyle et al. 1993; Chesmel et al. 1995;
Healy et al. 1996; Thomas et al. 1997; Anselme et al.
2000; Boyan et al. 2001), wettability (Morra &
Cassinelli 1997; Webb et al. 2000) and electrostatic
charges (Shelton et al. 1988; Healy et al. 1996; Qiu et al.
1998). As a result, a wide variety of surface treatments
are applied to most metallic implants before their
implantation. The effect of surface physical properties
such as topography on cell behaviour is a rather recent
concept that has allowed rationalizing the well-known
effect that roughness has on osseointegration and that
has been very well analysed in the case of dental
implants. Treatments of passivation (Masmoudi et al.
2006; mainly by acid etching) and roughening (Aparicio
et al. 2003; Schuh et al. 2004; Gil et al. 2007; shot
peening and blasting) are the most commonly employed
methods for dental implants.
2.2. Ceramic materials
When reviewing the ﬁrst-generation ceramic biomater-
ials, the most commonly employed are alumina,
zirconia and several porous ceramics. These non-
metallic inorganic materials have a limited range of
formulations. The microstructure is highly dependent
on the applied manufacturing process (maximum
temperature, duration of the thermal steps, purity of
the powder, size and distribution of the grains and
porosity) and it has a clear and direct effect on both the
mechanical and biological properties.
One of the pioneering applications of bioceramics
consisted of replacing the traditional metallic femoral
heads of hip prostheses by high-density and highly
pure alumina (a-Al2O3; Boutin 1972). Later, ceramic
materials were also used for the acetabular cups,
showing excellent wear rates, excellent corrosion
resistance, good biocompatibility and high strength
(Hench & Wilson 1993). This meant a signiﬁcant
improvement in relation to conventional PE cups, res-
ponsible for wear debris release that induces a foreign
body reaction and eventual osteolysis. Nevertheless,
ceramic material components suffer from early failures
due to their low fracture toughness. Therefore, import-
ant efforts have been made to improve the material
quality by modifying the production processes and
design requirements. Ceramic materials are widely used
in total hip arthroplasties either as femoral heads
articulated against PE, or as acetabular cups in the
alumina-on-alumina combination.
Alumina has been used for nearly 20 years owing to
its low friction and wear coefﬁcients. Alumina hip
prosthesis components must be perfectly spherical and
congruent, making surface ﬁnish a crucial step to limit
Table 2. (Continued.)
material
orthopaedic applications
references
polydimethylsulphoxide (PDMS)
replacement for small joints in hand and foot
Abel et al. (1998)
polypropylene (PP)
bone ﬁxation devices
polysulphone (PS)
bone ﬁxation devices, total joint arthroplasties
Marcolongo et al. (1998)
polycarbonate (PC)
bioabsorbable ﬁxation devices and bone regeneration
Charvet et al. (2000)
drug delivery
polyglycolic acid (PGA)
bioabsorbable ﬁxation devices and bone regeneration
Rokkanen (1998) and
Middleton & Tipton (2000)
drug delivery
polylactic acid (PLA)
bioabsorbable ﬁxation devices and bone regeneration
Rokkanen (1998) and
Middleton & Tipton (2000)
drug delivery
polycaprolactone (PCL)
bioabsorbable devices for bone regeneration
Hutmacher et al. (2000)
polydioxanone (PDS)
bioabsorbable ﬁxation devices
bone regeneration
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
1141
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 6 (native) -----
friction and wear. Moreover, serious problems of stress
shielding, due to a very high elastic modulus (380 GPa)
compared with cancellous bone, appear in elderly
patients with osteoporosis or rheumatoid arthritis and
lead to the loosening of the alumina acetabular cup.
This is the reason why a widely accepted combination
consists of using alumina for the head of the hip joint,
while the acetabular component is made of ultrahigh
molecular weight PE (UHMWPE).
Zirconia is one of the ceramic materials with the
highest strength suitable for medical use. Extremely
low wear (less than 0.1 mm3 per million cycles) has
been reported for zirconia femoral heads articulated
against alumina inserts for hip prostheses under
normal laboratory hip simulation conditions. This
bearing combination has been introduced into clinical
use (Villermaux 2000). In addition, zirconia is extre-
mely hard with excellent mechanical properties for
hip replacements.
Highly porous ceramics have been developed in order
to promote bone ingrowth and to induce prosthesis
stabilization. However, mechanical requirements will
determine the porous behaviour for low loaded or
unloaded bearing applications.
The calcium carbonate skeleton of certain corals
mimics trabecular bone. This fact has led to the
replication or reproduction of these structures with
different ceramic materials. In this sense, replamine-
form preparation of Al2O3 and hydroxyapatite (HA)
were described in detail by White et al. (1975) with
acceptable results.
Alumina and zirconia can also be foamed during
solidiﬁcation with a foaming agent such as CaCO3 that
produces porous generating gases (Peroglio et al. 2007).
However, the risk of mechanical collapse increases
with porosity, according to the Ryshkewitch equation:
sZs0$eKcp (Ryshkewitch 1953), where s is the
compression strength; s0 is the compression strength
of the bulk non-porous material; c is a constant; and p
is the porosity volume fraction.
Finally, because highly porous materials expose a
larger surface to the environment, their compression
strength can be affected by ageing.
2.3. Polymers
Some examples of polymer biomaterials of the ﬁrst
generation are silicone rubber, PE, acrylic resins,
polyurethanes, polypropylene (PP) and polymethyl-
methacrylate (PMMA).
Acrylic bone cements have played and still play a
key role in the anchorage of prostheses to the
surrounding bone in cemented arthroplasties. Charnley
(1960) introduced the self-polymerizing PMMA bone
cement into contemporary orthopaedics where he took
the idea from dental cements with the help of the
chemist D. Smith. This cement is constituted on the one
hand by a powder phase consisting of prepolymerized
PMMA, an initiator (to catalyse the polymerization
process) and a radiopaciﬁer (BaSO4 or ZrO2), and on
the other hand by a liquid phase formed by MMA
monomer, an accelerator reagent and a stabilizer.
These two components are mixed into a paste that
after the polymerization of the monomer hardens and
eventually sets.
Owing to the nature of the PMMA bone cement, it
provides an excellent primary ﬁxation of the prosthesis,
but it does not promote a biological secondary ﬁxation.
Moreover, even if from the biomaterials point of view,
PMMA bone cements perform adequately, several
drawbacks are associated with their use: residual
monomer may go into the blood supply producing a
fat embolism, the large exotherm in setting may
produce thermal necrosis of the surrounding bone, the
shrinkage of the cement during polymerization pro-
duces gaps and loss of contact between the cement and
the prosthesis and between the cement and the bone,
the difference in stiffness between the metallic prosthe-
sis and the bone may induce overstress or overstrain
that may produce fractures in the cement and the
release of cement particles that by interacting with the
surrounding tissues may induce an inﬂammatory
reaction. The ceramic radiopaciﬁer particles reduce
the mechanical properties up to 10 per cent due to the
discontinuities that they introduce in the cement
matrix. This is the reason why new opaciﬁers based
on organic iodine compounds have been investigated
(Artola et al. 2003). Despite these signiﬁcant draw-
backs, acrylic bone cements are still clinically used with
a good rate of success. One of the reasons is that
surgeons and material scientists have combined their
effort to greatly improve the surgical technique and
material performance from the time when acrylic bone
cements were initially used. Monomer cooling, vacuum
mixing and injecting devices have signiﬁcantly
improved the cements’ microstructure and their
mechanical properties. Moreover, the very good knowl-
edge about the pros and cons of these materials, as well
as the available choice of alternative solutions for
implant anchorage that surgeons have on their hands,
allows them to be used only in those applications where
they can exhibit a superior clinical performance. More
recently, acrylic cements have been used in verte-
broplasty and kyphoplasty, two surgical procedures
aimed at augmenting the strength of weakened
vertebral body, in order to stabilize it and restore it
(Phillips 2003; Bono & Garﬁn 2004). In the case of
vertebroplasties and kyphoplasties, the same formu-
lations as for cemented arthroplasties are still used,
including several formulations with a higher concen-
tration of radiopaciﬁer (Kuhn 2000; Carrodeguas
et al. 2002).
PE, and more speciﬁcally UHMWPE, is particularly
attractive for applications such as the liner of acet-
abular cups in total hip arthroplasties, in the tibial
insert and patellar component in total knee arthroplas-
ties and as a spacer in intervertebral artiﬁcial disc
replacement. Its unique properties of high abrasion
resistance, low friction and high impact strength,
excellent toughness and low density, ease of fabrication,
biocompatibility and biostability make it an ideal
candidate (Fisher & Dowson 1991; Sutula et al. 1995).
However, wear will take place and the wear debris will
lead to undesirable effects. It has been recently shown
that gamma-ray sterilization enhances the rate of
production of particles produced during the wear
1142
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 7 (native) -----
process. These particles produce an inﬂammatory
reaction in the surrounding tissues that may end up
as granulomatous lesions, osteolysis and bone resorp-
tion (Maloney & Smith 1995). In order to overcome
these problems, new processing and sterilization
techniques have been developed and continue under
study. They are speciﬁcally addressed to reduce the
fraction of low molecular weight chains in the polymer,
the orientation and compaction of the polymer chains
and the modiﬁcation and hardening of the surface of
the UHMWPE-bearing components.
Medical grade silicone elastomers have been widely
used in the replacement of diseased small joints. The
idea of replacing the small joints of the hand with
silicone implants was ﬁrst introduced by Swanson in
the mid-1960s (Swanson 1968). Arthroplasties of the
metacarpophalangeal and metatarsophalangeal joints
are most commonly practiced in severe pained rheuma-
toid arthritis treatments (Abel et al. 1998). Silicone
implants have proved to reduce pain effectively, correct
ulnar drift in ﬁngers and slightly improve the functional
range of motion (Kirschenbaum et al. 1993). Implant
mechanics are the main limitations of these ﬂexible
implants: the most important clinical complication
related to silicone implants is fracture (Blair et al.
1984; Bass et al. 1996). Other drawbacks include
subluxation, bone erosion, loosening and implant
abrasion (Hirakawa et al. 1996). A key issue in the
success of silicone-based implants lies in the appro-
priate design of the device mimicking the normal
characteristics of the joint (El-Gammal & Blair 1993;
Wilson et al. 1993).
Carbon ﬁbres have also been used in orthopaedics as
biomaterials of the ﬁrst generation. They have been
mainly used to reinforce polymers. These composite
materials have been tested with good results and rare
failure for spine surgery (Tullberg 1998). They have
also been studied for different applications such as total
hip replacement and internal ﬁxation. Carbon–carbon
prostheses for long-term middle-ear implantation have
also been applied with satisfactory results (Adams et al.
1978; Adams & Williams 1984; Podoshin et al. 1988).
Nevertheless, the main concern with these implants is
their release of carbon debris into the surrounding
tissues. It has been shown that they elicit adverse cell
response in some cases, such as collagenase synthesis
(Olson et al. 1988), cell detachment and lysis
(Brandwood et al. 1992) and the release of cell-
activating factors that then activate other cells in the
culture (Greis et al. 1994). Consequently, this means
that the use of these materials should be kept under
scrutiny unless carbon debris release is avoided.
Polyester and polytetraﬂuoroethylene (Goretex)
have been used for cruciate ligament prostheses, but
their clinical performance was not good enough
to become currently used by orthopaedic surgeons
(Du¨rselen et al. 1996).
Polymer matrix composite materials reinforced with
ceramic particles or ﬁbres, aiming for an inert
behaviour, have been also developed, although from a
chronological point of view they appeared later in time,
coexisting with the development of biomaterials of the
second and third generations. One of the main
applications sought was for osteosynthesis of bone
plates and screws. The main strategies consisted of
reinforcing polymeric matrices of polyetheretherke-
tone, PE or polysulphone (PS) mainly with carbon or
glass ﬁbres (Evans & Gregson 1998; Ramakrishna et al.
2001). Carbon ﬁbre-reinforced composites present a
lower rigidity in comparison with metallic biomaterials,
which is closer to that of cortical bone (Lewandowska-
Szumiel et al. 1999). These non-resorbable composite
materials are designed to be stable in in vivo conditions
without changes in the stiffness of the devices with
implantation time. Since these composites contain fully
polymerized and reacted thermoplastic polymers, no
complications associated with the toxic effect of
monomers can be expected. These materials can be
shaped according to surgery requirements, although in
certain applications such as bone plates, the stiffness
and lack of ductility of these materials do not allow
the surgeon in the operating theatre to give the
ﬁnal bend or shape in order to adapt it to the anatomy
of the patient.
A common feature of ﬁrst-generation biomaterials
is that after implantation a layer of diverse unspeciﬁc
proteins is adsorbed on their surface. The effect of such
different proteins adsorbed in different conﬁgurations
results in unspeciﬁc signalling to the cellular environ-
ment. The consequence is that a layer of ﬁbrous tissue
grows on the material surface, and with time the
implant becomes totally encapsulated by such ﬁbrous
tissue. The development of bioactive interfaces eliciting
a speciﬁc biological response and avoiding any ﬁbrous
layer has been one of the main driving forces in second-
generation biomaterials.
3. SECOND GENERATION
The second generation of biomaterials should be
considered to have appeared between 1980 and 2000,
and was deﬁned by the development of bioactive
materials’ ablility to interact with the biological
environment to enhance the biological response and
the tissue/surface bonding, as well as by the develop-
ment of bioabsorbable materials’ ability to undergo a
progressive degradation while new tissue regenerates
and heals. Bioactivity refers to any interaction or effect
that materials exert on cells with the aim of leading or
activating them to speciﬁc responses and behaviours.
Mineralization and binding between the bone tissue
and the implant is one of the most currently known
processes to increase bioactivity in bone repair and
ﬁxation applications. Bioactive biomaterials designed
for bone ﬁxation, repair and regeneration led to the
in vivo deposition of a layer of HA at the material
surface. By the mid-1980s, these bioactive materials
had reached clinical use in a variety of orthopaedic and
dental applications, including several bioactive glasses
(BGs), ceramics, glass–ceramics and composites.
However, there are other methods to induce materials’
bioactivity. These methods rely on the modiﬁcation of
surfaces with adsorbed proteins and tethered polymers
and biomolecules that promote certain cell responses
depending on the ﬁnal application.
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
1143
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 8 (native) -----
3.1. Ceramics
The most common ceramic materials can be classiﬁed
as BGs, glass–ceramics and calcium phosphates (CaPs)
both as ceramics and cements. The application of
these materials as bone substitutes started around the
1970s (De Groot 1974; Jarcho et al. 1976; Alkao et al.
1981; El Gannham 2005) and have been mainly used as
bone defect ﬁllers (Vogel et al. 2001). The similarities
between the bone mineral phase and their structural
and surface features are accountable for their good
bioactive properties, enabling binding to the bone with
no mediation of a ﬁbrous connective tissue interface
(Meffert et al. 1985; Schepers et al. 1991). Bioactive
ceramics have been reported to be biocompatible
and osteoconductive.
HA (Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2), b-tricalcium phosphate
(b-TCP, Ca3(PO4)2), their derivatives and their
combinations are the most commonly used ceramics.
Depending on their synthesis process, these materials
show different physical and chemical properties (El
Gannham 2005). HA shows good bioactive properties;
however, its chemical stability reduces its solubility
rate in comparison with other CaPs such as TCPs. In
fact, after implantation HA may remain integrated into
the regenerated bone tissue, whereas TCPs are
completely reabsorbed (Takahashi et al. 2005; Ginebra
et al. 2006).
There is a range of suitable CaPs (amorphous CaP
(ACP), OCP, a-TCP, b-TCP, CDHA, HA, TTCP and
occasionally FA) that can be used as CaP cements
(CPCs). These materials are injectable, harden inside
the damaged bone tissue and generate low heat transfer
that avoids the premature death of surrounding cells
(Ginebra et al. 1997; Takagi et al. 1998).
Silicon plays an essential role in bone formation;
indeed, silicon ions are known to be involved in the
calciﬁcation process of young bones (Carlisle 1970).
Thus, the presence of silicon in biological ceramics and
glasses has a signiﬁcant effect in the osteogenesis
process. In fact, it has been demonstrated that the
incorporation of silicon into apatites induces the
formation of a higher amount of bone tissue than non-
doped apatites (Patel et al. 2002). Moreover, silicon
improves materials’ bioactivity by leading the formation
of Si–OH groups on the material surface. These groups
trigger the nucleation and formation of apatite layers
on the surface improving the material–bone bonding.
Several BGs containing SiO2 as network former and
Na2O, CaO and P2O5 as modifying oxides such as the
bioglass (45S5) developed by Hench in the 1970s, and
glass–ceramic compositions are able to stimulate tissue
regeneration by inducing the formation of surface
active layers (Anderson & Kangansniemi 1991; Ohtsuki
et al. 1991; Neo et al. 1993; Cao & Hench 1996).
According to Hench (1991), bioactive materials are able
to form a carbonated HA (CHA) bone-like layer on the
surface. The crystallization of the ACP ﬁlm occurs by
incorporating OHK and CO3K from the solution to
form a CHA layer. Several BG formulations have been
developed by both the melt process and the sol–gel
process (Hench et al. 1998). These bioglass formu-
lations induce bone growth three times faster than HA
(Fujishiro et al. 1997). Approximately 10 hours after
implantation, there is a combination of adsorption and
desorption processes of proteins and growth factors to
trigger the osteogenic cascade and cell differentiation.
In approximately 100 hours, stem cells differentiate to
form osteoblasts, which generate an extracellular
matrix (ECM) to form a new bone. Finally, CaP
matrix crystallizes to enclose bone cells (osteocytes). It
has been shown that a large surface area in BGs,
silica gel and glass–ceramics (larger than 40–80 m2 gK1)
provides a high amount of silanol (Si–OH) termin-
ations, which are adequately ﬂexible to match the
crystal cell of CHA and therefore might act as
nucleation sites for it (Karlson et al. 1989; Kokubo
1991). Furthermore, Li and co-workers observed that
abundant OHK groups and a negative zeta potential
were required to nucleate CHA on the gel (Li & Zhang
1990; Li et al. 1994a,b). Thus, Ca2C is deposited on the
surface and induces phosphate precipitation. It was also
shown that SiO2 and TiO2 gels were able to induce the
nucleation of CHA owing to their negative charges at
physiological pH. Conversely, Al2O3 is positively
charged at pH 7 and inhibits CHA nucleation (Li
et al. 1994a,b).
Besides SiO2, P2O5 has also been used as a network
former, while alkaline earth metals (e.g. MgO or CaO)
or alkali metals (e.g. Na2O or K2O) act as network
modiﬁers allowing the modiﬁcation of the inner inter-
face environment through ion exchange. In several
cases, TiO2 has also been used as a modiﬁer to enhance
reticulation within the glass network (Clement et al.
2000; Navarro et al. 2003). Owing to their poor
mechanical properties, low tensile strength and very
low fracture toughness, BGs are not suitable for load-
bearing applications. Conversely, BGs were success-
fully used in low load-bearing material applications for
bone repair in dental and orthopaedic surgery (Ogino
et al. 1980; Schepers et al. 1991; Stanley et al. 1997). BG
surfaces have also been modiﬁed to enhance their
bioactivity by coating them with adhesive proteins
such as ﬁbronectin to promote cell adhesion (Garcı´a
et al. 1998).
3.2. Metals
None of the metallic materials used in orthopaedics is
bioactive per se. However, two approaches can be
considered to obtain bioactive metals. The ﬁrst one
consists of coating the surface of the implant with a
bioactive ceramic (HA and BGs). The second one is
to chemically modify the surface of the material so as to
obtain the deposition of a bioactive ceramic in vivo or
to induce proteins and cell adhesion and other
tissue/material interactions.
Some of the coating methods of the ﬁrst approach
include electrophoretic deposition (Ducheyne et al.
1990), plasma spraying (De Groot et al. 1990; Thull &
Grant 2001), radio frequency or ionic ray sputtering
(Cook et al. 1988), laser ablation (Cle`ries 1999; Serra
et al. 2001) or hot isostatic pressure (Hero et al. 1994).
None of these methods produce covalent links with
the substrate, and the majority are not cost-effective.
However, HA coating by plasma spray deposition is at
1144
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 9 (native) -----
present the most common method used for clinical
applications. In this process, HA in its plasma state
(greater than 10008C) is projected against a colder
material metallic surface (100–1508C). By cooling down
rapidly, a mechanical interaction is created between
the ceramic and the substrate. However, this method
presents some drawbacks such as difﬁculties in control-
ling the ﬁnal composition of the ceramic (Yan et al.
2003), crystallinity of the coating (Fazan & Marquis
2000), structure of the HA which is thermally unstable,
heterogeneities between the substrate and the coating
(air bubbles) and residual stresses in the ceramic coating
(Wang et al. 1993). All these factors may produce
failure of the coating, during the life in service of
the implant (Mann et al. 1994). Extensive information
about these drawbacks and their possible consequences
are reviewed in the literature (Sun et al. 2001).
In the second approach, various methods based on
chemical modiﬁcations have been developed to obtain
apatite or other CaP material layers on metallic
surfaces, creating a direct chemical link between the
substrate and the coating. These methods have been
mainly developed for CP Ti and Ti alloys.
The ﬁrst method consists of a thermochemical
treatment developed by Kokubo et al. (1996), which
consists of etching the surface of the material with an
aqueous solution of NaOH, followed by a heat treat-
ment at 6008C. This results in a thin titanate layer
able to form a dense bone-like apatite layer when
placed in a physiological medium. An alternative
method developed by Ohtsuki et al. (1997) is based on
a chemical etching with hydrogen peroxide containing
small amounts of tin chloride at 608C. Another method
consists of dipping the material in a sol–gel solution
previously prepared at 08C, followed by a thermal
treatment at 5008C (Li & de Groot 1993). Other
methods consist of the attachment of self-assembled
monolayers (SAMs) designed with a functional group at
their end, which is able to induce the nucleation of a
CaP (Campbell et al. 1996; Tanashi & Matsuda 1997;
Wheeler et al. 1997). A ﬁnal strategy used consists of
the precalciﬁcation of the metallic surfaces by succes-
sive immersion in solutions of Na2HPO4 and Ca(OH)2,
after a two-step chemical etching with a mixture of HCl
and H2SO4 followed by immersion in NaOH boiling
solution (Wen et al. 1997).
The mechanisms involved in the nucleation and
growth of a CaP layer on this bioactive surface, in vitro
and in vivo, are not fully understood. Among the
surface parameters that seem to play a critical role in
apatite deposition are the electrostatic charges and zeta
potential, density of hydroxyl groups and structure of
TiO2 oxide (Li et al. 1994a,b; Cho et al. 1995; Uchida
et al. 2003).
Other surface modiﬁcation methods to improve
the bioactivity of metallic surfaces were also studied.
Methods ranging from dip-coating techniques to
formation of SAMs and tethering polymer chains
to the surface were developed to affect the adhesion of
cells, to inﬂuence proliferation and differentiation rates
and to achieve more stable long-term material/tissue
integration (Blawas & Reichert 1998; Scotchford et al.
1998). In this context, covalent chemical binding of
polymers and biomolecules has been achieved through
silanized titania surfaces, using amino- and carboxyl-
directed immobilization mainly through glutaralde-
hyde chemistry, and photochemistry by ‘grafting to’
biomolecules with a photoactive group (Colloiud et al.
1993; Xiao et al. 1998, 2001).
3.3. Polymers
This second generation was characterized by the
development of resorbable biomaterials that displayed
a controlled chemical breakdown and the resorption of
the polymer chains. Biodegradable polymers of
synthetic and natural origin such as polyglycolide
(PGA), polylactide (PLA), polydioxanone (PDS),
poly(3-caprolactone) (PCL), polyhydroxybutyrate
(PHB), polyorthoester, chitosan, poly(2-hydroxy-
ethyl-methacrylate) (PHEMA), hyaluronic acid and
other hydrogels were extensively studied during this
period. The concept of bioabsorbable material was
introduced in the 1960s by Kulkarni et al. (1966, 1971).
In the last decades, these materials have been used in
many orthopaedic applications such as bone sub-
stitution, repair of bone fractures (including ligament
ﬁxation), cartilage, meniscus and intervertebral disc.
They are found as sutures, rods, screws, pins and plates
(Ciccone et al. 2001).
When from a mechanical point of view a polymeric
device can be used instead of a metallic one, the use of
bioresorbable implants has several advantages over the
use of traditional metallic ones. Biodegradable implants
reduce the stress shielding effect, eliminate subsequent
surgeries that may be necessary to remove the metallic
implant, and enable post-operative diagnostic imaging,
avoiding artefacts from metals.
Many macromolecular compounds are bioabsorb-
able, but only a few have the required properties for
internal bone ﬁxation devices. PLA, PGA and PDS
have been the most widely used for such purposes.
The mechanical strength of bioabsorbable poly-
meric implants has been enhanced by using the
self-reinforcing process. This approach consists of
reinforcing the polymer matrix with oriented ﬁbres
or ﬁbrils of the same material. This self-reinforcing
strategy for PLA (SR-PLA) and PGA (SR-PGA) has
been clinically studied and used since 1984 (To¨rma¨la¨
1992; Waris et al. 1994).
Bioabsorbable ﬁxation can be used in the treatments
of a variety of fractures, namely glenoidal rim, proximal
humerus, lateral humeral condyle, medial condyle
of the humerus,
olecranon,
radial head, distal
radius, hand, femoral head and neck, femoral condyles,
patella, tibial condyles, talus, calcaneus, metatarsal
bones, phalanges of the toes and malleolar fractures
(Rokkanen 1998). Bioabsorbable devices are also
currently used in the ﬁxation of bone in osteotomies,
arthrodeses and other reconstructive surgery. Bio-
absorbable self-reinforced PLA, self-reinforced PGA
and PDS pins can be used to ﬁx distal chevron
osteotomy (Barca & Busa 1997); PLA staples are
used in foot surgery (Burns 1998; Burns & Varin 1998).
The ﬁxation of ruptures of the ulnar collateral ligament
of the thumb, which is a common sports injury, can be
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
1145
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 10 (native) -----
done using bioabsorbable devices. PLA arrows and
plugs are also used in the ﬁxation of the knee meniscus
bucket-handle lesions and dislocations of the shoulder
(Albrecht-Olsen et al. 1993; Pihlajama¨ki et al. 1994).
Bioabsorbable implants for spinal surgery are rather
recent in comparison with the applications mentioned
previously (Vaccaro et al. 2003). Some applications
such as interbody cages elaborated with PLA for
speciﬁc spinal fusion applications, bioabsorbable ramp
type interbody spacers for posterior lumbar interbody
fusion procedures and the use of PLA screws for
anterior cervical decompression and fusion processes
have been successfully reported (Brunon et al. 1994;
Subach et al. 1999; Van Dijk et al. 2002). The
stabilization of posterolateral lumbar fusion using
facet joint ﬁxation with PLA bioabsorbable rods has
also been studied (Johnson et al. 1997).
Bioabsorbable polymers are usually processed
following similar procedures as those used for thermo-
plastics. They can be melted and extruded, moulded by
injection or compression or solvent cast, but the
presence of moisture must be carefully controlled,
because their hydrolytic sensitivity leads to a signi-
ﬁcant decrease in the material’s molecular weight.
Therefore, the polymer has to be kept completely dry
before thermally processing, and its contact with
moisture during the processing must be avoided. The
effect of several processing parameters on polymers’
degradation during processing has been reported by
Von Oepen & Michaeli (1992) and Michaeli & Von
Oepen (1994).
Biodegradability is mainly originated by hydrolysis
of the polymer chain backbone and to a lesser extent by
enzymatic activity (Vert & Li 1992; Li & McCarthy
1999). Degradation times depend on multiple factors
such as polymer crystallinity, molecular weight, ther-
mal
history,
porosity,
monomer
concentration,
geometry and the location of the implant. In an
aqueous environment, water penetrates the bulk of
the polymer sample and attacks preferentially the
chemical bonds of the amorphous phase, shortening the
polymer chains (Gopferich 1996). Crystalline regions
remain and temporarily support the physical properties
of the device until water disrupts and attacks crystal-
line regions. In a second stage, enzymatic attack of the
bulk takes place (Li & Vert 1994). Degradation inside
the device is accelerated due to the presence of the
acidic degradation products that autocatalyse the
degradation process of the material. After degradation,
the hydrophilicity of the monomer increases as well as
the amount of acidic end groups. These factors together
with a lower crystallinity and size of the device and a
higher amount of reactive hydrolytic groups in the
polymer backbone accelerate the degradation process
(Grizzi et al. 1995; Middleton & Tipton 2000). This
type of degradation is known as ‘bulk degradation’
(Li & Vert 1994; Li 1999). In the case of PLA and PGA,
the ﬁnal products of the polymer degradation are the
acidic monomers (lactic acid and glycolic acid, respect-
ively) that are enzymatically converted and used in the
metabolic pathway of the tricarboxylic acid cycle that
takes place in the mitochondria. The ﬁnal products are
ATP, water and CO2 that are excreted by the lungs and
kidneys (Brady et al. 1973; Agrawal et al. 1995).
Chitosan, PHEMA, PEG and hyaluronic acid are
among the most relevant hydrogels studied of this
second generation of biomaterials. Hydrogels’ structure
and properties are attributed to the bonding of hydro-
philic macromolecules by means of covalent hydrogen
and ionic bonds that form a three-dimensional network
that is able to retain large amounts of water in their
structure. These types of polymers have been mainly
used in cartilage, ligaments, tendons and intervertebral
disc repair applications (Ambrosio et al. 1996).
Self-reinforcing is not the only method used to
strengthen polymer materials. Hydrogels such as
PHEMA, which is a highly biocompatible, permeable
and hydrophilic hydrogel, have been combined with
PCL and reinforced with PGA and PET ﬁbres and
studied for potential use as tendon and ligament
prosthesis (Migliaresi et al. 1981; Davis et al. 1991;
Ambrosio et al. 1998). The incorporation of PCL and
PET ﬁbres into a PHEMA matrix has been studied as
an alternative to previous intervertebral disc prosthesis
made from metals and metallic–polymer systems
(Taksali et al. 2004).
Composite materials reinforced with ceramic particles
or ﬁbres, both biodegradable and inert can be considered
to have been developed during the last 30 years. The
inert ones can be considered as ﬁrst-generation materials
and they have been already described.
Most bioabsorbable composites for bone repair
applications were developed following the so-called
bone-analogue concept proposed by Bonﬁeld et al.
(1981) and Bonﬁeld (1988). It is necessary to point out
that in the case of Bonﬁeld’s composite, as well as some
others, the concept is a bioactive non-biodegradable
material: HAPEX consists of a PE matrix reinforced
with HA particles. HA acts as the bioactive agent that
promotes osteoblast attachment, while PE, the matrix,
is a stable, non-biodegradable inert polymer. It is worth
mentioning that HAPEX has been successfully com-
mercialized for middle-ear implant applications and to
date it has been implanted in over 300 000 patients with
very successful outcomes. In the case of bioabsorbable
composites, the bioabsorbable polymer matrix is
reinforced with a bioactive reinforcing phase such
as HA, several CaPs and BGs (Kasuga et al. 2003;
Kunze et al. 2003; Jaakkola et al. 2004; Navarro
et al. 2005). The aim is to obtain a material with
mechanical properties similar to those of bone that can
form bioactive bonding with bone tissue and where the
degradation process matches the healing period of the
fracture or lesion. The adhesion between the com-
ponents of the two phases is one of the main concerns
that need to be solved. The most effective strategy to
improve adhesion at the interface between the organic
matrix and the inorganic reinforcement is to chemically
modify both phases in order to create a biocompatible
chemical bonding between them. Some natural poly-
mers such as hyaluronic acid, collagen and chitosan
have proved to have some intrinsic bioactive effect in
some tissues such as cartilage tissue. Polymers’
bioactivity depends on the functional groups and
binding sites available at the material surface. Thus,
1146
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 11 (native) -----
polymers’ bioactivity can be also improved by coupling
certain polymers and biomolecules to their surface as in
the case of metals and ceramic materials. For the
second-generation
biomaterials,
polymer
surface
modiﬁcation has been mainly achieved by physisorp-
tion of proteins and peptides on the surface, by dip-
coating and by amino- and carboxyl-directed immobil-
ization of biomolecules (Ma et al. 2002). Polymers’
surfaces have also been modiﬁed biochemically to
induce their mineralization with HA layers (Kato
et al. 1996).
4. THIRD GENERATION
The third-generation biomaterials are meant to be new
materials that are able to stimulate speciﬁc cellular
responses at the molecular level (Hench & Polak 2002).
For these biomaterials, the bioactivity and biodegrad-
ability concepts are combined, and bioabsorbable
materials become bioactive and vice versa. These
materials’ properties should merge with their ability
to signal and stimulate speciﬁc cellular activity and
behaviour.
Temporary
three-dimensional
porous
structures that stimulate cells’ invasion, attachment
and proliferation, as well as functionalized surfaces
with peptide sequences that mimic the ECM com-
ponents so as to trigger speciﬁc cell responses are being
developed (Hutmacher et al. 2000; Temenoff & Mikos
2000; Agrawal & Ray 2001). Deliveries of biochemical
factors and medical drugs, as well as control of cell
behaviour through mechanotransduction are some
ﬁelds of interest.
The third generation of biomaterials appeared
approximately at the same time as scaffolds for tissue
engineering applications started to be developed.
Tissue engineering emergence is boosted as an alter-
native potential solution to tissue transplantation and
grafting. The use of allografts, autografts and xeno-
grafts presents several limitations, namely donor site
scarcity, rejection, diseases transfer, harvesting costs
and post-operative morbidity (Fernyhough et al. 1992;
Banwart et al. 1995; Goulet et al. 1997). Tissue
engineering and regenerative medicine are recent
research areas exploring how to repair and regenerate
organs and tissues using the natural signalling
pathways and components such as stem cells, growth
factors and peptide sequences among others, in
combination with synthetic scaffolds (Hardouin et al.
2000). In addition to the combination of the basic tissue
engineering triad (cells, signalling and scaffold), there
are some processes such as angiogenesis and nutrients
delivery that are crucial to stimulate tissue regen-
eration and must take place right after implantation.
Although tissue engineering has emerged as a very
brilliant alternative to overcome many existing pro-
blems related to the current use of autografts, allografts
and xenografts, its implementation as part of a routine
treatment for tissue replacement is controversial. At
present the angiogenesis problem has not been solved.
Besides, tissue engineering involves cells’ manipulation
which is not a simple and straightforward issue, and
represents a main drawback for the generalized use of
this technique in a hospital. In spite of that, tissue
engineering is a very promising strategy that opens
numerous possibilities of study and research in the ﬁeld
of regenerative medicine.
Tissue engineering is a multi- and interdisciplinary
ﬁeld that involves the complementary effort of
the engineering, chemistry, physics and biology
ﬁelds. Engineers, chemists and physicists will have to
focus on the improvement and development of new
materials and processing technologies, new surface
treatments and characterization techniques, bio-
reactors and cell seeding methods. From the biology
side, new cell sources will have to be found as well as new
isolation and expansion methodologies. Furthermore,
new biomolecules such as growth factors and peptides
involved in cell differentiation, angiogenesis and tissue
formation processes will have to be developed. Finally,
surgeons will have to enhance and develop new
surgical procedures, probably minimally invasive, in
order to overcome present limitations.
Scaffolds understood as three-dimensional porous
structures need to fulﬁl the following criteria in order to
be used in tissue engineering (Spaans et al. 2000;
Boccaccini et al. 2002).
— The material must be biocompatible and its
degradation by-products non-cytotoxic.
— The scaffold must be biodegradable and should
resorb at the same rate as the tissue is repaired.
— The scaffold must possess a highly interconnected
porous network, formed by a combination of macro-
and micropores that enable proper tissue ingrowth,
vascularization and nutrient delivery.
— The mechanical properties of the scaffold must be
appropriate to regenerate bone tissue in load-bearing
sites. Moreover, the material must keep its struc-
tural integrity during the ﬁrst stages of the new
bone formation.
Both natural and synthetic polymers have been used
in the development of new three-dimensional scaffolds
for bone, cartilage, ligament, meniscus and interver-
tebral disc tissue engineering. In particular, synthetic
biodegradable polymers have attracted special atten-
tion because they enable a better control of their
physico-chemical properties and also because they have
been successfully used in clinical applications. PLA,
PGA, PCL and PHB are the most widely studied
polymers for bone tissue engineering purposes. PLA,
collagen and silk have been studied as potential
materials for ligament tissue engineering (Guarino
et al. 2007). A combination of PCL and hyaluronic
acid has been developed for meniscus tissue engineering
with promising results (Chiari et al. 2006) Hyaluronic
acid, polyglactin (Marijnissen et al. 2002), collagen,
ﬁbrin, alginates, chondroitin sulphate photocrosslinked
hydrogels and glycosaminoglycans are also under study
for cartilage and intervertebral disc (nucleus pulposus)
tissue engineering applications (Cancedda et al. 2003;
Revell et al. 2007). In addition, decalciﬁed (or
demineralized) bone matrix (DBM) is currently being
used successfully in various clinical applications as an
alternative to autografts (Mellonig 1996; Caplanis et al.
1998; Groeneveld et al. 1999; Russell & Block 1999;
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
1147
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 12 (native) -----
Wang et al. 2007). It is commercially available from
different manufacturers as an allergenic human freeze-
dried bone graft (Wang et al. 2007), and is generally
used for ﬁlling bone defects. Moreover, due to its
similarity with natural bone, DMB has been demon-
strated to be an efﬁcient carrier for bone morphogenetic
proteins (BMP), which are growth factors that enhance
bone formation (Canter et al. 2007). In fact, DMB is
also used as a delivery system, and in combination with
BMPs, particularly with rhBMP-2, constitutes an
excellent osteoinductive bone graft (Peel et al. 2003).
The combination of bioactivity and biodegradability
is probably the most relevant characteristics that
encompass third-generation biomaterials. The bioacti-
vation of surfaces with speciﬁc biomolecules is a
powerful tool that allows cell guidance and stimulation
towards a particular response. The aim is to mimic the
ECM environment and function in the developed
scaffold by coupling speciﬁc cues in its surface. Thus,
cell behaviour including adhesion, migration, prolifer-
ation and differentiation into a particular lineage will
be inﬂuenced by the biomolecules attached to the
material surface.
Biodegradable composite scaffolds combining bio-
degradability and bioactivity offer unique advantages
in the tissue engineering ﬁeld. The incorporation of
an inorganic phase into a bioabsorbable polymer
matrix modiﬁes the mechanical behaviour of the
porous structure (Navarro et al. 2004b), modiﬁes
the degradation pattern of the polymer and also enhances
the bioactivity of bone tissue engineering scaffolds
(Spaans et al. 2000; Navarro et al. 2005).
In the case of cartilage, some natural polymers,
namely collagen and hyaluronic acid, possess inherent
biological cues that allow chondrocytes to interact with
hydrogel scaffolds. Alginate, chitosan and other
synthetic hydrogels have been modiﬁed with growth
factors such as transforming growth factor (TGF)-b3,
adhesion proteins and peptide sequences such as RAD,
ELK and EAK among others, which can increase the
expression and synthesis of cartilage-speciﬁc ECM
proteoglycans and promote cell–material interactions
(Holmes 2002; Na et al. 2007). Scaffolds intended for
ligament regeneration have been functionalized with
RGD motifs to stimulate cell attachment and prolifer-
ation as well as to increase the production of ECM
proteins (Guarino et al. 2007).
Numerous elaboration techniques and approaches to
the development of three-dimensional scaffolds that
combine biodegradability and bioactivity are currently
under study (Coombes & Heckman 1992; Mikos et al.
1993; Mooney et al. 1996; Wake et al. 1996). Each
preparation technique confers particular and different
structural characteristics to the scaffold. Therefore, the
choice of the technique depends on the requirements of
the ﬁnal application. Some of the most promising
techniques for the processing of such scaffolds are gel
casting, solvent casting and particulate leaching,
laminated object manufacturing, phase separation,
gas saturation, ﬁbre bonding and membrane lamination
among others (Yang et al. 2001). Recently, a new three-
dimensional braiding technology for the fabrication of
biodegradable PLLA scaffolds for ligament replacement
has been developed (Laurencin & Freeman 2005). The
micro- and macrostructure of the scaffolds depend
strongly on the processing technique. Pore distribution,
interconnectivity and size are of paramount importance
in order to guarantee proper cell proliferation and
migration, as well as tissue vascularization and diffu-
sion of nutrients. According to Klawitter & Hulbert
(1971) a pore size between 100 and 350 mm is optimum
for bone regeneration. Probably, a comprehensive
assessment of the ability of a three-dimensional scaffold
to allow cell viability and capacity of ECM production
is to evaluate its permeability. Moreover, it seems that
it would be advisable to evaluate the transport proper-
ties of oxygen and nutrients inside the scaffold in order
to assess whether they will be able to reach cells seeded
inside them.
Some ceramics and glasses have been used for the
elaboration of porous scaffolds. As in the case of
polymers, a high degree of macro-, micro- and nano-
porosities is needed. In addition, the degradation rate of
the biomaterial and the regeneration rate of the tissue
must be equilibrated in order to enable a proper bone
turnover process (Artzi et al. 2004).
Current research is focused in nanocrystalline
structures (Ferraz et al. 2004), organic–inorganic com-
posites, ﬁbres (Aizawa et al. 2005), microspheres (He
et al. 2007), three-dimensional ACP scaffolds (Tadic
et al. 2004), HA (Deville et al. 2006), tuned porosity
microstructures (Tampieri et al. 2001) and hierarchically
organized structures (Furuichi et al. 2006).
Recently, the introduction of undifferentiated bone
marrow stromal cells into a hydrogel containing CaP
particles in suspension (Trojani et al. 2006) has resulted
in an injectable cement composite mixed with living
cells. The in vivo results obtained after the implan-
tation of this material in mouse have shown a good
vascularization and integration into the host tissue.
In addition, BG–ceramics elaborated from CaP
degradable glasses as well as BGs, and CPC foams
have been used as templates for in situ regeneration
with very promising results (Gong et al. 2001; Yuan
et al. 2001; Almirall et al. 2004; Navarro et al. 2004a;
Ginebra et al. 2007).
Metals have also been used in the development of
porous structures for bone tissue engineering. The
development of porous metallic scaffolds (metallic
foams) for bone tissue engineering and drug delivery
applications has mainly been focused on titanium and
titanium alloys (Assad et al. 2003a,b; Li et al. 2002,
2006, 2007; Yeh & Sung 2004).
Despite the numerous studies on the manufacture
and design of metallic foams (Ko¨rner & Singer 2000;
Banhart 2001), works dealing with the in vitro or in vivo
behaviour of this type of materials are still scarce.
Titanium ﬁbre meshes (86% porosity and a 250 mm
average pore size) have been used for the ex vivo culture
of rat bone marrow stromal cells, under static and
dynamic conditions (ﬂow perfusion bioreactor), and
subsequent implantation in cranial defects in rats
(Sikavitsas et al. 2003; Van den Dolder et al. 2003).
These scaffolds have also found application as delivery
systems for transforming growth factor b1 (TGF-b1)
and have been used to repair rabbit cranial defects
1148
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 13 (native) -----
(Vehof et al. 2002). Titanium foams tested in vitro with
human osteoblasts have shown osteoblast colonization
and differentiation into mature bone cells, and conse-
quently could be appropriate materials for spine fusion
and other applications (St-Pierre et al. 2005; Mu¨ller
et al. 2006). In fact, some authors even claim the
osteoinductive action of these materials (Takemoto
et al. 2006; Tognarini et al. 2008).
Porous tantalum is also being successfully used
clinically in several orthopaedic applications. Its high
volumetric porosity, low elastic modulus (it can be as
low as 3 GPa) and good frictional characteristics make
tantalum foam an ideal candidate for weight-bearing
applications such as total joint arthroplasty (Levine
et al. 2006). Moreover, tantalum has an excellent in vivo
biocompatibility and can become bioactive via a simple
chemical treatment (Miyazaki et al. 2001).
The main concerns with these unresorbable scaffolds
are related to their permanent implantation in the body
that can trigger risks of toxicity caused by the
accumulation of metal ions due to corrosion (Rubin &
Yaremchuk 1997), the premature failure due to poor
wear properties, and the higher elastic modulus
compared with bone, which leads to heterogeneous
stress distributions.
Bioresorbable foams of magnesium have been
developed as a new alternative for bone graft sub-
stitutes. By adjusting their porosity, an elastic modulus
similar to that of cancellous bone can be achieved (Wen
et al. 2001). In addition, magnesium scaffolds have
shown good osteoinductive properties (capable of
osteogenesis; Maeda et al. 2007).
Research on shape memory metallic foams is
currently carried out, especially with NiTi alloys, so
as to reduce stress shielding and increase the wear
resistance of conventional porous titanium scaffolds.
Gu et al. (2006) have studied the in vitro behaviour of
porous NiTi in contact with osteoblasts while Unger
et al. (2004) have obtained preliminary results on the
cytocompatibility of porous NiTi scaffolds with endo-
thelial cells for angiogenesis. As such, all these metallic
materials belong to the ﬁrst generation. The innovation
lies in the porosity, although a ﬁbrous layer between the
metal and the ECM growth inside the pores should be
expected. Thus, as mentioned above, when discussing
strategies for improving metal bioactivity, a proper
treatment of the material surface may help to avoid this
problem and create a direct bonding with the tissue.
Since cell adhesion is mediated by protein–cell
interactions via biological recognition of protein
sequences by transmembrane cell receptors, with speciﬁc
sequences that enhance cell attachment (arginine–
glycine–aspartic acid (RGD)), the design of biomaterials
is now focused on biological stimulation. Some of the
most commonly employed strategies are the functiona-
lization of biomaterial surfaces using proteins and
peptides that mimic the ECM chemistry, in particular
RGD sequences (Garcia et al. 1997; D’Avis et al. 1998;
Dee et al. 1999; Hersel et al. 2003), and the addition of
growth factors into the scaffold composition for a
controlled delivery to the surrounding cells. For this
last approach, various growth factors have already been
used: ﬁbroblast growth factor (FGF), platelet-derived
growth factor and insulin-like growth factor, TGF,
BMPs, interleukins and interferons (Nathan & Sporn
1991; Ripamonti & Tasker 2000).
Surface bioactivation can be achieved by functiona-
lizing surfaces with different biomolecules by applying a
variety of methods where both chemical bonding and
physical adsorption take place. Some of these methods
are an update and evolution of some of the methods
already explored at the end of the second generation of
biomaterials. During the third generation, dip-coating
techniques are still used, but some more sophisticated
‘bottom-up’ and ‘top-down’ techniques are also
developed to engineer surfaces with high speciﬁcity
levels. Additionally, the synthesis and tailoring of new
biomolecules for speciﬁc applications occur during this
third generation. The development of more complex
biopolymers and biomolecules such as elastin-like
biopolymers including peptide sequences that induce
mineralization and cell adhesion, or self-assembled
amphiphilic peptides that include cell signalling cues
could provide the answer (Rodrı´guez-Cabello et al.
2007; Sargeant et al. 2008).
Therefore, it is predictable that in the short and
medium term, future trends in biomaterials will involve
the active interaction between chemistry and biology
and will be more and more focused on achieving their
combination with biological entities in order to obtain a
totally viable biological environment.
5. CONCLUSION
In the last 60 years, biomaterials for orthopaedic
applications have moved from materials available for
different industrial applications into the development
of materials with abilities to interact with the biological
environment and to elicit speciﬁc biological responses.
Most of the problems that orthopaedic surgery has to
face have not basically changed, and are practically the
same that orthopaedics had to face 50 years ago;
however, the choice of possible solutions has been
greatly expanded because new materials allow the
design of innovative devices. The possibility to regen-
erate tissues or organs could not be undertaken with the
materials of the ﬁrst generation. The possibility to
modify and control surface properties at the micro/
nano level constitutes one of the major breakthroughs,
because it opens a whole new range of strategies seeking
the desired interaction with the biological environment.
In certain instances, the regeneration of a musculoske-
letal tissue can be considered, either after an early
diagnosis of some pathology or after an accident or an
operation where part of the tissue has been lost or a
resection has been made. In such cases, the aim of
regenerative medicine will be either to implant a smart
biomaterial that is able to stimulate stem cells existing
in their niches or to use cellular tissue engineering
strategies, where a construct developed inside a
bioreactor and consisting of a scaffold, patient’s cells
and initial ECM developed by them, is implanted in the
patient’s body that recognizes it as its own tissue. One
of the main ideas behind the different approaches
reviewed in the literature consists of developing
functionalized bioabsorbable polymeric, CaP or
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
1149
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 14 (native) -----
composite substrates or scaffolds able to stimulate cell
activity, i.e. adhesion, proliferation and differentiation,
with the aim that differentiated osteoblasts produce
bone ECM. Most of these approaches meant for bone
regeneration require still solving the necessary angio-
genesis in the newly growing ECM, expected to become
healthy bone tissue. Here again, the combination of
knowledge of materials scientists and biologists should
allow the development and synthesis of materials and
biomolecules with the right chemistry and structure to
stimulate endothelialization as well as the formation of
blood vessels.
In many other circumstances, like fractures, large
resections, joint malfunctions, spinal pathologies and
other situations, repair or substitution will be the main
requirement. This means that different devices and
prostheses will still be needed as permanent implants.
In this sense, it is difﬁcult to foresee in the short or
medium term that metals and alloys can be avoided in
relevant load-bearing applications: the evidence seems
to point out that titanium alloys will still be needed for
osteosynthesis applications, like bone plates where no
ossteointegration into bone is desirable. The conse-
quence is that the use of biomaterials of the ﬁrst
generation cannot be discarded, and in general, it can
be said that biomaterials from the three generations
have a relevant role to be played. For those cases where
the aim is the integration of the implant in the
surrounding tissue, bioactive surfaces are developed
by different means: functionalization with different
molecules, surface coatings or layers such as CaPs and
others like metallic porous structures.
The ﬁnal comment that seems necessary to intro-
duce is that, in many instances, the biological assess-
ment of modiﬁed or functionalized surfaces, as well as
three-dimensional scaffolds is carried out in vitro by
means of cell cultures. However, the conclusive assess-
ment can only come from in vivo testing. Besides
extracellular ﬂuids, there is blood contact and inﬂam-
mation that play the leading role in the outcome of the
ﬁnal implant behaviour.
The main conclusion seems to be that there is
still sophisticated materials science to be developed
in order to match the biological complexity at
the molecular level. However, the task of tailoring the
biomaterials’ surfaces for at least some of the different
purposes of implant integration and tissue regeneration
seems a feasible challenge in the future, probably at
midterm by the synergistic interdisciplinary work of
materials science, engineering, biology, chemistry,
physics and medicine.
REFERENCES
Abel, E., Wheleer, J., Chudek, J., Hunter, G. & Som, F. 1998
Analysis of MRI images of a silicone elastomer under
different axial loading conditions. Biomaterials 19, 55–60.
(doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(97)00155-5)
Adams, D. & Williams, D. F. 1984 The response of bone to
carbon–carbon composites. Biomaterials 5, 59–64. (doi:10.
1016/0142-9612(84)90001-2)
Adams, D., Williams, D. F. & Hill, J. 1978 Carbon ﬁber-
reinforced
carbon
as
a
potential
implant
material.
J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 12, 35–42. (doi:10.1002/jbm.
820120104)
Agrawal, C. M. & Ray, R. B. 2001 Biodegradable polymeric
scaffolds for musculoskeletal tissue engineering. J. Biomed.
Mater. Res. 55, 141–150. (doi:10.1002/1097-4636(200105)
55:2!141::AID-JBM1000O3.0.CO;2-J)
Agrawal, C. M., Niedarauer, G., Micallef, D. & Athanasiou,
K. A. 1995 The use of PLA-PGA polymers in orthopae-
dics. In Encyclopedic handbook of biomaterials and bio-
engineering. Part A. Materials (eds D. Wise, D. Trantolo,
D. Altobelh, M. Yaszemski, J. Greser & E. Schwartz),
pp. 1055–1089. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker.
Aizawa, M., Porter, A. E., Best, S. M. & Bonﬁeld, W. 2005
Ultrastructural observation of single-crystal apatite ﬁbers.
Biomaterials 26, 3427–3433.
Albrecht-Olsen, P., Kristensen, G. & To¨rma¨la¨, P. 1993
Meniscus bucket handle ﬁxation with an absorbable
Bioﬁx tack: development of a new technique. Knee Surg.
Sports Traumatol. Arthrosc. 1, 104–106. (doi:10.1007/
BF01565462)
Alkao, M., Aoki, H. & Kato, K. 1981 Mechanical properties
of sintered hydroxyapatite for prosthetic applications.
J. Mater. Sci. 16, 809. (doi:10.1007/BF02402799)
Almirall, A., Larrecq, G., Delgado, J. A., Martı´nez, S.,
Planell, J. A. & Ginebra, M. P. 2004 Fabrication of
low temperature macroporous hydroxypapatite scaffolds
by foaming and hydrolysis of an alpha-TCP paste.
Biomaterials 25, 3671–3680. (doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.
2003.10.066)
Ambrosio, L., Netti, P., Iannace, S., Huang, S. J. & Nicolais,
L. 1996 Composite hydrogels for intervertebral disc
prostheses. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 7, 525–530.
(doi:10.1007/BF00122175)
Ambrosio, L., De Santis, R. & Nicolais, L. 1998 Composite
hydrogels for implants. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. H212,
93–99. (doi:10.1243/0954411981533863)
Anderson, O. H. & Kangansniemi, L. 1991 Calcium phosphate
formation at the surface of bioactive glass in vivo.
J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 25, 1019–1030. (doi:10.1002/jbm.
820250808)
Andersson, O¨. H., Rosenqvist, J. & Karlsson, K. H. 2004
Dissolution, leaching, and Al2O3 enrichment at the surface
of bioactive glasses studied by solution analysis. J. Biomed.
Mater. Res. 27, 941–948. (doi:10.1002/jbm.820270713)
Anselme, K., Bigerelle, M., Noel, B., Dufresne, E., Judas, D.,
Iost, A. & Hardouin, P. 2000 Qualitative and quantitative
study of human osteoblast adhesion on materials with
various surface roughnesses. J. Biomed. Mater. Res 49,
155–166.(doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4636(200002)49:2!155::
AID-JBM2O3.0.CO;2-J)
Aparicio, C., Gil, F. J., Fonseca, C., Barbosa, M. & Planell,
J. A. 2003 Corrosion behaviour of commercially pure
titanium shot blasted with different materials and sizes of
shot particles for dental implant applications. Biomater-
ials 24, 263–273. (doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(02)00314-9)
Artola, A., Gurruchaga, M., Va´zquez, B., San Roma´n, J. &
Gon˜i, I. 2003 Elimination of barium sulphate from acrylic
bone cements. Use of two iodine-containing monomers.
Biomaterials
24,
4071–4080.
(doi:10.1016/S0142-9612
(03)00298-9)
Artzi, Z., Weinreb, M., Givol, N., Rohrer, M. D., Nemcovsky,
C. E., Prasad, H. S. & Tal, H. 2004 Biomaterial
resorbability and healing site morphology of inorganic
bovine bone and beta tricalcium phosphate in the canine.
A 24-month longitudinal histologic study and morpho-
metric analysis. Int. J. Oral Maxillofac. Implants 19, 357.
1150
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Assad,
M.,
Jarzem,
P., Leroux,
M.
A., Coillard,
C.,
Chernyshov, A. V., Charette, S. & Rivard, C. H. 2003a
Porous titanium–nickel for intervertebral fusion in a sheep
model:
part
1.
Histomorphometric
and
radiological
analysis. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 64B, 107–120. (doi:10.
1002/jbm.b.10530)
Assad, M., Chernyshov, A. V., Jarzem, P., Leroux, M. A.,
Coillard, C., Charette, S. & Rivard, C. H. 2003b Porous
titanium–nickel for intervertebral fusion in a sheep model:
part 2. Surface analysis and nickel release assessment.
J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 64B, 121–129. (doi:10.1002/jbm.b.
10531)
Banhart, J. 2001 Manufacture, characterisation and appli-
cation of cellular metals and metal foams. Prog. Mater.
Sci. 46, 559–632. (doi:10.1016/S0079-6425(00)00002-5)
Banwart, J. C., Asher, M. A. & Hassanein, R. S. 1995 Iliac
crest bone graft harvest donor site morbidity. A statistical
evaluation. Spine 20, 1055–1060. (doi:10.1097/00007632-
199505000-00012)
Barca, F. & Busa, R. 1997 Resorbable poly-L-lactic acid mini-
staples for the ﬁxation of Akin osteotomies. J. Foot Ankle
Surg. 36, 106–111.
Bass, R. L., Stern, P. J. & Nairus, J. G. 1996 High implant
fracture incidence with sutter silicone metacarpophalan-
geal joint arthroplasty. J. Hand Surg. 21, 813–818. (doi:10.
1016/S0363-5023(96)80197-3)
Bauer, T. W. & Schils, J. 1999 The pathology of total joint
arthroplasty. II. Mechanisms of implant failure. Skeletal
Radiol. 28, 483–497. (doi:10.1007/s002560050552)
Blair, W. F., Shurr, D. G. & Buckwalter, J. A. 1984
Metacarpophalangeal joint implant arthroplasty with a
silastic spacer. J. Bone Joint Surg. 66A, 365–370.
Blawas, A. S. & Reichert, W. M. 1998 Protein patterning.
Biomaterials 19, 595–609. (doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(97)
00218-4)
Boccaccini, A. R., Roether, J. A., Hench, L. L., Maquet, V. &
Je´roˆme,
R.
2002
A
composites
approach
to
tissue
engineering. Ceram. Eng. Sci. Proc. 23, 805–816.
Bonﬁeld, W. 1988 Composites for bone replacement. J. Biomed.
Eng. 10, 522–526. (doi:10.1016/0141-5425(88)90110-0)
Bonﬁeld, W., Grynpas, M. D., Tully, A. E., Bowman, J. &
Abram, J. 1981 Hydroxiapatite reinforced polyethylene—
a
mechanically
compatible
implant.
Biomaterials
2,
185–189. (doi:10.1016/0142-9612(81)90050-8)
Bono, C. & Garﬁn, S. 2004 Kyphoplasty and vertebroplasty
for
the
treatment
of
painful
osteoporotic
vertebral
compression fractures. In Advances in spinal fusion:
molecular science, biomechanics, and clinical management
(eds K. U. Lewadrowski, D. L. Wise, D. J. Trantolo, M. J.
Yaszemski & A. A. White), pp. 33–49. New York, NY:
Marcel Dekker, Inc.
Boutin, P. 1972 Total arthroplasty of the hip by fritted
aluminum prosthesis. Experimental study and 1st clinical
applications. Rev. Chir. Orthop. Reparatrice Appar. Mot.
58, 229–246.
Boyan, B. D., Lohmann, C. H., Dean, D. D., Sylvia, V. L.,
Cochran, D. L. & Schwartz, Z. 2001 Mechanisms involved in
osteoblast response to implant surface morphology. Annu.
Rev. Mater. Res. 31, 357–371. (doi:10.1146/annurev.matsci.
31.1.357)
Brady, J. M., Cutright, D. E., Miller, R. A., Battisto, G. C. &
Hunsuck, E. E. 1973 Resorption rate, route of elimination,
and ultrastructure of implant site of polylactic acid in
abdominal-wall of rat. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 7, 155–166.
(doi:10.1002/jbm.820070204)
Brandwood, A., Noble, K. R. & Schindhelm, K. 1992
Phagocytosis
of
carbon
particles
by
macrophages
in vitro. Biomaterials 13, 646–648. (doi:10.1016/0142-
9612(92)90035-M)
Branemark, P. I., Breine, U., Johansson, B., Roylance, P. J.,
Ro¨ckert, H. & Yoffey, J. M. 1964 Regeneration of bone
marrow. Acta Anat. 59, 1–46.
Bromer, H., Deutscher, K., Blencke, B., Pfeil, E. & Strunz, V.
1977 Properties of the bioactive implant material ceravi-
tal. Sci. Ceram. 9, 219–225.
Brunon, J., Duthel, R., Fotso, M. J. & Tudor, C. 1994
Anterior osteosynthesis of the cervical spine by phusiline
bioabsorbable screws and plates. Initial results apropos of
5 cases. Neurochirurgie 40, 196–202.
Buehler, W. J. & Wang, F. E. 1967 A summary of recent
research on the Nitinol alloys and their potential appli-
cation in ocean engineering. Ocean Eng. 1, 105–120.
(doi:10.1016/0029-8018(68)90019-X)
Burns, A. 1998 Absorbable ﬁxation techniques in forefoot
surgery.
Tech.
Orthop.
13,
201–206.
(doi:10.1097/
00013611-199806000-00018)
Burns, A. & Varin, J. 1998 Poly-L-lactic acid rod ﬁxation
results in foot surgery. J. Foot Ankle Surg. 37, 37–41.
Campbell, A. A., Fryxell, G., Lineham, J. & Graff, G. 1996
Surface-induced mineralization: a new method for produ-
cing calcium phosphate coatings. J. Biomed. Mater. Res.
32, 111–118. (doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4636(199609)32:1
!111::AID-JBM13O3.0.CO;2-P)
Cancedda, R., Dozin, B., Giannoni, P. & Quarto, R. 2003
Tissue engineering and cell therapy of cartilage and bone.
Matrix Biol. 22, 81–91. (doi:10.1016/S0945-053X(03)
00012-X)
Canter, H. I., Vargel, I. & Mavili, M. E. 2007 Reconstruction
of mandibular defects using autografts combined with
demineralized
bone
matrix
and
cancellous
allograft.
J.
Craniofac.
Surg.
18,
95–100.
(doi:10.1097/01.scs.
0000244921.07383.cc)
Cao, W. & Hench, L. L. 1996 Bioactive materials. Ceram. Int.
22, 493–507. (doi:10.1016/0272-8842(95)00126-3)
Caplanis, N., Lee, M. B., Zimmerman, G. J., Selvig, K. A. &
Wikesjo, U. M. E. 1998 Effect of allogeneic freeze-
dried demineralized bone matrix on regeneration of
alveolar
bone
and
periodontal
attachment
in
dogs.
J. Clin. Periodontol. 25, 801–806. (doi:10.1111/j.1600-
051X.1998.tb02373.x)
Carlisle, E. M. 1970 Silicon: a possible factor in bone
calciﬁcation. Science 167, 279–280. (doi:10.1126/science.
167.3916.279)
Carrodeguas,
R.
G.,
Vazquez,
B.,
San Roman,
J.
&
Madronero, A. 2002 Barium titanate-ﬁlled bone cements
I. Chemical, physical and mechanical characterization.
Int.
J.
Polym.
Mater.
51,
591–605.
(doi:10.1080/
714975801)
Charnley, J. 1960 Anchorage of the femoral head prosthesis to
the shaft of the femur. J. Bone Joint Surg. 42B, 28–30.
Charvet, J. L., Cordes, J. A. & Alexander, H. 2000
Mechanical and fracture behaviour of a ﬁber-reinforced
bioadsorbable
material
for
orthopaedic
applications.
J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 11, 101–109. (doi:10.1023/
A:1008945017668)
Chesmel, K. D., Clark, C. C., Brighton, C. T. & Black, J. 1995
Cellular-responses to chemical and morphologic aspects of
biomaterial surfaces, 2: the biosynthetic and migratory
response of bone cell-populations. J. Biomed. Mater. Res.
29, 1101–1110. (doi:10.1002/jbm.820290910)
Chiari, C. et al. 2006 A tissue engineering approach to
meniscus regeneration in a sheep model. Osteoarthr.
Cartil. 14, 1056–1065. (doi:10.1016/j.joca.2006.04.007)
Cho, S. B., Nakanishi, K., Kokubo, T., Soga, N., Ohtsuki, C.,
Nakamura, T., Kitsugi, T. & Yamamuro, T. 1995
Dependence of apatite formation on silica gel on its
structure: effect of heat treatment. J. Am. Ceram. Soc.
78, 1769–1774. (doi:10.1111/j.1151-2916.1995.tb08887.x)
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
1151
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 16 (native) -----
Chow, L. C., Takagi, S., Costantino, P. D. & Friedman, C. D.
1991 Self-setting calcium phosphate cements. Mater. Res.
Soc. Symp. Proc. 179, 3–24.
Christel, P., Meunier, A., Dorlot, J. M., Crolet, J. M.,
Witvoet, J., Sedel, L. & Boutin, P. 1988 Biomechanical
compatibility and design of ceramic implants for orthope-
dic surgery. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 523, 234–256. (doi:10.
1111/j.1749-6632.1988.tb38516.x)
Chu, Y., Dai, K., Zhu, M. & Mi, X. 2000 Medical applications
of NiTi shape memory alloy in China. Mater. Sci. Forum
327–328, 55–62.
Ciccone, W., Motz, C., Bentley, C. & Tasto, J. 2001
Bioabsorbable implants in orthopaedics: new develop-
ments and clinical applications. J. Am. Acad. Orthop.
Surg. 9, 280–288.
Clement, J., Avila, G., Navarro, M., Ginebra, M. P.,
Martı´nez, S. & Planell, J. A. 2000 Chemical durability
and mechanical properties of calcium phosphate glasses
with the addition of Fe2O3, TiO2 and ZnO. Key Eng.
Mater. 192–195, 729–732.
Cle`ries, L. 1999 In vitro studies of calcium phosphate coatings
obtained by laser ablation. PhD thesis, Universitat de
Barcelona.
Colloiud, A., Clemence, J. F., Sanger, M. & Sigrist, H. 1993
Oriented and covalent immobilization of target molecules
to solid supports: synthesis and application of a light-
activatable and thiol-reactive crosslinking reagent. Bio-
conjug. Chem. 4, 528–536. (doi:10.1021/bc00024a016)
Constantz, B. R. et al. 1995 Skeletal repair by in situ
formation of the mineral phase of bone. Science 267,
1796–1799. (doi:10.1126/science.7892603)
Cook, S. S. D., Thomas, K. A. & Jarcho, M. 1988
Hydroxyapatite-coated porous titanium for use as an
orthopaedic biological attachment system. Clin. Orthop.
230, 303–312.
Coombes, A. G. A. & Heckman, J. D. 1992 Gel casting of
resorbable polymers: 1. Processing and applications.
Biomaterials
13,
217–224.
(doi:10.1016/0142-9612(92)
90187-S)
Daley, B., Doherty, A. T., Fairman, B. & Case, C. P. 2004
Wear debris from hip or knee replacements causes
chromosomal damage in human cells in tissue culture.
J. Bone Joint Surg. Br. 86, 598–606.
Davis, P. A., Huang, S. J., Ambrosio, L., Ronce, D. &
Nicolais, L. 1991 A biodegradable composite artiﬁcial
tendon. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 3, 359. (doi:10.1007/
BF00705368)
D’Avis, P., Hessle, H., Cardenas, J., Mullen, D., Malaney, T.,
Pulson, G., Pierchbacher, M. & Ingram, R. T. 1998
Potent, integrin selective RGD-containing peptides pro-
mote cell-speciﬁc adhesion on three dimensional collagen
matrices. Trans. Soc. Biomater. XXI, 100.
Dee, K. C., Andersen, T. T. & Bizios, R. 1999 Osteoblast
population
migration
characteristics
on
substrates
modiﬁed with immobilized adhesive peptides. Biomater-
ials 20, 221–227. (doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(98)00161-6)
De Groot, K. 1974 Bone induction by allogenous rat dentine
implanted subcutaneously. Arch. Oral Biol. 19, 477–479.
(doi:10.1016/0003-9969(74)90155-1)
De Groot, K., Klein, C. P., Wolke, J. G. & Blieck-Hogervorst,
J. M. 1990 Plasma-sprayed coatings of calcium phosphate.
In CRC handbook of bioactive ceramics, vol. II (eds
T. Yamamuro, L. L. Hench & J. Wilson), pp 133–142,
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press Inc.
Deville, S., Saiz, E. & Tomsia, A. P. 2006 Freeze casting of
hydroxyapatite scaffolds for bone tissue engineering.
Biomaterials 27, 5480–5484. (doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.
2006.06.028)
Driessens, F. C. M., Planell, J. A., Boltong, M. G., Khairoun,
I. & Ginebra, M. P. 1998 Osteotransductive bone cements.
Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. H: J. Eng. Med. 212, 427–435.
(doi:10.1243/0954411981534196)
Driessens, F. C. M., Boltong, M. G., de Maeyer, E. A. P.,
Wenz, R., Nies, B. & Planell, J. A. 2002 The Ca/P range of
nanoapatitic calcium phosphate cements. Biomaterials 23,
4011–4017. (doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(02)00151-5)
Ducheyne, P., Radin, S. & Heughbaert, C. 1990 Calcuim
phosphate ceramic coating on porous titanium: effect of
structure and composition on electrophoretic deposition,
vacuum sintering and in vitro dissolution. Biomaterials 11,
244–254. (doi:10.1016/0142-9612(90)90005-B)
Duerig, T. W. & Pelton, A. R. 1994 NiTi shape memory
alloys. In Materials properties handbook: titanium alloys
(eds
R.
Boyer,
G.
Welsch
&
E.
W.
Collings),
pp. 1035–1048. Materials Park, OH: ASM International.
Duerig, T. W., Pelton, A. R. & Sto¨ckel, D. 1996 The utility of
superelasticity in medicine. Biomed. Mater. Eng. 6,
255–266.
Du¨rselen, L., Claes, L., Ignatius, A. & Ru¨benacker, S. 1996
Comparative animal study of three ligament prostheses for
the replacement of the anterior cruciate and medial
collateral ligament. Biomaterials 17, 977–982. (doi:10.
1016/0142-9612(96)84671-0)
El-Gammal, T. A. & Blair, W. F. 1993 Motion after
metacarpophalangeal joint reconstruction in rheumatoid
disease. J. Hand Surg. 18A, 504–511.
El Gannham, A. 2005 Bone reconstruction: from bioceramics
to tissue engineering. Exp. Rev. Med. Dev. 2, 87–101.
(doi:10.1586/17434440.2.1.87)
Evans, S. L. & Gregson, P. J. 1998 Composite technology in
load-bearing
orthopaedic
implants.
Biomaterials
19,
1329–1342. (doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(97)00217-2)
Fazan, F. & Marquis, P. M. 2000 Dissolution behaviour of
plasma-sprayed hydroxyaptite coatings. J. Mater. Sci.
Mater.
Med.
11,
7787–7792.
(doi:10.1023/A:100890
1512273)
Fernyhough, J. C., Schimandle, J. J., Weigel, M. C.,
Edwards, C. C. & Levine, A. M. 1992 Chronic donor site
pain complicating bone graft harvest from the posterior
iliac crest for spinal fusion. Spine 17, 1474–1480.
Ferraz, M. P., Monteiro, F. J. & Manuel, C. M. 2004
Hydroxyapatite nanoparticles: a review of preparation
methodologies. J. Appl. Biomater. Biomech. 2, 74–80.
Filgueiras, M. R. T., Latorre, G. & Hench, L. L. 1993 Solution
effects on the surface reactions of three bioactive glass
compositions. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 27, 1485–1493.
(doi:10.1002/jbm.820271204)
Filho, O. P., LaTorre, G. P. & Hench, L. L. 1996 Effect of
crystallization on apatite-layer formation of bioactive glass
45S5. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 30, 509. (doi:10.1002/(SICI)
1097-4636(199604)30:4!509::AID-JBM9O3.0.CO;2-T)
Fisher, J. & Dowson, D. 1991 Tribology of total artiﬁcial
joints. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. J. Eng. Med. 205, 73–79.
(doi:10.1243/PIME_PROC_1991_205_271_02)
Friberg, L., Nordberg, G. F. & Vouk, V. B. 1979 Handbook on
the toxicology of metals. Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
Elsevier/North-Holland Biomedical.
Fujishiro, Y. Oonishi, H. & Hench, L. L. 1997 Quantitative
comparison of in vivo bone generation with particulate
Bioglassw. In Bioceramics, vol. 10 (eds L. Sedel & C. Rwy),
pp. 283–286. New York, NY: Elsevier.
Furuichi, K., Oaki, Y., Ichimiya, H., Komotori, J. & Imai, H.
2006 Preparation of hierarchically organized calcium
phosphate-organic polymer composites by calciﬁcation of
hydrogel. Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 7, 219–225. (doi:10.
1016/j.stam.2005.10.008)
1152
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 17 (native) -----
Garcia, A. J., Ducheyne, P. & Boettiger, D. 1997 Cell
adhesion strength increases linearly with absorbed ﬁbro-
nectin surface density. Tissue Eng. 3, 197–206. (doi:10.
1089/ten.1997.3.197)
Garcı´a, A. J., Ducheyne, P. & Boettinger, D. 1998 Effect of
surface reaction stage on ﬁbronectin-mediated adhesion of
osteoblast-like cells to bioactive glass. J. Biomed. Mater.
Res. 40, 48–56. (doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4636(199804)
40:1!48::AID-JBM6O3.0.CO;2-R)
Gil, F. J., Planell, J. A., Padros, A. & Aparicio, C. 2007 The
effect of shot blasting and heat treatment on the fatigue
behavior of titanium for dental implant applications. Dent.
Mater. 23, 486–491. (doi:10.1016/j.dental.2006.03.003)
Ginebra, M. P., Ferna´ndez, E., De maeyer, E. A. P., Verbeek,
R. M. H., Boltong, M. G., Ginebra, J., Driessens, F. C. M.
& Planell, J. A. 1997 Setting reaction and hardening of an
apatitic calcium phosphate cement. J. Dent. Res. 76,
905–912.
Ginebra, M. P., Traykova, T. & Planell, J. A. 2006 Calcium
phosphate cements as bone drug delivery systems: a
review. J. Control. Release 113, 102–110. (doi:10.1016/
j.jconrel.2006.04.007)
Ginebra, M. P., Delgado, J. A., Harr, I., Almirall, A., Del
Valle, S. & Planell, J. A. 2007 Factors affecting the
structure and properties of an injectable self-setting
calcium phosphate foam. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A 80,
351–361. (doi:10.1002/jbm.a.30886)
Goebel, J. A. & Jacob, A. 2005 Use of Mimix hydroxyapatite
bone cement for difﬁcult ossicular reconstruction. Otolar-
yngol. Head Neck Surg. 132, 727–734. (doi:10.1016/j.
otohns.2005.01.023)
Gong, W. L., Abdelouas, A. & Lutze, W. 2001 Porous
bioactive glass and glass–ceramics made by reaction
sintering under pressure. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 54,
320–327.
(doi:10.1002/1097-4636(20010305)54:3!320::
AID-JBM20O3.0.CO;2-E)
Gopferich, A. 1996 Mechanism of polymer degradation and
erosion. Biomaterials 17, 103–114. (doi:10.1016/0142-
9612(96)85755-3)
Goulet, J. A., Senunas, L. E., DeSilva, G. L. & Greengield,
M. L. V. H. 1997 Autogenous iliac crest bone graft.
Complications and functional assessment. Clin. Orthop.
339, 76–81. (doi:10.1097/00003086-199706000-00011)
Greis, P. E., Georgescu, H. I., Fu, F. H. & Evans, C. H. 1994
Particle-induced synthesis of collagenase by synovial
ﬁbroblasts: an immunocytochemical study. J. Orthop.
Res. 12, 286–293. (doi:10.1002/jor.1100120219)
Grizzi, I., Garreau, H., Li, S. & Vert, M. 1995 Hydrolytic
degradation of devices based on poly(DL-lactic acid) size-
dependence. Biomaterials 16, 305–311. (doi:10.1016/0142-
9612(95)93258-F)
Groeneveld, E. H. J., van den Bergh, J. P. A., Holzmann, P.,
ten Bruggenkate, C. M., Tuinzing, D. B. & Burger, E. H.
1999 Mineralization processes in demineralized bone
matrix grafts in human maxillary sinus ﬂoor elevations.
J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 48, 393–402. (doi:10.1002/(SICI)
1097-4636(1999)48:4!393::AID-JBM1O3.0.CO;2-C)
Gross, U., Kinne, R., Schmitz, H. J. & Strunz, V. 1988 The
response of bone to surface active glass/glass–ceramics.
CRC Crit. Rev. Biocompat. 4, 2.
Gu, Y. W., Li, H., Tay, B. Y., Lim, C. S., Yong, M. S. & Khor,
K. A. 2006 In vitro bioactivity and osteoblast response of
porous NiTi synthesized by SHS using nanocrystalline Ni–
Ti reaction agent. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 78, 316–323.
(doi:10.1002/jbm.a.30743)
Guarino, V., Causa, F. & Ambrosio, L. 2007 Bioactive
scaffolds for bone and ligament tissue. Exp. Rev. Med. Dev.
4, 405–418. (doi:10.1586/17434440.4.3.405)
Gummel, J., Holand, W., Naumann, K. & Vogel, W. 1983
Mechanically
processable
bioactive
glass
ceramics–a
new biomaterial for bone replacement. Z. Exp. Chir.
Transplant Kunstliche Organe 16, 338–343.
Hardouin,
P.,
Anselme,
K.,
Flautre,
B.,
Bianchi,
F.,
Bascoulenguet, G. & Bouxin, B. 2000 Tissue engineering
and skeletal diseases. Joint Bone Spine 67, 419–424.
He, X., Ge, X., Liu, H., Wang, M. & Zhang, Z. 2007 Cagelike
polymer microspheres with hollow core/porous shell
structures. J. Polym. Sci. A: Polym. Chem. 45, 933–941.
(doi:10.1002/pola.21873)
Healy, K. E., Thomas, C. H., Rezania, A., Kim, J. E.,
McKeown, P. J., Lom, B. & Hockberger, P. E. 1996
Kinetics of bone cell organization and mineralization on
materials with patterned surface chemistry. Biomaterials
17, 195–208. (doi:10.1016/0142-9612(96)85764-4)
Hench, L. L. 1980 Biomaterials. Science 208, 826–831.
(doi:10.1126/science.6246576)
Hench, L. L. 1991 Sol-gel silica for precision and multi-
functional optics. Ceram. Int. 17, 209–216. (doi:10.1016/
0272-8842(91)90015-R)
Hench, L. & Polak, J. 2002 Third generation biomedical
materials. Science 295, 1014–1017. (doi:10.1126/science.
1067404)
Hench, L. L. & Wilson, J. 1993 Introduction to bioceramics.
Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
Hench, L. L., Paschall, H. A., Allen, W. C. & Riotrowski, G.
1975 Interfacial behaviour of ceramic implants. Natl Bur.
Stand. Spec. Publ. 415, 19–35.
Hench, L. L., Wheeler, D. L. & Greenspan, D. C. 1998
Molecular
control
of
bioactivity
in
sol-gel
glasses.
J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol. 13, 245–250. (doi:10.1023/
A:1008643303888)
Hero, H., Wie, H., Jorgensen, R. B. & Ruyter, I. E. 1994
Hydroxyapatite coating on titanium produced by isostatic
pressing. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 28, 344–348. (doi:10.
1002/jbm.820280308)
Hersel, U., Dahmen, C. & Kessler, H. 2003 RGD modiﬁed
polymers: biomaterials for stimulated cell adhesion and
beyond. Biomaterials 24, 4385–4415. (doi:10.1016/S0142-
9612(03)00343-0)
Hirakawa, K., Bauer, T. W., Culver, J. E. & Wilde,
A.
H.
1996
Isolation
and
quantitation
of
debris
particles around failed silicone orthopaedic implants.
J. Hand Surg. 21, 819–827. (doi:10.1016/S0363-5023
(96)80198-5)
Holmes, T. C. 2002 Novel peptide-based biomaterial scaffolds
for tissue engineering. Trends Biotechnol. 20, 16–21.
(doi:10.1016/S0167-7799(01)01840-6)
Ho¨hland, W., Vogel, W., Naurnann, K. & Gummel, J. 1985
Interface reactions between machinable bioactive glass–
ceramics and bone. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 19, 303.
(doi:10.1002/jbm.820190311)
Huiskes, R., Weinans, H. & Rietbergen, B. V. 1992 The
relationship between stress shielding and bone resorption
around total hip stems and the effects of ﬂexible materials.
Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 274, 124–134.
Hutmacher, D., Hu¨rzeler, M. B. & Schliephake, H. 2000
A
review
of
material
properties
of
biodegradable
and bioresorbable polymer for GTR and GBR. J. Oral
Maxillofac. Implants 11, 667–678.
Jaakkola, T., Rich, J., Tirri, T., Na¨rhi, T., Jokinen, M.,
Seppa¨la¨, J. & Yli-Urpo, A. 2004 In vitro Ca-P precipi-
tation
on
biodegradable
thermoplastic
composite
of
poly(3-caprolactone-co-DL-lactide)
and
bioactive
glass
(S53P4). Biomaterials 25, 575–581. (doi:10.1016/S0142-
9612(03)00558-1)
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
1153
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 18 (native) -----
Jarcho, M., Bolen, C. H., Thomas, M. B., Bobick, J., Kay,
J. F. & Doremus, R. H. 1976 Hydroxylapatite synthesis
and
characterization
in
dense
polycrystalline
form.
J. Mater. Sci. 11, 2027–2035. (doi:10.1007/BF02403350)
Jedlicka, A. B. & Clare, A. G. 2001 Chemical durability of
commercial silicate glasses. I. Material characterization.
J. Non-Cryst. Solids 281, 6–24. (doi:10.1016/S0022-
3093(00)00442-7)
Johnson, R., Axelsson, P. & Stromqvist, B. 1997 Poster-
olateral lumbar fusion using facet joint ﬁxation with
biodegradable rods: a pilot study. Eur. Spine 6, 144–148.
(doi:10.1007/BF01358748)
Karlson, K. H., Froberg, K. & Ringbom, T. 1989 A structural
approach to bone adhering of bioactive glasses. J. Non-
Cryst.
Solids
112,
69–72.
(doi:10.1016/0022-3093(89)
90495-X)
Kasuga, T., Maeda, H., Kato, K., Nogami, M., Hata, K.-i. &
Ueda, M. 2003 Preparation of poly(lactic acid) composites
containing calcium carbonate (vaterite). Biomaterials 24,
3247–3253. (doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(03)00190-X)
Kato,
K.,
Eika,
Y.
&
Ikada,
Y.
1996
Deposition
of
hydroxiapatite thin layer onto a polymer surface carrying
grafted phosphate polymer chains. J. Biomed. Mater. Res.
32, 687–691. (doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4636(199612)32:4
!687::AID-JBM23O3.0.CO;2-9)
Khairoun, I., Driessens, F. C. M., Boltong, M. G., Planell,
J. A. & Wenz, R. 1999 Addition of cohesion promotors to
calcium phosphate cements. Biomaterials 20, 393–398.
(doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(98)00202-6)
Kirschenbaum, D., Schneider, L. H., Adams, D. C. & Cody,
R. P. 1993 Arthroplasty of the metacarpophalangeal
joints with use of silicone-rubber implants in patients
who have rheumatoid arthritis. J. Bone Joint Surg. Ser. A
75, 3–12.
Klawitter, J. J. & Hulbert, S. F. 1971 Application of porous
ceramics for the attachment of load-bearing internal
orthopedic applications. Cell Transplant. 3, 339.
Kokubo, T. 1991 Bioactive glass ceramics: properties and
applications. Biomaterials 12, 155–163. (doi:10.1016/
0142-9612(91)90194-F)
Kokubo, T., Ito, S., Shigematsu, M., Sanka, S. & Yamamuro,
T. 1987 Fatigue and life-time of bioactive glass–ceramic A-
W containing apatite and wollastonite. J. Mater. Sci. 22,
4067–4070. (doi:10.1007/BF01133359)
Kokubo, T., Miyaji, F. & Kim, H. M. 1996 Spontaneous
formation of bonelike apatite on chemically treated
titanium metals. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 79, 1127–1129.
(doi:10.1111/j.1151-2916.1996.tb08561.x)
Ko¨rner, C. & Singer, R. F. 2000 Processing of metal foams—
challenges
and
opportunities.
Adv.
Eng.
Mater.
2,
159–165.
(doi:10.1002/(SICI)1527-2648(200004)2:4!
159::AID-ADEM159O3.0.CO;2-O)
Kuhn, K. D. 2000 Bone cements: up-to-date comparison of
physical and chemical properties of commercial materials.
Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Kulkarni, R., Pani, K. C., Neuman, C. & Leonard, F. 1966
Polylactic acid for surgical implants. Arch. Surg. 93, 839.
Kulkarni, R., Moore, R. G., Hegyeli, A. F. & Leonard, F. 1971
Biodegradable poly(lactic acid) polymers. J. Biomed.
Mater. Res. 5, 169–181. (doi:10.1002/jbm.820050305)
Kunze, C., Freier, T., Heldwig, E., Sandner, B., Reif, D.,
Wutzler, A. & Radusch, H.-J. 2003 Surface modiﬁcation of
tricalcium phosphate for improvement of the interfacial
compatibility with biodegradable polymers. Biomaterials
24, 967–974. (doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(02)00433-7)
Kurashina, K., Kurita, H., Hirano, M., Kotani, A., Klein,
C. P. A. T. & de Groot, K. 1997 In vivo study of calcium
phosphate
cements:
implantation
of
a
a-tricalcium
phosphate/dicalcium
phosphate
dibasic/tetracalcium
phosphate monoxide cement paste. Biomaterials 18,
539–543. (doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(96)00162-7)
Laurencin, C. T. & Freeman, J. W. 2005 Ligament tissue
engineering: an evolutionary materials science approach.
Biomaterials 26, 7530–7536. (doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.
2005.05.073)
Levine, B. R., Sporer, S., Poggie, R. A., Della Valle, C. J. &
Jacobs, J. J. 2006 Experimental and clinical performance
of porous tantalum in orthopedic surgery. Biomaterials 27,
4671–4681. (doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.2006.04.041)
Lewandowska-Szumiel, M., Komender, J. & Chlopek, J. 1999
Interaction between carbon composites and bone after
intrabone implantation. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 48,
289–296. (doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4636(1999)48:3!289::
AID-JBM12O3.0.CO;2-L)
Lewis, G. 1997a Properties of acrylic bone cement: state-of-
the-art. Review. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 38, 155–182.
Lewis, G. 1997b Polyethylene wear in total hip and knee
arthroplasties. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 38, 55–75.
Lewis,G.2006 Injectable bonecements for use invertebroplasty
andkyphoplasty:state-of-the-art.Review.J.Biomed.Mater.
Res. B 76, 456–486. (doi:10.1002/jbm.b.30398)
Li, S. M. 1999 Hydrolytic degradation characteristics of
aliphatic polyesters derived from lactic and glycolic acids.
J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 48, 342–353. (doi:10.1002/(SICI)
1097-4636(1999)48:3!342::AID-JBM20O3.0.CO;2-7)
Li, P. & de Groot, K. 1993 Calcium phosphate formation
within sol-gel prepared titania in vitro and in vivo.
J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 27, 1445–1500. (doi:10.1002/jbm.
820271205)
Li, S. M. & McCarthy, S. 1999 Further investigations on the
hydrolitic degradation of poly(DL-lactide). Biomaterials
20, 35–44. (doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(97)00226-3)
Li, S. M. & Vert, M. 1994 Morphological changes resulting
from the hydrolytic degradation of stereocopolymers
derived from L-lactides. Macromolecules 27, 3107–3110.
(doi:10.1021/ma00089a031)
Li, P. J. & Zhang, F. 1990 The electrochemistry of a glass
surface and its application to bioactive glass in solution FP
1991. J. Non-Cryst. Solids 119, 112–118. (doi:10.1016/
0022-3093(90)90247-J)
Li, P., Ohtsuki, C., Kokubo, T., Nakanishi, K., Soga, N.,
Nakamura, T., Yamamuro,T.& deGroot,K.1994a The role
ofhydratedsilica,titaniaandaluminainformingbiologically
active bone-like apatite on implant. J. Biomed. Mater. Res.
24, 7–15. (doi:10.1002/jbm.820280103)
Li, P., Ohtsuki, C., Kokubo, T., Nakanishi, K., Soga, N. &
Groot, K. 1994b The role of hydrated silica, titania, and
alumina in inducing apatite on implants. J. Biomed.
Mater. Res. 28, 7–15. (doi:10.1002/jbm.820280103)
Li, J. P., Li, S. H., de Groot, K. & Layrolle, P. 2002
Preparation and characterization of porous titanium. Key
Eng. Mater. 218–220, 51–54.
Li, J. P., De Wijn, J. R., Van Blitterswijk, C. A. & de Groot,
K. 2006 Porous Ti6Al4V scaffold directly fabricating by
rapid prototyping: preparation and in vitro experiment.
Biomaterials 27, 1223–1235. (doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.
2005.08.033)
Li, J. P., Habibovic, P., van den Doel, M., Wilson, C. E., De
Wijn, J. R., Van Blitterswijk, C. A. & de Groot, K. 2007
Bone ingrowth in porous titanium implants produced by
3D ﬁber deposition. Biomaterials 28, 2810–2820. (doi:10.
1016/j.biomaterials.2007.02.020)
Liu, C., Shen, W., Gu, Y. & Hu, L. 1997 Mechanism of the
hardening
process
for
a
hydroxyapatite
cement.
J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 35, 75–80. (doi:10.1002/(SICI)
1097-4636(199704)35:1!75::AID-JBM7O3.0.CO;2-J)
1154
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 19 (native) -----
Long, M. & Rack, H. J. 1998 Titanium alloys in total joint
replacement—a materials science perspective. Biomater-
ials 19, 1621–1639. (doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(97)00146-4)
Ma, Z., Gao, C., Gong, Y., Ji, J. & Shen, J. 2002
immobilization of natural macromolecules on poly-L-lactic
acid membrane surface in order to improve its cytocom-
patibility. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 63, 838–847. (doi:10.
1002/jbm.10470)
Maeda, M., Hirose, M., Ohgushi, H. & Kirita, T. 2007 In vitro
mineralization by mesenchymal stem cells cultured on
titanium scaffolds. J. Biochem. 141, 729–736. (doi:10.
1093/jb/mvm077)
Maloney, W. J. & Smith, R. L. 1995 Periprosthetic osteolysis
in total hip arthroplasty: the role of particulate debris.
J. Bone Joint Surg. 77A, 1448–1461.
Mann, K. K., Ediddin, A. A., Kinoshita, R. K. & Manley,
M. T. 1994 Mixed mode fracture characterization of
hydroxyapatite–titanium alloy interface. J. Appl. Bioma-
ter. 5, 285–291. (doi:10.1002/jab.770050403)
Marcolongo, M., Ducheyne, P., Garino, J. & Schepers, E.
1998 Bioactive glass ﬁber/polymeric composites bond to
bone tissue. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 39, 161–170. (doi:10.
1002/(SICI)1097-4636(199801)39:1!161::AID-JBM18O
3.0.CO;2-I)
Marijnissen, W. J. C. M., van Osch, G. J. V. M., Aigner, J.,
van der Veen, S. W., Hollander, A. P., Verwoerd-Verhoef,
H. L. & Verhaar, J. A. N. 2002 Alginate as a chondrocyte-
delivery substance in combination with a non-woven
scaffold for cartilage tissue engineering. Biomaterials 23,
1511–1517. (doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(01)00281-2)
Masmoudi, M., Assoul, M., Wery, M., Abdelhedi, R., El
Halouani, F. & Monteil, G. 2006 Friction and wear
behaviour of cp Ti and Ti6A14V following nitric acid
passivation. Appl. Surf. Sci. 253, 2237–2243. (doi:10.1016/
j.apsusc.2006.04.047)
McKee, G. K. & Watson-Farra, R. J. 1966 Replacement of
arthritic hips by the McKee–Farrar prostheis. J. Bone
Joint Surg. 48, 245–259.
Meffert, R., Thomas, J., Hamilton, K. & Brownstein, C. 1985
Hydroxylapatite as an alloplastic graft in the treatment of
periodontal osseous defect. J. Periodontol. 56, 63–73.
Mellonig, J. T. 1996 Bone allografts in periodontal therapy.
Clin. Orthop. Relat. 324, 116–125. (doi:10.1097/00003086-
199603000-00014)
Meyle, J., Gultig, K., Wolburg, H. & Vonrecum, A. F. 1993
Fibroblast
anchorage
to
microtextured
surfaces.
J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 27, 1553–1557. (doi:10.1002/jbm.
820271212)
Michaeli, W. & Von Oepen, R. 1994 Processing of degradable
polymers. In ANTEC, pp. 796–804.
Middleton, J. C. & Tipton, A. J. 2000 Synthetic biodegrad-
able polymers as orthopedic devices. Biomaterials 21,
2335–2346. (doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(00)00101-0)
Migliaresi, C., Kolaric, J., Stol, M. & Nicolais, L. 1981
Mechanical
properties
of
model
synthetic
tendons.
J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 15, 147–157. (doi:10.1002/jbm.
820150303)
Mikos, A. G., Sarakinos, G., Leite, S. M., Vacant, J. P. &
Langer, R. 1993 Laminated three-dimensional biodegrad-
able foams for use in tissue engineering. Biomaterials 14,
323–330. (doi:10.1016/0142-9612(93)90049-8)
Miyazaki, T., Kim, H. M., Kokubo, T., Miyaji, F., Kato, H. &
Nakamura, T. 2001 Effect of thermal treatment on apatite-
forming
ability
of
NaOH-treated
tantalum
metal.
J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 12, 683–687. (doi:10.1023/
A:1011260224120)
Mooney, D. J., Baldwin, D. F., Suh, N. P., Vacanti, J. P. &
Langer, R. 1996 Novel approach to fabricate porous
sponges of poly (D,L-lactic-co-glycolic acid) without the
use of organic solvents. Biomaterials 17, 1417–1422.
(doi:10.1016/0142-9612(96)87284-X)
Morra, M. & Cassinelli, C. 1997 Bacterial adhesion to
polymer surfaces: a critical review of surface thermo-
dynamic approaches. J. Biomater. Sci.-Polym. E 9, 55–74.
(doi:10.1163/156856297X00263)
Mu¨ller, U., Imwinkelried, T., Horst, M., Sievers, M. & Graf-
Hausner, U. 2006 Do human osteoblasts grow into open-
porous titanium? Eur. Cells Mater. 11, 8–15.
Mulliez, M. A.& Wenz, R. 2002 Physical-chemical character-
ization of a new magnesium containing calcium phosphate
cement SOPRIMw. In Proc. 17th European Society
for Biomaterials Conference, Barcelona, Spain, 11–14
September, poster L49.
Na, K., Kim, S., Woo, D. G., Sun, B. K., Yang, H. N., Chung,
H. M. & Park, K. H. 2007 Synergistic effect of FGF-b3 on
chondrogenic differentiation of rabbit chondrocytes in
thermo-reversible hydrogel constructs blended with hya-
luronic acid by in vivo test. J. Biotechnol. 128, 412–422.
(doi:10.1016/j.jbiotec.2006.09.025)
Nathan, D. & Sporn, M. 1991 Cytokines in context. J. Cell
Biol. 113, 981–986. (doi:10.1083/jcb.113.5.981)
Navarro, M., Ginebra, M. P., Clement, J., Martı´nez, S., Avila,
G. & Planell, J. A. 2003 Physicochemical degradation of
titania-stabilized soluble phosphate glasses for medical
applications. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 86, 1345–1352.
Navarro, M., Del Valle, S., Martı´nez, S., Zeppetelli, S.,
Ambrosio, L., Planell, J. A. & Ginebra, M. P. 2004a New
macroporous calcium phosphate glass ceramic for guided
bone regeneration. Biomaterials 25, 4233–4241. (doi:10.
1016/j.biomaterials.2003.11.012)
Navarro, M., Ginebra, M. P., Planell, J. A., Zeppetelli, S. &
Ambrosio, L. 2004b Development and cell response of a
new biodegradable composite scaffold for bone guided
regeneration. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 15, 419–422.
(doi:10.1023/B:JMSM.0000021113.88702.9d)
Navarro, M., Ginebra, M. P., Planell, J. A., Barrias, C. C. &
Barbosa, M. A. 2005 In vitro degradation behavior of a
novel bioresorbable composite material based on PLA and
a soluble CaP glass. Acta Biomater. 1, 411–419. (doi:10.
1016/j.actbio.2005.03.004)
Neo, M., Nakamura, T., Ohtsuki, C., Kokubo, T. &
Yamamuro, T. 1993 Apatite formation on three kinds of
bioactive material at an early stage in vivo: a comparative
study by transmission electron microscopy. J. Biomed.
Mater. Res. 27, 999–1006. (doi:10.1002/jbm.820270805)
Ogino, M., Ohuchi, F. & Hench, L. L. 1980 Compositional
dependence on the formation of calcium phosphate ﬁlms on
bioglass. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 14, 55–64. (doi:10.1002/
jbm.820140107)
Ohtsuki, C., Kushitani, H., Kokubo, T., Kotani, S. &
Yamamuro, T. 1991 Apatite formation on the surface of
Ceravital-type glass–ceramic in the body. J. Biomed.
Mater. Res. 25, 1363–1370. (doi:10.1002/jbm.820251105)
Ohtsuki, C., Iida, H., Hayakawa, S. & Osaka, A. 1997
Bioactivity of titanium treated with hydrogen peroxide
solutions containing metal chlorides. J. Biomed. Mater.
Res. 35, 39–47. (doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4636(199704)
35:1!39::AID-JBM5O3.0.CO;2-N)
Olson, E. J., Kang, J. D., Fu, F. H., Georgescu, H. I., Mason,
G. C. & Evans, C. H. 1988 The biochemical and
histological effects of artiﬁcial ligament wear particles:
in vitro and in vivo studies. Am. J. Sports Med. 16,
558–570. (doi:10.1177/036354658801600602)
Patel, N., Best, S. M., Bonﬁeld, W., Gibson, I. R., Hing, K. A.,
Damien, E. & Revell, P. A. 2002 A comparative study
on the in vivo behavior of hydroxyapatite and silicon
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
1155
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 20 (native) -----
substituted
hydroxyapatite
granules.
J.
Mater.
Sci.
Mater. Med. 13, 1199–1206. (doi:10.1023/A:102111471
0076)
Peel, S. A. F., Hu, Z. M. & Clokie, C. M. L. 2003 In search
of
the
ideal
bone
morphogenetic
protein
delivery
system: in vitro studies on demineralized bone matrix,
puriﬁed, and recombinant bone morphogenetic protein.
J. Craniofac. Surg. 14, 284–291. (doi:10.1097/00001665-
200305000-00005)
Peroglio, M., Gremillard, L., Chevalier, J., Chazeau, L.,
Gauthier, C. & Hamaide, T. 2007 Toughening of bio-
ceramics scaffolds by polymer coating. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc.
27, 2679–2685. (doi:10.1016/j.jeurceramsoc.2006.10.016)
Phillips, F. M. 2003 Minimally invasive treatments of
osteoporotic vertebral compression fractures. Spine 28,
S45–S53. (doi:10.1097/00007632-200308011-00009)
Pihlajama¨ki, H., Bo¨stman, O. & Rokkanen, P. 1994 A
biodegradable expansion plug for ﬁxation of the cortical
bone block in the Britow-Latarjet operation. Int. Orthop.
18, 66–71. (doi:10.1007/BF02484413)
Podoshin, L., Nodar, R. H., Hughes, G. B., Bauer, T., Hayes,
J. D., Fradis, M., Boss, J. & Ramsey, L. 1988 Long-term
histologic study of a new carbon–carbon ossicular replace-
ment prosthesis. Am. J. Otol. 9, 366–375.
Punt, I. M., Visser, V. M., van Rhijn, L. W., Kurtz, S. M.,
Antonis, J., Schurink, G. W. H. & van Ooij, A. 2008
Complications and reoperations of the SB Charite´ lumbar
disc prothesis: experience in 75 patients. Eur. Spine J. 17,
36–43. (doi:10.1007/s00586-007-0506-8)
Qiu, Q., Sayer, M., Kawaja, M., Shen, X. & Davies, J. E. 1998
Attachment, morphology, and protein expression of rat
marrow stromal cells cultured on charged substrate
surfaces. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 42, 117–127. (doi:10.
1002/(SICI)1097-4636(199810)42:1!117::AID-JBM15O
3.0.CO;2-I)
Ramakrishna, S., Mayer, J., Wintermantel, E. & Leong,
K. W. 2001 Biomedical applications of polymer-composite
materials: a review. Compos. Sci. Technol. 61, 1189–1224.
(doi:10.1016/S0266-3538(00)00241-4)
Ratier, A., Freche, M., Lacout, J. L. & Rodriguez, F. 2004
Behaviour of an injectable calcium phosphate cement with
added tetracycline. Int. J. Pharm. 274, 261–268. (doi:10.
1016/j.ijpharm.2004.01.021)
Ratner, B. D., Hoffman, A. S. & Schoen, F. J. 2004
Biomaterials science. An introduction to materials in
medicine, 2nd edn. Amsterdam, The Netherlands/New
York, NY: Elsevier/Academic Press.
Revell, P. A., Damien, E., Di Silvio, L., Gurav, N., Longinotti,
C. & Ambrosio, L. 2007 Tissue engineered intervertebral
disc repair in the pig using injectable polymers. J. Mater.
Sci. Mater. Med. 18, 303–308. (doi:10.1007/s10856-006-
0693-6)
Ripamonti, U. & Tasker, J. R. 2000 Advances in bio-
technology for tissue engineering of bone. Curr. Pharm.
Biotechnol. 1, 47–55. (doi:10.2174/1389201003379031)
Rodrı´guez-Cabello, J. C., Prieto, S., Reguera, J., Arias, F. J.
& Ribeiro, A. 2007 Biofunctional design of elastin-like
polymers for advanced applications in nanobiotechnology.
J. Biomater. Sci. Polym. Ed. 18, 269–286. (doi:10.1163/
156856207779996904)
Rokkanen, P. U. 1998 Bioabsorbable ﬁxation devices in
orthopaedics and traumatology. Ann. Chir. Gyn. 87,
13–20.
Rubin, J. P. & Yaremchuk, M. J. 1997 Complications and
toxicities of implantable biomaterials used in facial
reconstructive and aesthetic surgery: a comprehensive
review of the literature. Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 100,
1336–1353. (doi:10.1097/00006534-199710000-00043)
Russell, J. L. & Block, J. E. 1999 Clinical utility of
demineralized bone matrix for osseous defects, arthrodesis,
and reconstruction: impact of processing techniques and
study methodology. Orthopedics 22, 524–531.
Ryha¨nen, J. 1999 Biocompatibility evaluation of nickel–
titanium
shape
memory
metal
alloy.
PhD
thesis,
University of Oulu, Finland.
Ryshkewitch, E. 1953 Compression strength of porous
sintered alumina and zirconia. 9th Communication to
Ceramography. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 36, 65–68. (doi:10.
1111/j.1151-2916.1953.tb12837.x)
Sargeant, T. D., Rao, M. S., Koh, C. Y. & Stupp, S. I. 2008
Covalent functionalization on NiTi surfaces with bio-
active peptide amphiphile nanoﬁbers. Biomaterials 29,
1085–1098. (doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.2007.11.002)
Schepers, E., de Clercq, M., Ducheyne, P. & Kempeneers, R.
1991 Bioactive glass particulate material as a ﬁller for bone
lesions. J. Oral Rehabil. 18, 439–452.
Schuh, A., Holzwarth, U., Kachler, W., Goske, J. & Zeiler, G.
2004 Surface characterization of Al2O3-blasted titanium
implants in total hip arthroplasty. Orthopade 33, 905–910.
Scotchford, C. A., Cooper, E., Leggett, G. J. & Downes, S.
1998 Growth of human osteoblast-like cells on alkanethiol
on gold self-assembled monolayers: the effects of surface
chemistry. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 41, 431–442. (doi:10.
1002/(SICI)1097-4636(19980905)41:3!431::AID-JBM13
O3.0.CO;2-L)
Serra, J., Gonzalez, P., Chiussi, S., Leo´n, B. & Pe´rez-Amor,
M. 2001 Processing of bioglass coatings by excimer laser
ablation. Key Eng. Mater. 192–195, 635–638.
Shabalovskaya, S. A. 1996 On the nature of biocompatibility
and on medical applications of NiTi shape memory and
superelastic alloys. Biol. Med. Mater. Eng. 6, 267–289.
Shelton, R. M., Rasmussen, A. C. & Davies, J. E. 1988
Protein adsorption at the interface between charged
polymer substrata and migrating osteoblasts. Biomaterials
9, 24–29. (doi:10.1016/0142-9612(88)90065-8)
Sikavitsas, V. I., Van den Dolder, J., Bancroft, G. N., Jansen,
J. A. & Mikos, A. G. 2003 Inﬂuence of the in vitro culture
period on the in vivo performance of cell/titanium bone
tissue-engineered constructs using a rat cranial critical size
defect model. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 67, 944–951. (doi:10.
1002/jbm.a.10126)
Spaans, C. J., Belgraver, V. W., Rienstra, O., de Groot, J. H.,
Veth, R. P. H. & Pennings, A. J. 2000 Solvent-free
fabrication of micro-porous polyurethane amide and
polyurethane-urea scaffolds for repair and replacement of
the knee-joint meniscus. Biomaterials 21, 2453–2460.
(doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(00)00113-7)
Stanley, H. R., Hall, M. B., Clark, A. E., King, C., Hench,
L. L. & Berte, J. J. 1997 Using 45S5 bioglass cones as
endosseous ridge maintenance implant to prevent alveolar
ridge resorption: a 5 year evolution. Int. J. Maxillofac.
Implants 12, 95–105.
Steinmann, S. G. 1985 Corrosion of titanium and titanium
alloys for surgical implants. Titanium’84 science and
technology, vol. 2, p. 1373. Munich, Germany: Deutsche
Gesellschaft fu¨r Mettallkunde EV.
St-Pierre, J. P., Gauthier, M., Lefebvre, L. P. & Tabrizian, M.
2005 Three-dimensional growth of differentiating MC3T3-
E1 pre-osteoblasts on porous titanium scaffolds. Bioma-
terials 26, 7319–7328. (doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.2005.
05.046)
Subach, B. R., Haid, R. W., Rodts, G. E. & Alexander, J. T.
1999 Postrior lumbar interbody fusion (PLIF) using an
impacted, bioabsorbable device. In American Association
of Neurological Surgeons, Proceedings of the Congress of
Neurological Surgeons.
1156
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 21 (native) -----
Sun, L., Berndt, C. C., Gross, K. A. & Kucuk, A. 2001
Material
fundamentals
and
clinical
performance
of
plasma-sprayed
hydroxyapatite
coatings:
a
review.
J. Biomed. Mater. Res. B 58, 570–592. (doi:10.1002/jbm.
1056)
Sutula, L. C. et al. 1995 Impact of gamma sterilization on
clinical performance of polyethylene in the hip. Clin.
Orthop. 319, 28–40.
Suzuki, A., Kanetaka, H., Shimizu, Y., Tomizuka, R.,
Hosoda, H., Miyazaki, S., Okuno, O., Igarashi, K. &
Mitani, H. 2006 Orthodontic buccal tooth movement by
nickel-free titanium-based shape memory and superelastic
alloy wire. Angle Orthod. 76, 1041–1046. (doi:10.2319/
083105-306)
Swanson, A. B. 1968 Silicone rubber implants for replacement
of arthritic or destroyed joints in the hand. Surg. Clin.
North Am. 48, 1113–1127.
Tadic, D., Beckmann, F., Schwarz, K. & Epple, M. 2004
A novel method to produce hydroxyapatite objects
with interconnecting porosity that avoids sintering. Bio-
materials
25,
3335–3340.
(doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.
2003.10.007)
Takagi, S., Chow, L. C. & Ishikawa, K. 1998 Formation of
hydroxyapatite
in
new
calcium
phosphate
cements.
Biomaterials
19,
1593–1599.
(doi:10.1016/S0142-9612
(97)00119-1)
Takahashi, Y., Yamamoto, M. & Tabata, Y. 2005 Osteogenic
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells in biodegradable
sponges composed of gelatin and b-tricalcium phosphate.
Biomaterials 26, 3587–3596. (doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.
2004.09.046)
Takemoto,
M.,
Fujibayashi,
S.,
Neo,
M.,
Suzuki,
J.,
Matsushita, T., Kokubo, T. & Nakamura, T. 2006
Osteoinductive porous titanium implants: effect of sodium
removal by dilute HCl treatment. Biomaterials
27,
2682–2691. (doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.2005.12.014)
Taksali, S., Grauer, J. N. & Vaccaro, A. R. 2004 Material
considerations
for
intervertebral
disc
replacement
implants. Spine J. 4(Suppl. 6), 231S–238S. (doi:10.1016/
j.spinee.2004.07.012)
Tampieri, A., Celotti, G., Sprio, S., Delcogliano, A. &
Franzese,
S.
2001
Porosity-graded
hydroxyapatite
ceramics
to
replace
natural
bone.
Biomaterials
22,
1365–1370. (doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(00)00290-8)
Tanashi, M. & Matsuda, T. 1997 Surface functional group
dependence on apatite formation on self-assembled mono-
layers in a simulated body ﬂuid. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 34,
305–315. (doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4636(19970305)34:3!
305::AID-JBM5O3.0.CO;2-O)
Temenoff, J. S. & Mikos, A. G. 2000 Tissue engineering for
regeneration
of
articular
cartilage.
Biomaterials
21,
431–440. (doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(99)00213-6)
Thomas, C. H., McFarland, C. D., Jenkins, M. L., Rezania,
A., Steele, J. G. & Healy, K. E. 1997 The role of vitronectin
in the attachment and spatial distribution of bone-derived
cells on materials with patterned surface chemistry.
J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 37, 81–93. (doi:10.1002/(SICI)
1097-4636(199710)37:1!81::AID-JBM10O3.0.CO;2-T)
Thompson, G. J. & Puleo, D. A. 1996 Ti-6Al-4V ion solution
inhibition of osteogenic cell phenotype as a function of
differentiation time course in vitro. Biomaterials 17,
1949–1954. (doi:10.1016/0142-9612(96)00009-9)
Thull, R. & Grant, D. 2001 Physical and chemical vapour
deposition and plasma-assisted techniques for coating
titanium. In Titanium in medicine: material science,
surface science, engineering, biological responses and
medical applications (eds D. M. Brunette, P. Tengvall,
M. Textor & P. Thomsen), pp. 283–342. Berlin, Germany:
Springer.
Toﬁghi, A., Mounic, S., Chakravarthy, P., Rey, C. & Lee, D.
2001 Setting reactions involved in injectable cements
based on amorphous calcium phosphate. Key Eng. Mater.
192–195, 769–772.
Tognarini, I. et al. 2008 In vitro differentiation of human
mesenchymal stem cells on Ti6Al4V surfaces. Biomaterials
29, 809–824. (doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.2007.10.043)
To¨rma¨la¨, P. 1992 Biodegradable self-reinforced composite
materials; manufacturing structure and mechanical prop-
erties. Clin. Mater. 10, 29–34. (doi:10.1016/0267-6605(92)
90081-4)
Trojani, C. et al. 2006 Ectopic bone formation using an
injectable biphasic calcium phosphate/Si-HPMC hydrogel
composite loaded with undifferentiated bone marrow
stromal cells. Biomaterials 27, 3256–3264. (doi:10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2006.01.057)
Tullberg, T. 1998 Failure of a carbon ﬁber implant. A case
report.
Spine
23,
1804–1806.
(doi:10.1097/00007632-
199808150-00016)
Uchida, M., Kim, H. M., Kokubo, T. & Nakamura, T. 2003
Structural dependence of apatite formation on titania gels
in a simulated body ﬂuid. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 64,
164–170. (doi:10.1002/jbm.a.10414)
Unger, R. E., Peters, K., Assad, M., Schrooten, J., Kirkpatrick,
C. J. 2004 Endothelial
cell
compatibility
of
porous
nitinol. In Transactions—7th World Biomaterials Con-
gress, p. 1538.
Vaccaro, A. R., Singh, K., Haid, R., Kitchel, S., Wuisman, P.,
Taylor, W., Branch, C. & Graﬁn, S. 2003 The use of
bioabsorbable implants in the spine. Spine J. 3, 227–237.
(doi:10.1016/S1529-9430(02)00412-6)
Van den Dolder, J., Farber, E., Spauwen, P. H. & Jansen,
J. A. 2003 Bone tissue reconstruction using titanium ﬁber
mesh combined with rat bone marrow stromal cells.
Biomaterials
24,
1745–1750.
(doi:10.1016/S0142-9612
(02)00537-9)
Van Dijk, M., Smit, T., Sugihara, S., Burger, E. & Wuisman,
P. 2002 The effect of cage stiffness on the rate of lumbar
interbody fusion. An in vivo model using poly(L-lactic acid)
and titanium cages. Spine 27, 682–688. (doi:10.1097/
00007632-200204010-00003)
Vehof, J. W., Haus, M. T., de Ruijter, A. E., Spauwen, P. H.
& Jansen, J. A. 2002 Bone formation in transforming
growth factor beta-I-loaded titanium ﬁber mesh implants.
Clin. Oral Implants Res. 13, 94–102. (doi:10.1034/j.1600-
0501.2002.130112.x)
Vert, M. & Li, S. M. 1992 Bioresorbability of aliphatic
polyesters. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 3, 432–446. (doi:10.
1007/BF00701240)
Villermaux, F. 2000 Zirconia–alumina as the new generation
of ceramic–ceramic THP: wear performance evaluation
including extreme life conditions. In Transactions of
the Sixth
World Biomaterials Congress,
Society for
Biomaterials.
Vogel, M., Voigt, C., Gross, U. & Mu¨ller-Mai, C. 2001 In vivo
comparison of bioactive glass particles in rabbits. Bio-
materials
22,
357–362.
(doi:10.1016/S0142-9612(00)
00191-5) See also pages 26, 4, 359–371.
Von Oepen, R. & Michaeli, W. 1992 Injection moulding of
biodegradable implants. Clin. Mater. 10, 21–28. (doi:10.
1016/0267-6605(92)90080-D)
Wake, M. C., Gupta, P. K. & Mikos, A. G. 1996 Fabrication
of pliable biodegradable polymer foams to engineer soft
tissues. Cell Transplant 5, 465–473. (doi:10.1016/0963-
6897(96)00025-5)
Walker, P. S. & Gold, B. L. 1971 The tribology (friction
lubrication
and
wear)
of
all-metal
artiﬁcial
hip
joints. Wear 17, 285–299. (doi:10.1016/0043-1648(71)
90032-9)
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
1157
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)

----- Page 22 (native) -----
Wang, B. C., Lee, T. M., Chang, E. & Yang, C. Y. 1993 The
shear strength and the failure mode of plasma-sprayed
hydroxyapatite coating to bone: the effect of coating
thickness. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 27, 1315–1327. (doi:10.
1002/jbm.820271012)
Wang, J. C., Alanay, A., Mark, D., Kanim, L. E. A.,
Campbell, P. A., Dawson, E. G. & Lieberman, J. R. 2007
A comparison of commercially available demineralized
bone matrix for spinal fusion. Eur. Spine J. 16, 1233–1240.
(doi:10.1007/s00586-006-0282-x)
Waris, T., Pohjonen, T. & To¨rma¨la¨, P. 1994 Self-reinforced
absorbable polylactide (Sr-PLLA) plates in craniofacial
surgery—a
preliminary
report
on
14 patients.
Eur.
J. Plast. Surg. 17, 236–238. (doi:10.1007/BF00208837)
Webb, K., Hlady, V. & Tresco, P. A. 2000 Relationships
among cell attachment, spreading, cytoskeletal organiz-
ation, and migration rate for anchorage-dependent cells on
model surfaces. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 49, 362–368.
(doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4636(20000305)49:3!362::AID-
JBM9O3.0.CO;2-S)
Wen, C. E., Mabuchi, M., Yamada, Y., Shimojina, K., Chino,
Y. & Asahina, T. 2001 Processing of biocompatible porous
Ti and Mg. Scr. Mater. 45, 1147–1153. (doi:10.1016/
S1359-6462(01)01132-0)
Wen, H. B., de Wijn, J. R., de Groot, K. & Cui, F. Z. 1997 A
simple method to prepare calcium phosphate coatings on
Ti6Al4V. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 8, 765–770. (doi:10.
1023/A:1018512612695)
Wheeler, D. L., Campbell, A. A., Graff, G. L. & Miller, G. J.
1997 Histological and biochemical evaluation of calcium
phosphate
coatings
applied
through
surface-induced
mineralization to porous titanium implants. J. Biomed.
Mater. Res. 34, 539–543. (doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4636
(19970315)34:4!539::AID-JBM14O3.0.CO;2-7)
White, E. W., Weber, J. N., Roy, D. M., Owen, E. L., Chiroff,
R. T. & White, R. A. 1975 Replamineform porous
biomaterials
for
hard
tissue
implant
applications.
J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 9, 23–27. (doi:10.1002/jbm.
820090406)
Wilson, Y. G., Sykes, P. J. & Niranjan, N. S. 1993 Long-
term follow-up of Swanson’s silastic arthroplasty of the
metacarpophalangeal
joints
in
rheumatoid
arthritis.
J. Hand Surg. 18, 81–91. (doi:10.1016/0266-7681(93)
90203-R)
Xiao, S. J., Textor, M., Spencer, N. D., Wieland, M., Keller, B.
& Sigrist, H. 1998 Covalent attachment of cell-adhesive
peptides containing (arg-gly-asp) sequences to titanium
surfaces. Langmuir 14, 5507–5516. (doi:10.1021/la980257z)
Xiao, S. J., Kenausis, G. & Textor, M. 2001 Biochemical
modiﬁcation
of
titanium
surfaces.
Berlin,
Germany:
Springer.
Yan, L., Leng, Y. & Weng, L. T. 2003 Characterization of
chemical inhomogeneity in plasma-sprayed hydroxyapa-
tite coatings. Biomaterials 24, 2585–2592. (doi:10.1016/
S0142-9612(03)00061-9)
Yang, S., Leong, K., Du, Z. & Chua, C. 2001 The design of
scaffolds for use in tissue engineering. Part I. Traditional
factors. Tissue Eng. 7, 679–689. (doi:10.1089/107632
701753337645)
Yeh, C. L. & Sung, W. Y. 2004 Synthesis of NiTi
intermetallics by self-propagating combustion. J. Alloy
Comp. 376, 79–88. (doi:10.1016/j.jallcom.2003.12.016)
Yuan, H. P., de Bruijn, J. D., Zhang, X. D., van Blitterswijk,
C. A. & de Groot, K. 2001 Bone induction by porous glass
ceramic made from bioglass (45S5). J. Biomed. Mater.
Res. 58, 270–276. (doi:10.1002/1097-4636(2001)58:3!
270::AID-JBM1016O3.0.CO;2-2)
1158
Review. Biomaterials in orthopaedics
M. Navarro et al.
J. R. Soc. Interface (2008)