

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Nature  |  Vol 582  |  25 June 2020  |  557
Article
Aerodynamic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 in two 
Wuhan hospitals
Yuan Liu1,6, Zhi Ning2,6 ✉, Yu Chen1,6 ✉, Ming Guo1,6, Yingle Liu1, Nirmal Kumar Gali2, Li Sun2, 
Yusen Duan3, Jing Cai4, Dane Westerdahl2, Xinjin Liu1, Ke Xu1, Kin-fai Ho5 ✉, Haidong Kan4 ✉, 
Qingyan Fu3 ✉ & Ke Lan1 ✉
The ongoing outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has spread rapidly on a 
global scale. Although it is clear that severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) is transmitted through human respiratory droplets and direct contact, 
the potential for aerosol transmission is poorly understood1–3. Here we investigated 
the aerodynamic nature of SARS-CoV-2 by measuring viral RNA in aerosols in different 
areas of two Wuhan hospitals during the outbreak of COVID-19 in February and March 
2020. The concentration of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in aerosols that was detected in isolation 
wards and ventilated patient rooms was very low, but it was higher in the toilet areas 
used by the patients. Levels of airborne SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the most public areas was 
undetectable, except in two areas that were prone to crowding; this increase was 
possibly due to individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 in the crowd. We found that 
some medical staff areas initially had high concentrations of viral RNA with aerosol 
size distributions that showed peaks in the submicrometre and/or supermicrometre 
regions; however, these levels were reduced to undetectable levels after 
implementation of rigorous sanitization procedures. Although we have not 
established the infectivity of the virus detected in these hospital areas, we propose 
that SARS-CoV-2 may have the potential to be transmitted through aerosols. Our 
results indicate that room ventilation, open space, sanitization of protective apparel, 
and proper use and disinfection of toilet areas can effectively limit the concentration 
of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in aerosols. Future work should explore the infectivity of 
aerosolized virus.
The ongoing outbreak of COVID-19, which has been reported in 206 
countries and areas, has resulted in 857,641 confirmed cases and 
42,006 deaths globally as of 2 April 2020. Owing to the increasing threat 
caused by COVID-19 to global health, the World Health Organization 
(WHO) has declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic and global 
public health emergency. The causative pathogen of the COVID-19 
outbreak has been identified as a highly infectious novel coronavirus 
that is referred to as SARS-CoV-24–6. Reported transmission pathways of 
SARS-CoV-2 in humans include the inhalation of virus-laden liquid drop-
lets, close contact with infected individuals and contact with surfaces 
that are contaminated with SARS-CoV-21. Moreover, aerosol transmis-
sion has been suggested to be an additional, yet important pathway, on 
the basis of clinical observations in confined spaces2,3. There are many 
respiratory diseases that are spread through airborne routes, such as 
tuberculosis, measles and chickenpox7,8. A retrospective cohort study 
conducted after the SARS epidemic—which was caused by SARS-CoV—in 
Hong Kong in 2003 suggested that airborne spread may have had an 
important role in the transmission of SARS9. At present, little is known 
about the aerodynamic characteristics and transmission pathways of 
SARS-CoV-2 in aerosols; in part because of the difficulties in sampling 
virus-containing aerosols in real-world settings and challenges in their 
quantification at low concentrations.
We analysed the occurrence of airborne SARS-CoV-2 and its aerosol 
deposition at 30 sites in two designated hospitals and public areas in 
Wuhan, China, and then quantified the copy counts of SARS-CoV-2 
in aerosol samples using a robust droplet-digital-PCR-based detec-
tion method (ddPCR)10. The two hospitals are exclusively used for the 
treatments of patients with COVID-19 during the outbreak; however, 
each hospital has unique characteristics that serve different purposes. 
Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University (hereafter, Renmin Hospital) 
is representative of grade-A tertiary hospitals that have been desig-
nated for the treatment of patients with severe symptoms of COVID-19. 
By contrast, Wuchang Fangcang Field Hospital (hereafter, Fangcang 
Hospital) is representative of the makeshift field hospitals that were 
converted from indoor sports facilities or exhibition centres to quar-
antine and treat patients with mild symptoms. The sampling locations 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2271-3
Received: 14 March 2020
Accepted: 20 April 2020
Published online: 27 April 2020
 Check for updates
1State Key Laboratory of Virology, Modern Virology Research Center, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, P. R. China. 2Division of Environment and Sustainability, The Hong Kong 
University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, P. R. China. 3Shanghai Environmental Monitoring Center, Shanghai, P. R. China. 4School of Public Health, Key Laboratory of Public Health 
Safety of the Ministry of Education and Key Laboratory of Health Technology Assessment of the Ministry of Health, Fudan University, Shanghai, P. R. China. 5JC School of Public Health and 
Primary Care, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, P. R. China. 6These authors contributed equally: Yuan Liu, Zhi Ning, Yu Chen, Ming Guo. ✉e-mail: zhining@ust.hk;  
chenyu@whu.edu.cn; kfho@cuhk.edu.hk; kanh@fudan.edu.cn; qingyanf@sheemc.cn; klan@whu.edu.cn

----- Page 2 (native) -----
558  |  Nature  |  Vol 582  |  25 June 2020
Article
were classified into three categories according to their accessibility by 
different groups: (1) patient areas, where the patients with COVID-19 
have a physical presence—these include the intensive care units, coro-
nary care units and ward rooms inside Renmin Hospital, a toilet and 
staff workstations inside Fangcang Hospital; (2) medical staff areas, 
the workplaces in the two hospitals that are exclusively accessed by 
medical staff who had direct contact with the patients; and (3) pub-
lic areas, venues that are open to the general public (Supplementary 
Table 1). Three types of aerosol samples were collected: (1) aerosol 
samples of total suspended particles with no upper size limit to quan-
tify RNA concentrations of SARS-CoV-2 in aerosols; (2) aerodynamic 
size-segregated aerosol samples to determine the size distribution of 
airborne SARS-CoV-2 droplets; and (3) aerosol deposition samples to 
determine the deposition rate of airborne SARS-CoV-2.
The existence of SARS-CoV-2 in aerosol samples was deter-
mined through the quantification of its genetic material (RNA). 
Table 1 | RNA concentration of airborne SARS-CoV-2 at different locations in Wuhan
Category
Sites
Sample type
Concentration (copies m−3)
Patient areas
Fangcang Hospital
Zone A workstationa
TSPb
1
TSPc
9
Zone B workstation
TSP
1
Zone C workstationa
TSPb
5
TSPc
0
Patient mobile toilet room
TSP
19
Renmin Hospital
Intensive care unit
TSP
0
Intensive care unit
Deposition
31d
Intensive care unit
Deposition
113d
Coronary care unit
TSP
0
Ward zone 16
TSP
0
Medical staff areas
Fangcang Hospital
PPAR of zone Aa
TSPb
16
TSPc
0
PPAR of zone B
Size-segregated
42
PPAR of zone Ca
Size-segregatedb
20
TSPc
0
Male staff change room
TSP
20
Female staff change room
TSP
11
Medical staff’s office
Size-segregated
20
Meeting room
TSP
18
Warehousea
TSPb
21
TSPc
0
Renmin Hospital
Passageway for medical staff
TSP
6
Dining room for medical staff
TSP
6
Public areas
Fangcang Hospital pharmacy
TSP
3
Renmin Hospital doctor office
TSP
0
Renmin Hospital outpatient hall
TSP
0
Renmin Hospital outdoor
TSP
7
University office doorside
TSP
0
University hospital outpatient hall
TSP
0
Community checkpoint
TSP
0
Residential building
TSP
0
Supermarket
TSP
0
Department store 1
TSP
11
Department store 2
TSP
3
Blank controla
Field blankb
0
Field blankc
0
TSP, total suspended particles. The samples were distinct by design owing to the unique conditions inside the hospitals during COVID-19 outbreak. We collected 35 samples (not including two 
blanks) at different sites, therefore n = 35. The replicability is limited by very restricted experimental conditions to conduct sampling in the highly infectious zones. 
aTwo rounds of sampling were conducted for the sites. A blank control was included for each of round of sampling. Detailed information is shown in Supplementary Table 1. 
bThe samples were taken during the first round of sampling from 17 February to 24 February 2020. 
cThe samples were taken during the second round of sampling on 2 March 2020. 
dThe reported values are virus aerosol deposition rates in copies m−2 h−1.

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Nature  |  Vol 582  |  25 June 2020  |  559
The concentrations of airborne SARS-CoV-2 at the different sites 
are shown in Table 1. In general, very low or undetectable concen-
trations of airborne SARS-CoV-2 were found in most of the patient 
areas of Renmin Hospital, suggesting that the negatively pressur-
ized isolation and high air exchange rate inside the intensive care 
units, coronary care units and ward room of Renmin Hospital are 
very effective in limiting the airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2. 
The highest concentration in patient areas was observed inside a 
patient mobile toilet room at Fangcang Hospital (19 copies m−3), 
which is a temporary single toilet room of approximate 1 m2 in area 
without ventilation. Airborne SARS-CoV-2 may come from either the 
patient’s breath or the aerosolization of the virus-laden aerosol from 
the faeces or urine of a patient during use11,12. Although the infectiv-
ity of the virus is not known in this study, the results also relate to 
the findings of another study13, which found positive test results of 
wipe samples from room surfaces of toilets used by patients infected 
with SARS-CoV-2. In medical staff areas, the two sampling sites in 
Renmin Hospital had low concentrations of 6 copies m−3, whereas 
the sites in Fangcang Hospital generally had higher concentrations. 
In particular, the protective-apparel removal rooms (PPARs) in three 
different zones inside Fangcang Hospital are among the upper range 
of the concentrations of airborne SARS-CoV-2, ranging from 16 to 
42 copies m−3 in the first round of sampling. In public areas outside 
the hospitals, we found that most of the sites had undetectable or 
very low concentrations of SARS-CoV-2 aerosols (below 3 copies m−3), 
except for one crowd-gathering site about 1 m from the entrance of 
a department store that customers frequently passed through and 
a site next to Renmin Hospital, through which the public including 
outpatients walked. Although both sites were outside buildings, it 
is possible that individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 in the crowd 
may have been the source of virus-laden aerosols during the sam-
pling period. The results suggest that, overall, the risks of infection 
are low in well-ventilated or open public venues, but do reinforce 
the importance of avoiding crowded gatherings and implementing 
the early identification and diagnosis of individuals infected with 
SARS-CoV-2 for quarantine or treatment.
Inside a room of the intensive care unit of Renmin Hospital, the two 
aerosol deposition samples tested positive with an estimated deposi-
tion rate of 31 and 113 copies m−2 h−1, although the concentration of the 
total suspended particles in the aerosol sample inside this room of the 
intensive care unit was below the detection limit (Table 1). The sample 
with the higher deposition rate was placed in the hindrance-free corner 
of the room, approximately 3 m from the bed of a patient. The other 
sample, for which a lower number of virus copies was recorded, was 
placed in another corner, approximately 2 m from the bed of the patient 
and below medical equipment, which may have blocked the path of 
virus aerosols during sedimentation. Our findings, although based on a 
small sample size, indicate that virus-laden aerosol deposition may have 
a role in surface contamination and subsequent contact by susceptible 
people, which results in the infection of individuals with SARS-CoV-2.
In general, medical staff areas had higher concentrations of 
SARS-CoV-2 aerosols compared with patient areas in both hospitals 
during the first round of sampling (17–24 February 2020) at the peak of 
the COVID-19 outbreak (Table 1). For sampling sites at Renmin Hospital, 
the air circulation in medical staff areas is isolated by design from the 
air circulation in the patient rooms. By contrast, in Fangcang Hospital, 
the non-ventilated temporary PPAR was isolated from the patient hall, 
in which the aerosol concentration of SARS-CoV-2 was generally low. 
The second round of sampling of total suspended particles in medical 
staff areas of Fangcang Hospital was conducted after the number of 
patients reduced from more than 200 to less than 100 per zone and 
the implementation of more rigorous and thorough sanitization meas-
ures, including more frequent spraying of chlorinated disinfectant on 
the floor of patient areas, additional disinfection using 3% hydrogen 
peroxide in the PPAR at least once a week, thoroughly spraying alco-
hol disinfectant on the protective apparel before taking it off and an 
increased operation time of indoor air purifiers. The samples from this 
second round showed all undetectable results (Table 1), confirming 
the importance of sanitization in reducing the amount of airborne 
SARS-CoV-2 in high-risk areas.
SARS-CoV-2 aerosols were mainly found to include two size ranges, 
one in the submicrometre region (dp between 0.25 and 1.0 μm) and 
the other in supermicrometre region (dp > 2.5 μm). Aerosols in the 
submicrometre region were predominantly found in PPARs in zones 
B and C of Fangcang Hospital (Fig. 1a, b) with peak concentrations of 
40 and 9 copies m−3 in the 0.25–0.5 μm and 0.5–1.0 μm range, respec-
tively. By contrast, aerosols in the supermicrometre region were mainly 
observed in the PPAR of zone C of Fangcang Hospital (Fig. 1b) with con-
centrations of 7 copies m−3. The medical staff’s office (Fig. 1c) had more 
virus-laden aerosols in the supermicrometre size range, but the size 
distribution is flatter compared with the range in other areas. Reports 
on the resuspension of microorganisms from the floor, clothing and 
furniture have previously been noted to contribute to the generation 
of microbial aerosols in the built environment14. Therefore, we hypoth-
esize that the source of the submicrometre peak is the resuspension of 
virus-laden aerosols from the surface of the protective apparel worn by 
medical staff while they are removing the equipment. The submicro-
metre virus-laden aerosols may originally come from the direct depo-
sition of respiratory droplets or airborne SARS-CoV-2 from a patient 
onto the protective apparel as evidenced by the deposition samples 
(Table 1). The higher mobility owing to their smaller aerodynamic 
diameter facilitates the resuspension from the surface of protective 
0.01
0.1
1
0.25 0.5
2.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0.01
0.1
0.25 0.5
1
2.5
0
5
10
15
20
0.01
0.1
1
0.25 0.5
2.5
0
5
10
15
20
SARS-CoV-2 RNA
concentration (copies m–3)
a
b
c
Aerodynamic diameter (μm)
Aerodynamic diameter (μm)
Aerodynamic diameter (μm)
Fig. 1 | Concentration of airborne SARS-CoV-2 RNA in different aerosol size 
bins. a, Concentration of SARS-CoV-2 in a protective-apparel removal room in 
zone B of Fangcang Hospital. b, Concentration of SARS-CoV-2 in a 
protective-apparel removal room in zone C of Fangcang Hospital.  
c, Concentration of SARS-CoV-2 in the medical staff’s office of Fangcang 
Hospital. The x axis represents the aerodynamic diameter on a logarithmic 
scale to cover the multiple magnitudes of measured aerosol diameters.

----- Page 4 (native) -----
560  |  Nature  |  Vol 582  |  25 June 2020
Article
apparel after gaining the initial velocity while the equipment is being 
removed. On the other hand, floor-deposited SARS-CoV-2 is possibly 
the source of supermicrometre virus-laden aerosols and was carried 
across different areas by medical staff. Furthermore, a recent study 
has experimentally demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2 could maintain 
its biological stability in aerosols and on different surfaces for hours 
to days15. The submicrometre SARS-CoV-2 aerosols found in this study 
had a relatively longer residence time, indicating that the virus was 
probably still infectious during transmission.
This study has its inherent limitations because of the small sample 
size and the description of sample viral RNA instead of virus infectiv-
ity, which was imposed by restricted access to the patient and medical 
staff areas at the epicentre of the COVID-19 outbreak. Nonetheless, 
the findings of this study provide a real-world investigation of the 
aerodynamic characteristics of airborne SARS-CoV-2 in Wuhan, where 
a strict quarantine and travel restrictions were implemented during 
the peak of the COVID-19 outbreak. The findings suggest that toilet 
use by patients with COVID-19 and crowd gatherings that included 
individuals infected by SARS-CoV-2 are non-negligible sources of air-
borne SARS-CoV-2, although the infectivity of the virus is not known. 
We also describe a transmission pathway for SARS-CoV-2 aerosols that 
is mediated by the surface deposition of the virus on and resuspension 
from protective apparel of medical staff and the floor surface. The 
results of this study have important implications for the prevention 
of infection of the public and protection of medical staff. We call for 
particular attention to (1) the ventilation and sterilization of toilets as 
a potential source for the spreading of the virus; (2) personal protec-
tion measures for the general public, such as the wearing of masks and 
avoidance of busy crowds to reduce the risk of exposure to airborne 
virus; (3) the effective sanitization of high-risk areas in the hospital 
to limit the transmission of airborne SARS-CoV-2 and to protect the 
medical staff; (4) the effectiveness of a naturally ventilated large sta-
dium to limit the aerosol transmission of SARS-CoV-2 when converted 
to a field hospital for the quarantine and treatment of patients with 
SARS-CoV-2; and (5) surface sanitization of the apparel before the 
equipment is taken off to help to reduce the potential risk of infection 
for medical staff.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting sum-
maries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, 
acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author con-
tributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code 
availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2271-3.
1.	
National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases (NCIRD). How COVID-19 
spreads https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/about/transmission.html (2020).
2.	
Offord, C. How COVID-19 is spread. The Scientist https://www.the-scientist.com/
news-opinion/how-covid-19-is-spread-67143 (21 February 2020).
3.	
WHO Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) 
https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/who-china-joint-mission-on- 
covid-19-final-report.pdf (2020).
4.	
Coronaviridae Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses. The 
species Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus: classifying 2019-nCoV 
and naming it SARS-CoV-2. Nat. Microbiol. 5, 536–544 (2020).
5.	
Chen, L. et al. RNA based mNGS approach identifies a novel human coronavirus from two 
individual pneumonia cases in 2019 Wuhan outbreak. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 9, 313–319 
(2020).
6.	
Zhou, P. et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat 
origin. Nature 579, 270–273 (2020).
7.	
Leclair, J. M., Zaia, J. A., Levin, M. J., Congdon, R. G. & Goldmann, D. A. Airborne 
transmission of chickenpox in a hospital. N. Engl. J. Med. 302, 450–453 (1980).
8.	
Escombe, A. R. et al. The detection of airborne transmission of tuberculosis from HIV-infected 
patients, using an in vivo air sampling model. Clin. Infect. Dis. 44, 1349–1357 (2007).
9.	
Yu, I. T., Qiu, H., Tse, L. A. & Wong, T. W. Severe acute respiratory syndrome beyond Amoy 
Gardens: completing the incomplete legacy. Clin. Infect. Dis. 58, 683–686 (2014).
10.	
Suo, T. et al. ddPCR: a more accurate tool for SARS-CoV-2 detection in low viral load 
specimens. Emerg. Microbes Infect. https://doi.org/10.1080/22221751.2020.1772678 (2020).
11.	
Peng, L. et al. SARS-CoV-2 can be detected in urine, blood, anal swabs, and 
oropharyngeal swabs specimens. J. Med. Virol. https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.25936 (2020).
12.	
Wang, W. et al. Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in different types of clinical specimens. J. Am. 
Med. Assoc. 323, 1843–1844 (2020).
13.	
Ong, S. W. X. et al. Air, surface environmental, and personal protective equipment 
contamination by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) from a 
symptomatic patient. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 323, 1610–1612 (2020).
14.	
Prussin, A. J. II & Marr, L. C. Sources of airborne microorganisms in the built environment. 
Microbiome 3, 78 (2015).
15.	
van Doremalen, N. et al. Aerosol and surface stability of SARS-CoV-2 as compared with 
SARS-CoV-1. N. Engl. J. Med. 382, 1564–1567 (2020).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020

----- Page 5 (native) -----
Methods
Data reporting
No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The 
experiments were not randomized and the investigators were not 
blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.
Sample collection
The sampling was conducted between 17 February and 2 March 2020 
in the locations in two rounds as shown in Table 1. All aerosol samples 
were collected on presterilized gelatin filters (Sartorius). A total of 
30 aerosol samples of total suspended particles were collected on 
25-mm-diameter filters loaded into styrene filter cassettes (SKC) by 
sampling air at a fixed flow rate of 5.0 l min−1 using a portable pump 
(APEX2, Casella). A total of three size-segregated aerosol samples was 
collected using a miniature cascade impactor (Sioutas Impactor, SKC) 
that separated aerosols into five ranges (>2.5 μm, 1.0–2.5 μm, 0.50–
1.0 μm and 0.25–0.50 μm on 25-mm filter substrates, and 0–0.25 μm on 
37-mm filters) at a flow rate of 9.0 l min−1. A total of two aerosol deposi-
tion samples was collected using 80-mm-diameter filters packed into a 
holder with an effective deposition area of 43.0 cm2 and the filters were 
placed intact on the floor in two corners of the intensive care unit room 
of Renmin Hospital for 7 days. Sampling durations and operation peri-
ods are described in Supplementary Table 1. All sampling instruments 
were located in the centre of the respective sampling area, where the 
sampling inlet was at a height of 1.5 m from the floor. Considering the 
limited experimental conditions and the small sample size, the integrity 
and robustness of the experiment protocol was examined extensively 
in the laboratory before field sampling and these results are described 
in Supplementary Table 2.
Analytical method and data analysis
After the collection of aerosol samples, all samples were processed 
immediately in the BSL-2 laboratory of Wuhan University. The 25-, 
37-mm and 80-mm filter samples were dissolved in deionized water, 
after which TRIzol LS reagent (Invitrogen) was added to inactivate 
SARS-CoV-2 viruses and extract RNA according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. First-strand cDNA was synthesized using the PrimeScript 
RT kit (TakaRa). Optimized ddPCR was used to detect the presence of 
SARS-CoV-2 viruses according to a previous study10. Analysis of the 
ddPCR data was performed using QuantaSoft software (Bio-Rad). The 
concentration reported by the procedure equals the number of copies 
of template per microlitre of the final 1× ddPCR reaction, which was 
normalized to copies m−3 in all of the results; therefore, the virus or viral 
RNA concentration in aerosol is expressed in copies m−3 throughout. 
A detailed protocol is provided in the Supplementary Information.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature 
Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.
Data availability
All data generated and analysed during this study are included in the 
Article and its Supplementary Information. Source Data for Fig. 1 are 
provided with the paper. 
Acknowledgements This study was supported by the Special Fund for COVID-19 Research of 
Wuhan University. We thank Taikang Insurance Group, Beijing Taikang Yicai Foundation, 
Renmin Hospital and Wuchang Fangcang Hospital for their support of this work; H. Xu from 
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Qingdao Laoying Environmental Technology, Beijing Top Science, 
Shanghai Leon Scientific Instrument, Shanghai Eureka Environmental Protection Hi-tech and 
Sapiens Environmental Technology for their support in providing the sampling devices and 
technical support of this study; and C. Wang, Q. Zhang, G. Liang and Z. Song for their 
assistance in filter sample preparation and logistics support.
Author contributions K.L., Y.C., Z.N., Q.F., H.K. and K.-f.H. conceptualized the study design; 
Yuan Liu, Y.C., M.G., Yingle Liu and K.L. collected samples; Yuan Liu, M.G. and X.L. carried out 
the laboratory tests; Yuan Liu, Z.N., Y.C., N.K.G., M.G., X.L. and K.L. analysed the data; Y.C., Z.N., 
Yuan Liu, Q.F., H.K., J.C., K.-f.H. and K.L. interpreted the results; Yuan Liu and Z.N. wrote the 
initial drafts of the manuscript; Yuan Liu, Z.N., Y.C. and K.L. revised the manuscript; M.G., Yingle 
Liu, N.K.G., L.S., Y.D., J.C., D.W., K.X., H.K. and Q.F. commented on the manuscript. All authors 
read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-
2271-3.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Z.N., Y.C., K.-f.H., H.K., 
Q.F. or K.L.
Peer review information Nature thanks Linsey Marr and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for 
their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.

----- Page 6 (native) -----
1
nature research  |  reporting summary
October 2018
Corresponding author(s):
Ke Lan
Last updated by author(s): Apr 2, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency 
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided 
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient) 
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted 
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection
NONE
Data analysis
QuantaSoft analysis software v.1.7.4.0917 (Bio-Rad) was used for analysis of the ddPCR data.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers. 
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable: 
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets 
- A list of figures that have associated raw data 
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
All data generated and analysed during this study are included in the Article and its Supplementary Information files, which include an additional Excel file 
containing Source Data for Fig. 1 and all raw data.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences
Behavioural & social sciences
 Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences

----- Page 7 (native) -----
2
nature research  |  reporting summary
October 2018
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description
This study investigated the aerodynamic nature and aerosol transmission of SARS-CoV-2 aerosol in Wuhan under strict quarantine 
and travel restriction during the peak of COVID-19 outbreak.
Research sample
Total of 35 distinct samples of three types, total suspended particle, size segregated and aerosol deposition were collected.
Sampling strategy
We sampled three types of virus aerosol samples at 30 sites covering patient and medical staff areas inside hospitals and in public 
areas in Wuhan. The sampling was designed to identify the hotspots of airborne SARS-CoV-2 and investigate their sources, and seek 
for evidences of their aerosol transmission across different isolation zones and air-surface transfer mechanisms.
Data collection
We collected two batches of samples from Feb 17 to Feb 24, 2020 and on Mar 2, 2020 respectively.
Timing and spatial scale
Sampling durations range from 5 to 20 hours for total suspended particle and size segregated samples and 7 days for aerosol 
deposition samples. Sampling air volumes range from 1.5 m3 to 8.9 m3.
Data exclusions
No data were excluded in this work.
Reproducibility
The samples were distinct by design in this study due to the unique conditions inside the hospitals during COVID-19 outbreak.
Randomization
This study categorized sampling locations by functions and user groups. Each sample has served different purposes so no 
randomization was attempted.
Blinding
The sampling process itself has no impact on the study subject and data integrity by the nature of study, so no blinding was 
attempted.
Did the study involve field work?
Yes
No
Field work, collection and transport
Field conditions
The sampling sites include indoor of hospital function areas and outdoor in public areas in Wuhan under strict quarantine and 
travel restriction.
Location
We sampled SARS-CoV-2 aerosol samples at 30 sites in two designated hospitals and public areas in Wuhan.
Access and import/export
This field study didn't involve any study objects that require permission so no approval is needed.
Disturbance
The sampling process has no disturbance of the subjects.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material, 
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response. 
Materials & experimental systems
n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies
Eukaryotic cell lines
Palaeontology
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Methods
n/a Involved in the study
ChIP-seq
Flow cytometry
MRI-based neuroimaging