

----- Page 1 (native) -----
838     
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;51:838–847. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699
Consensus statement on concussion in sport—the 5th 
international conference on concussion in sport held 
in Berlin, October 2016
Paul McCrory,1 Willem Meeuwisse,2 Jiří Dvorak,3,4 Mark Aubry,5 Julian Bailes,6 
Steven Broglio,7 Robert C Cantu,8 David Cassidy,9 Ruben J Echemendia,10,11 
Rudy J Castellani,12 Gavin A Davis,13,14 Richard Ellenbogen,15 Carolyn Emery,16 
Lars Engebretsen,17 Nina Feddermann-Demont,18,19 Christopher C Giza,20,21 
Kevin M Guskiewicz,22 Stanley Herring,23 Grant L Iverson,24 Karen M Johnston,25 
James Kissick,26 Jeffrey Kutcher,27 John J Leddy,28 David Maddocks,29 
Michael Makdissi,30,31 Geoff T Manley,32 Michael McCrea,33 William P Meehan,34,35 
Sinji Nagahiro,36 Jon Patricios,37,38 Margot Putukian,39 Kathryn J Schneider,40 
Allen Sills,41,42 Charles H Tator,43,44 Michael Turner,45 Pieter E Vos46 
Consensus statement
To cite: McCrory P, 
Meeuwisse W, Dvorak J, 
et al. Br J Sports Med 
2018;51:838–847.
►
►Additional material is 
published online only. To view 
please visit the journal online 
(http://​dx.​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​
bjsports-​2017-​097699)
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Dr Paul McCrory, The Florey 
Institute of Neuroscience and 
Mental Health, Heidelberg 
3084, Victoria, Australia;  
​paulmccrory@​icloud.​com
Accepted 6 March 2017
Preamble
The 2017 Concussion in Sport Group (CISG) 
consensus statement is designed to build on the 
principles outlined in the previous statements1–4 
and to develop further conceptual understanding 
of sport-related concussion (SRC) using an expert 
consensus-based approach. This document is devel-
oped for physicians and healthcare providers who 
are involved in athlete care, whether at a recre-
ational, elite or professional level. While agree-
ment exists on the principal messages conveyed by 
this document, the authors acknowledge that the 
science of SRC is evolving and therefore individual 
management and return-to-play decisions remain in 
the realm of clinical judgement.
This consensus document reflects the current 
state of knowledge and will need to be modified as 
new knowledge develops. It provides an overview 
of issues that may be of importance to healthcare 
providers involved in the management of SRC. 
This paper should be read in conjunction with the 
systematic reviews and methodology paper that 
accompany it. First and foremost, this document 
is intended to guide clinical practice; however, the 
authors feel that it can also help form the agenda 
for future research relevant to SRC by identifying 
knowledge gaps.
A series of specific clinical questions were devel-
oped as part of the consensus process for the Berlin 
2016 meeting. Each consensus question was the 
subject of a specific formal systematic review, which 
is published concurrently with this summary state-
ment. Readers are directed to these background 
papers in conjunction with this summary statement 
as they provide the context for the issues and include 
the scope of published research, search strategy and 
citations reviewed for each question. This 2017 
consensus statement also summarises each topic 
and recommendations in the context of all five 
CISG meetings (that is, 2001, 2004, 2008, 2012 
as well as 2016). Approximately 60 000 published 
articles were screened by the expert panels for the 
Berlin meeting. The details of the search strategies 
and findings are included in each of the systematic 
reviews.
The details of the conference organisation, meth-
odology of the consensus process, question devel-
opment and selection on expert panellists and 
observers is covered in detail in an accompanying 
paper in this issue.5 A full list of scientific committee 
members, expert panellists, authors, observers and 
those who were invited but could not attend are 
detailed is at the end of the summary document. 
The International Committee of Medical Journal 
Editors conflict of interest declaration for all 
authors is provided in Appendix 1.
Readers are encouraged to copy and freely 
distribute this Berlin Consensus Statement on 
Concussion in Sport, the Concussion Recogni-
tion Tool version 5 (CRT5), the Sports Concus-
sion Assessment Tool version 5 (SCAT5) and/or 
the Child SCAT5. None of these are subject to 
copyright restriction, provided they are used in 
their complete format, are not altered in any way, 
not sold for commercial gain or rebranded, not 
converted into a digital format without permission, 
and are cited correctly.
Medical legal considerations
The consensus statement is not intended as a clin-
ical practice guideline or legal standard of care, and 
should not be interpreted as such. This document is 
only a guide, and is of a general nature, consistent 
with the reasonable practice of a healthcare profes-
sional. Individual treatment will depend on the facts 
and circumstances specific to each individual case. 
It is intended that this document will be formally 
reviewed and updated before 31 December 2020.
SRC and its management
The paper is laid out following the CISG’s 11 ‘R’s 
of SRC management to provide a logical flow of 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
26 April 2017. 
10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 2 (native) -----
839
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;51:838–847. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699
Consensus statement
clinical concussion management. The new material recommen-
dations determined at the Berlin 2016 meeting are italicised, and 
any background material or unchanged recommendations from 
previous meetings are in normal text.
The sections are: Recognise; Remove; Re-evaluate; Rest; 
Rehabilitation; Refer; Recover; Return to sport; Reconsider; 
Residual effects and sequelae; Risk reduction.
Recognise
What is the definition of SRC?
In the broadest clinical sense, SRC is often defined as representing 
the immediate and transient symptoms of traumatic brain injury 
(TBI). Such operational definitions, however, do not give any 
insights into the underlying processes through which the brain 
is impaired, nor do they distinguish different grades of severity, 
nor reflect newer insights into the persistence of symptoms and/
or abnormalities on specific investigational modalities. This issue 
is clouded not only by the lack of data, but also by confusion in 
definition and terminology. Often the term mild traumatic brain 
injury (mTBI) is used interchangeably with concussion; however, 
this term is similarly vague and not based on validated criteria 
in this context.
One key unresolved issue is whether concussion is part of a 
TBI spectrum associated with lesser degrees of diffuse structural 
change than are seen in severe TBI, or whether the concussive 
injury is the result of reversible physiological changes. The term 
concussion, while useful, is imprecise, and because disparate 
author groups define the term differently, comparison between 
studies is problematic. In spite of these problems, the CISG has 
provided a consistent definition of SRC since 2000.1
The Berlin expert panel modified the previous CISG defini-
tion as follows:
Sport related concussion is a traumatic brain injury induced 
by biomechanical forces. Several common features that may be 
utilised in clinically defining the nature of a concussive head 
injury include:
►
►
SRC may be caused either by a direct blow to the head, face, 
neck or elsewhere on the body with an impulsive force trans-
mitted to the head.
►
►
SRC typically results in the rapid onset of short-lived impair-
ment of neurological function that resolves spontaneously. 
However, in some cases, signs and symptoms evolve over a 
number of minutes to hours.
►
►
SRC may result in neuropathological changes, but the acute 
clinical signs and symptoms largely reflect a functional distur-
bance rather than a structural injury and, as such, no abnor-
mality is seen on standard structural neuroimaging studies.
►
►
SRC results in a range of clinical signs and symptoms that may 
or may not involve loss of consciousness. Resolution of the 
clinical and cognitive features typically follows a sequential 
course. However, in some cases symptoms may be prolonged.
The clinical signs and symptoms cannot be explained by drug, 
alcohol, or medication use, other injuries (such as cervical inju-
ries, peripheral vestibular dysfunction, etc) or other comorbidities 
(eg, psychological factors or coexisting medical conditions).
Do the published biomechanical studies inform us about the 
definition of SRC?
Many studies have reported head-impact-exposure patterns for 
specific sports—for example, American football, ice hockey 
and Australian football. Those studies report head-impact 
characteristics including frequency, head kinematics, head-im-
pact location, and injury outcome. In these studies, the use of 
instrumented helmets has provided information on head-im-
pact exposures, although there remains some debate about the 
accuracy and precision of the head kinematic measurements. To 
quantify head impacts, studies have used helmet-based systems, 
mouthguard/headband/skin sensors and videometric studies; 
however, reported mean peak linear and rotational acceleration 
values in concussed players vary considerably.
Although current helmet-based measurement devices may 
provide useful information for collision sports, these systems 
do not yet provide data for other (non-collision) sports, limiting 
the value of this approach. Furthermore, accelerations detected 
by a sensor or video-based systems do not necessarily reflect the 
impact to the brain itself, and values identified vary considerably 
between studies. The use of helmet-based or other sensor systems 
to clinically diagnose or assess SRC cannot be supported at this 
time.
Sideline evaluation
It is important to note that SRC is an evolving injury in the acute 
phase, with rapidly changing clinical signs and symptoms, which 
may reflect the underlying physiological injury in the brain. SRC 
is considered to be among the most complex injuries in sports 
medicine to diagnose, assess and manage. The majority of SRCs 
occur without loss of consciousness or frank neurological signs. 
At present, there is no perfect diagnostic test or marker that 
clinicians can rely on for an immediate diagnosis of SRC in the 
sporting environment. Because of this evolving process, it is not 
possible to rule out SRC when an injury event occurs associated 
with a transient neurological symptom. In all suspected cases of 
concussion, the individual should be removed from the playing 
field and assessed by a physician or licensed healthcare provider 
as discussed below.
Sideline evaluation of cognitive function is an essential compo-
nent in the assessment of this injury. Brief neuropsychological 
(NP) test batteries that assess attention and memory function 
have been shown to be practical and effective. Such tests include 
the SCAT5, which incorporates the Maddocks' questions6 7 and 
the Standardised Assessment of Concussion (SAC).8–10 It is worth 
noting that standard orientation questions (eg, time, place, 
person) are unreliable in the sporting situation when compared 
with memory assessment.7 11 It is recognised, however, that abbre-
viated testing paradigms are designed for rapid SRC screening 
on the sidelines and are not meant to replace a comprehensive 
neurological evaluation; nor should they be used as a standalone 
tool for the ongoing management of SRC.
A key concept in sideline assessment is the rapid screening for 
a suspected SRC, rather than the definitive diagnosis of head 
injury. Players manifesting clear on-field signs of SRC (eg, loss 
of consciousness, tonic posturing, balance disturbance) should 
immediately be removed from sporting participation. Players 
with a suspected SRC following a significant head impact or with 
symptoms can proceed to sideline screening using appropriate 
assessment tools—for example, SCAT5. Both groups can then 
proceed to a more thorough diagnostic evaluation, which should 
be performed in a distraction-free environment (eg, locker room, 
medical room) rather than on the sideline.
In cases where the physician may have been concerned 
about a possible concussion, but after the sideline assessment 
(including additional information from the athlete, the assess-
ment itself and/or inspection of videotape of the incident) 
concussion is no longer suspected, then the physician can 
determine the disposition and timing of return to play for that 
athlete.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
26 April 2017. 
10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 3 (native) -----
840
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;51:838–847. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699
Consensus statement
We acknowledge that many contact sports are played at a fast 
pace in a disorganised environment, where the view of on-field 
incidents is often obscured and the symptoms of SRC are 
diverse, all of which adds to the challenge of the medical assess-
ment of suspected SRC. Furthermore, evolving and delayed-
onset symptoms of SRC are well documented and highlight the 
need to consider follow-up serial evaluation after a suspected 
SRC regardless of a negative sideline screening test or normal 
early evaluation.
The recognition of suspected SRC is therefore best approached 
using multidimensional testing guided via expert consensus. The 
SCAT5 currently represents the most well-established and rigor-
ously developed instrument available for sideline assessment. 
There is published support for using the SCAT and Child SCAT 
in the evaluation of SRC. The SCAT is useful immediately after 
injury in differentiating concussed from non-concussed athletes, 
but its utility appears to decrease significantly 3–5 days after 
injury. The symptom checklist, however, does demonstrate clin-
ical utility in tracking recovery. Baseline testing may be useful, 
but is not necessary for interpreting post-injury scores. If used, 
clinicians must strive to replicate baseline testing conditions. 
Additional domains that may add to the clinical utility of the 
SCAT tool include clinical reaction time, gait/balance assessment, 
video-observable signs and oculomotor screening.
The addition of sideline video review offers a promising 
approach to improving identification and evaluation of significant 
head-impact events, and a serial SRC evaluation process appears 
to be important to detect delayed-onset SRC. Other tools show 
promise as sideline screening tests but require adequately powered 
diagnostic accuracy studies that enrol a representative sample of 
athletes with suspected SRC. Collaboration between sporting 
codes to rationalise multimodal diagnostic sideline protocols may 
help facilitate more efficient application and monitoring. Current 
evidence does not support the use of impact sensor systems for 
real-time SRC screening.
Symptoms and signs of acute SRC
Recognising and evaluating SRC in the adult athlete on the 
field is a challenging responsibility for the healthcare provider. 
Performing this task often involves a rapid assessment in the 
midst of competition with a time constraint and the athlete 
eager to play. A standardised objective assessment of injury that 
excludes more serious injury is critical in determining disposi-
tion decisions for the athlete. The sideline evaluation is based 
on recognition of injury, assessment of symptoms, cognitive and 
cranial nerve function, and balance. Serial assessments are often 
necessary. Because SRC is often an evolving injury, and signs 
and symptoms may be delayed, erring on the side of caution (ie, 
keeping an athlete out of participation when there is any suspi-
cion of injury) is important.
The diagnosis of acute SRC involves the assessment of a 
range of domains including clinical symptoms, physical signs, 
cognitive impairment, neurobehavioral features and sleep/wake 
disturbance. Furthermore, a detailed concussion history is an 
important part of the evaluation both in the injured athlete and 
when conducting a pre-participation examination.
The suspected diagnosis of SRC can include one or more of 
the following clinical domains:
a.	 Symptoms: somatic (eg, headache), cognitive (eg, feeling like 
in a fog) and/or emotional symptoms (eg, lability)
b.	 Physical signs (eg, loss of consciousness, amnesia, neurological 
deficit)
c.	 Balance impairment (eg, gait unsteadiness)
d.	 Behavioural changes (eg, irritability)
e.	 Cognitive impairment (eg, slowed reaction times)
f.	 Sleep/wake disturbance (eg, somnolence, drowsiness)
If symptoms or signs in any one or more of the clinical domains 
are present, an SRC should be suspected and the appropriate 
management strategy instituted. It is important to note, however, 
that these symptoms and signs also happen to be non-specific to 
concussion, so their presence simply prompts the inclusion of 
concussion in a differential diagnosis for further evaluation, but 
the symptom is not itself diagnostic of concussion.
Remove
When a player shows any symptoms or signs of an SRC:
a.	 The player should be evaluated by a physician or other 
licensed healthcare provider on site using standard emergency 
management principles, and particular attention should be 
given to excluding a cervical spine injury.
b.	 The appropriate disposition of the player must be determined 
by the treating healthcare provider in a timely manner. If 
no healthcare provider is available, the player should be 
safely removed from practice or play and urgent referral to a 
physician arranged.
c.	 Once the first aid issues are addressed, an assessment of the 
concussive injury should be made using the SCAT5 or other 
sideline assessment tools.
d.	 The player should not be left alone after the injury, and serial 
monitoring for deterioration is essential over the initial few 
hours after injury.
e.	 A player with diagnosed SRC should not be allowed to return 
to play on the day of injury.
When a concussion is suspected, the athlete should be removed 
from the sporting environment and a multimodal assessment 
should be conducted in a standardised fashion (eg, the SCAT5). 
Table 1  Graduated return-to-sport (RTS) strategy
Stage
Aim
Activity
Goal of each step
1
Symptom-limited activity
Daily activities that do not provoke symptoms
Gradual reintroduction of work/school activities
2
Light aerobic exercise
Walking or stationary cycling at slow to medium pace. No resistance training
Increase heart rate
3
Sport-specific exercise
Running or skating drills. No head impact activities
Add movement
4
Non-contact training drills
Harder training drills, eg, passing drills. May start progressive resistance training
Exercise, coordination and increased thinking
5
Full contact practice
Following medical clearance, participate in normal training activities
Restore confidence and assess functional skills by 
coaching staff
6
Return to sport
Normal game play
NOTE: An initial period of 24–48 hours of both relative physical rest and cognitive rest is recommended before beginning the RTS progression.
There should be at least 24 hours (or longer) for each step of the progression. If any symptoms worsen during exercise, the athlete should go back to the previous step. 
Resistance training should be added only in the later stages (stage 3 or 4 at the earliest). If symptoms are persistent (eg, more than 10–14 days in adults or more than 1 month 
in children), the athlete should be referred to a healthcare professional who is an expert in the management of concussion.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
26 April 2017. 
10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 4 (native) -----
841
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;51:838–847. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699
Consensus statement
Sporting bodies should allow adequate time to conduct this eval-
uation. For example, completing the SCAT alone typically takes 
10 min. Adequate facilities should be provided for the appro-
priate medical assessment both on and off the field for all injured 
athletes. In some sports, this may require rule changes to allow 
an appropriate off-field medical assessment to occur without 
affecting the flow of the game or unduly penalising the injured 
player’s team. The final determination regarding SRC diagnosis 
and/or fitness to play is a medical decision based on clinical 
judgement.
Re-evaluate
An athlete with SRC may be evaluated in the emergency room 
or doctor’s office as a point of first contact after injury or may 
have been referred from another care provider. In addition to 
the points outlined above, the key features of follow-up exam-
ination should encompass:
a.	 A medical assessment including a comprehensive history 
and detailed neurological examination including a thorough 
assessment of mental status, cognitive functioning, sleep/
wake disturbance, ocular function, vestibular function, gait 
and balance.
b.	 Determination of the clinical status of the patient, including 
whether there has been improvement or deterioration since 
the time of injury. This may involve seeking additional 
information 
from 
parents, 
coaches, 
teammates 
and 
eyewitnesses to the injury.
c.	 Determination of the need for emergent neuroimaging 
to exclude a more severe brain injury (eg, structural 
abnormality).
Neuropsychological assessment
Neuropsychological assessment (NP) has been previously 
described by the CISG as a ‘cornerstone’ of SRC management. 
Neuropsychologists are uniquely qualified to interpret NP tests 
and can play an important role within the context of a multifac-
eted—multimodal and multidisciplinary approach to managing 
SRC. SRC management programmes that use NP assessment to 
assist in clinical decision-making have been instituted in profes-
sional sports, colleges and high schools.
The application of NP testing in SRC has clinical value and 
contributes significant information in SRC evaluation.12–17 
Although in most cases, cognitive recovery largely overlaps with 
the time course of symptom recovery, cognitive recovery may 
occasionally precede or lag behind clinical symptom resolution, 
suggesting that the assessment of cognitive function should 
be an important component in the overall assessment of SRC 
and, in particular, any return-to-play protocol.18 19 It must be 
emphasised, however, that NP assessment should not be the sole 
basis of management decisions. Rather, it provides an aid to the 
clinical decision-making process in conjunction with a range 
of assessments of different clinical domains and investigational 
results.
It is recommended that all athletes should have a clinical 
neurological assessment (including evaluation of mental status/
cognition, oculomotor function, gross sensorimotor, coordina-
tion, gait, vestibular function and balance) as part of their overall 
management. This will normally be performed by the treating 
physician, often in conjunction with computerised NP screening 
tools.
Brief computerised cognitive evaluation tools are a commonly 
utilised component of these assessments worldwide given the 
logistical limitation in accessing trained neuropsychologists. 
However, it should be noted that these are not substitutes for 
complete NP assessment.
Baseline or pre-season NP testing was considered by the panel 
and was not felt to be required as a mandatory aspect of every 
assessment; however, it may be helpful or add useful information 
to the overall interpretation of these tests. It also provides an 
additional educative opportunity for the healthcare provider to 
discuss the significance of this injury with the athlete.
Post-injury NP testing is not required for all athletes. However, 
when this is considered necessary, the assessment should opti-
mally be performed by a trained and accredited neuropsychol-
ogist. Although neuropsychologists are in the best position to 
interpret NP tests by virtue of their background and training, 
the ultimate return-to-play decision should remain a medical one 
in which a multidisciplinary approach, when possible, has been 
taken. In the absence of NP and other testing, a more conserva-
tive return-to-play approach may be appropriate.
Post-injury NP testing may be used to assist return-to-play 
decisions and is typically performed when an athlete is clinically 
asymptomatic. However, NP assessment may add important 
information in the early stages after injury.20 21 There may be 
particular situations where testing is performed early to assist 
in determining aspects of management—for example, return to 
school in a paediatric athlete. This will normally be best deter-
mined in consultation with a trained neuropsychologist.22 23
Concussion investigations
Over the past decade, we have observed major progress in 
clinical methods for evaluation of SRC and in determining the 
natural history of clinical recovery after injury. Critical ques-
tions remain, however, about the acute neurobiological effects 
of SRC on brain structure and function, and the eventual time 
course of physiological recovery after injury. Studies using 
advanced neuroimaging techniques have demonstrated that 
SRC is associated with changes in brain structure and function, 
which correlate with post-concussive symptoms and perfor-
mance in neurocognitive testing during the acute post-injury 
phase.
Table 2  Graduated return-to-school strategy
Stage
Aim
Activity
Goal of each step
1
Daily activities at home that do not give the child 
symptoms
Typical activities of the child during the day as long as they 
do not increase symptoms (eg, reading, texting, screen time). 
Start with 5–15 min at a time and gradually build up
Gradual return to typical activities
2
School activities
Homework, reading or other cognitive activities outside of 
the classroom
Increase tolerance to cognitive work
3
Return to school part-time
Gradual introduction of schoolwork. May need to start with 
a partial school day or with increased breaks during the day
Increase academic activities
4
Return to school full time
Gradually progress school activities until a full day can be 
tolerated
Return to full academic activities and catch up on 
missed work
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
26 April 2017. 
10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 5 (native) -----
842
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;51:838–847. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699
Consensus statement
The assessment of novel and selective fluid (eg, blood, saliva 
and cerebrospinal fluid) biomarkers and genetic testing for TBI 
has rapidly expanded in parallel with imaging advances, but this 
currently has limited application to the clinical management of 
SRC. Extending from the broader TBI literature, there is also 
increasing interest in the role of genetics in predicting risk of 
(i) initial injury, (ii) prolonged recovery and long-term neuro-
logical health problems associated with SRC, and (iii) repetitive 
head-impact exposure in athletes.
Clinically, there is a need for diagnostic biomarkers as a 
more objective means to assess the presence/severity of SRC 
in athletes. Beyond the potential diagnostic utility, there is also 
keen interest in the development of prognostic biomarkers of 
recovery after SRC. Imaging and fluid biomarkers that reliably 
reflect the extent of neuronal, axonal and glial damage and/or 
microscopic pathology could conceivably diagnose and predict 
clinical recovery outcome and/or determine risk of potential 
cumulative impairments after SRC.
Advanced neuroimaging, fluid biomarkers and genetic testing 
are important research tools, but require further validation to 
determine their ultimate clinical utility in evaluation of SRC.
Rest
Most consensus and agreement statements for managing SRC 
recommend that athletes rest until they become symptom-free. 
Accordingly, prescribed rest is one of the most widely used inter-
ventions in this population. The basis for recommending phys-
ical and cognitive rest is that rest may ease discomfort during 
the acute recovery period by mitigating post-concussion symp-
toms and/or that rest may promote recovery by minimising brain 
energy demands following concussion.
There is currently insufficient evidence that prescribing 
complete rest achieves these objectives. After a brief period of rest 
during the acute phase (24–48 hours) after injury, patients can be 
encouraged to become gradually and progressively more active 
while staying below their cognitive and physical symptom-ex-
acerbation thresholds (ie, activity level should not bring on or 
worsen their symptoms). It is reasonable for athletes to avoid 
vigorous exertion while they are recovering. The exact amount 
and duration of rest is not yet well defined in the literature and 
requires further study.
Rehabilitation
This summary statement regarding the potential for concussion 
rehabilitation must be read in conjunction with the systematic 
review paper, which details the background, search strategy, cita-
tions and reasoning for this statement. As ‘Rehabilitation’ did 
not exist as a separate section in the previous Consensus State-
ments, this section is all in italics.
SRCs can result in diverse symptoms and problems, and can 
be associated with concurrent injury to the cervical spine and 
peripheral vestibular system. The literature has not evaluated 
early interventions, as most individuals recover in 10–14 days. 
A variety of treatments may be required for ongoing or persistent 
symptoms and impairments following injury. The data support 
interventions including psychological, cervical and vestibular 
rehabilitation.
In addition, closely monitored active rehabilitation programmes 
involving controlled sub-symptom-threshold, submaximal exer-
cise have been shown to be safe and may be of benefit in facili-
tating recovery. A collaborative approach to treatment, including 
controlled cognitive stress, pharmacological treatment, and 
school accommodations, may be beneficial.
Further research evaluating rest and active treatments should 
be performed using high-quality designs that account for poten-
tial confounding factors, and have matched controls and effect 
modifiers to best inform clinical practice and facilitate recovery 
after SRC.
Refer
Persistent symptoms
A standard definition for persistent post-concussive symptoms is 
needed to ensure consistency in clinical management and research 
outcomes. The Berlin expert consensus is that use of the term 
‘persistent symptoms’ following SRC should reflect failure of 
normal clinical recovery—that is, symptoms that persist beyond 
expected time frames (ie, >10–14 days in adults and >4 weeks 
in children).
‘Persistent symptoms’ does not reflect a single pathophys-
iological entity, but describes a constellation of non-specific 
post-traumatic symptoms that may be linked to coexisting and/
or confounding factors, which do not necessarily reflect ongoing 
physiological injury to the brain. A detailed multimodal clinical 
assessment is required to identify specific primary and secondary 
pathologies that may be contributing to persisting post-trau-
matic symptoms. At a minimum, the assessment should include a 
comprehensive history, focused physical examination, and special 
tests where indicated (eg, graded aerobic exercise test). Currently, 
while there is insufficient evidence for investigations, such as 
EEG, advanced neuroimaging techniques, genetic testing and 
biomarkers, to recommend a role in the clinical setting, their use 
in the research setting is encouraged.
Treatment should be individualised and target-specific medical, 
physical and psychosocial factors identified on assessment. There 
is preliminary evidence supporting the use of:
a.	 an 
individualised 
symptom-limited 
aerobic 
exercise 
programme in patients with persistent post-concussive 
symptoms associated with autonomic instability or physical 
deconditioning, and
b.	 a targeted physical therapy programme in patients with 
cervical spine or vestibular dysfunction, and
c.	 a collaborative approach including cognitive behavioural 
therapy to deal with any persistent mood or behavioural 
issues.
Currently, there is limited evidence to support the use of phar-
macotherapy. If pharmacotherapy is used, then an important 
consideration in return to sport is that concussed athletes should 
not only be free from concussion-related symptoms, but also 
should not be taking any pharmacological agents/medications 
that may mask or modify the symptoms of SRC. Where pharma-
cological therapy may be begun during the management of an 
SRC, the decision to return to play while still on such medication 
must be considered carefully by the treating clinician.
Overall, these are difficult cases that should be managed in 
a multidisciplinary collaborative setting, by healthcare providers 
with experience in SRC.
Recovery
There is tremendous interest in identifying factors that might 
influence or modify outcome from SRC. Clinical recovery is 
defined functionally as a return to normal activities, including 
school, work and sport, after injury. Operationally, it encom-
passes a resolution of post-concussion-related symptoms and a 
return to clinically normal balance and cognitive functioning.
It is well established that SRCs can have large adverse effects 
on cognitive functioning and balance in the first 24–72 hours 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
26 April 2017. 
10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 6 (native) -----
843
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;51:838–847. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699
Consensus statement
after injury. Injured athletes report diverse physical, cognitive 
and emotional symptoms during the initial days after injury, and 
a greater number and severity of symptoms after an SRC predict 
a slower recovery in some studies.
For most injured athletes, cognitive deficits, balance and symp-
toms improve rapidly during the first 2 weeks after injury. Many 
past studies, particularly those published before 2005, concluded 
that most athletes recover from SRC and return to sport within 
10 days. This is generally true, but that conclusion should be 
tempered by the fact that many studies reported group-level 
findings only, not clinical outcomes from individual athletes, and 
group statistical analyses can obscure subgroup results and indi-
vidual differences. There is also historical evidence that some 
athletes returned to play while still symptomatic, well before 
they were clinically recovered. Moreover, during the past 10 
years, there has been a steadily accumulating literature that a 
sizeable minority of youth, high-school and collegiate athletes 
take much longer than 10 days to clinically recover and return 
to sport.
Some authors have suggested that the longer recovery times 
reported in more recent studies partially reflects changes in 
the medical management of SRC, with adoption of the gradual 
return-to-play recommendations from the CISG statements. 
This seems likely because these return-to-play recommendations 
include no same-day return to play and a sequential progres-
sion through a series of steps before medical clearance for return 
to sport. Longer recovery times reported by some studies are 
also significantly influenced by ascertainment bias—that is, 
studies that rely, or report data, on clinical samples have a major 
selection bias and will report longer recovery times than those 
reported from truly incident cohort studies that provide a more 
accurate estimate of recovery time.
At present, it is reasonable to conclude that the large majority 
of injured athletes recover, from a clinical perspective, within 
the first month of injury. Neurobiological recovery might 
extend beyond clinical recovery in some athletes. Clinicians 
know that some student athletes report persistent symptoms for 
many months after injury, that there can be multiple causes for 
those symptoms, and that those individuals are more likely to 
be included in studies conducted at specialty clinics. There is a 
growing body of literature indicating that psychological factors 
play a significant role in symptom recovery and contribute to 
risk of persistent symptoms in some cases.
Researchers have investigated whether pre-injury individual 
differences, initial injury severity indicators, acute clinical effects, 
or subacute clinical effects or comorbidities influence outcome 
after SRC. Numerous studies have examined whether genetics, 
sex differences, younger age, neurodevelopmental factors such 
as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder or learning disability, 
personal or family history of migraine, or a personal or family 
history of mental health problems are predictors or effect modi-
fiers of clinical recovery from SRC. Having a past SRC is a risk 
factor for having a future SRC, and having multiple past SRCs 
is associated with having more physical, cognitive and emotional 
symptoms before participation in a sporting season. Therefore, 
it is not surprising that researchers have studied whether having 
prior SRCs is associated with slower recovery from an athlete’s 
next SRC. There have been inconsistent findings regarding 
whether specific injury severity characteristics, such as loss of 
consciousness, retrograde amnesia, or post-traumatic amnesia, 
are associated with greater acute effects or prolonged recovery. 
Numerous post-injury clinical factors, such as the initial severity 
of cognitive deficits, the development of post-traumatic head-
aches or migraines, experiencing dizziness, difficulties with 
oculomotor functioning, and experiencing symptoms of depres-
sion have all been associated with worse outcomes in some 
studies.
The strongest and most consistent predictor of slower recovery 
from SRC is the severity of a person’s initial symptoms in the 
first day, or initial few days, after injury. Conversely, and impor-
tantly, having a low level of symptoms in the first day after 
injury is a favourable prognostic indicator. The development of 
subacute problems with migraine headaches or depression are 
likely risk factors for persistent symptoms lasting more than a 
month. Children, adolescents and young adults with a pre-in-
jury history of mental health problems or migraine headaches 
appear to be at somewhat greater risk of having symptoms for 
more than 1 month. Those with attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder or learning disabilities might require more careful plan-
ning and intervention regarding returning to school, but they do 
not appear to be at substantially greater risk of persistent symp-
toms beyond a month. Very little research to date has been carried 
out on children under the age of 13. There is some evidence that 
the teenage years, particularly the high-school years, might be the 
most vulnerable time period for having persistent symptoms—
with greater risk for girls than boys.
Establishing time of recovery for SRC
Establishing the time of recovery after an SRC is a difficult task 
for healthcare providers. These determinations have been limited 
by lack of a gold standard as well as subjective symptom scores 
and imperfect clinical and NP testing. In addition, patients 
frequently experience more persistent symptoms, including, but 
not limited to, chronic migraines, anxiety, post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD), attention problems and sleep dysfunction. 
Clinicians must determine whether these are premorbid mala-
dies, downstream effects of SRC, or unrelated challenges while 
being mindful of the potential for repeat injuries when returning 
patients to sport too early. Providers are often left in a quan-
dary with limited data to make decisions. Moreover, recent liter-
ature suggests that the physiological time of recovery may outlast 
the time for clinical recovery. The consequence of this is as yet 
unknown, but one possibility is that athletes may be exposed to 
additional risk by returning to play while there is ongoing brain 
dysfunction.
In a research context, modalities that measure physiological 
change after SRC can be categorised into the following:
►
►
functional MRI (fMRI)
►
►
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)
►
►
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS)
►
►
cerebral blood flow (CBF)
►
►
electrophysiology
►
►
heart rate
►
►
measure of exercise performance
►
►
fluid biomarkers
►
►
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS).
Owing to differences in modalities, time course, study design 
and outcomes, it is not possible to define a single ‘physiolog-
ical time window’ for SRC recovery. Multiple studies suggest 
that physiological dysfunction may outlast current clinical 
measures of recovery, supporting a ‘buffer zone’ of gradually 
increasing activity before full contact risk. Future studies need 
to use generalisable populations, longitudinal designs following 
to physiological and clinical recovery, and careful correlation of 
neurobiological modalities with clinical measures. At this stage, 
these modalities, while useful as research tools, are not ready for 
clinical management.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
26 April 2017. 
10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 7 (native) -----
844
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;51:838–847. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699
Consensus statement
Return to sport
Graduated return to sport
The process of recovery and then return to sport participation 
after an SRC follows a graduated stepwise rehabilitation strategy, 
an example of which is outlined in table 1. This table has been 
modified from previous versions to improve clarity.
After a brief period of initial rest (24–48 hours), symptom-lim-
ited activity can be begun while staying below a cognitive and 
physical exacerbation threshold (stage 1). Once concussion-re-
lated symptoms have resolved, the athlete should continue to 
proceed to the next level if he/she meets all the criteria (eg, 
activity, heart rate, duration of exercise, etc) without a recur-
rence of concussion-related symptoms. Generally, each step 
should take 24 hours, so that athletes would take a minimum 
of 1 week to proceed through the full rehabilitation protocol 
once they are asymptomatic at rest. However, the time frame for 
RTS may vary with player age, history, level of sport, etc, and 
management must be individualised.
In athletes who experience prolonged symptoms and resul-
tant inactivity, each step may take longer than 24 hours simply 
because of limitations in physical conditioning and recovery 
strategies outlined above. This specific issue of the role of symp-
tom-limited exercise prescription in the setting of prolonged 
recovery is discussed in an accompanying systematic review.24 
If any concussion-related symptoms occur during the stepwise 
approach, the athlete should drop back to the previous asymp-
tomatic level and attempt to progress again after being free of 
concussion-related symptoms for a further 24 hour period at the 
lower level.
Reconsider
The CISG also considered whether special populations should 
be managed differently and made recommendations for elite and 
young athletes.
Elite and non-elite athletes
All athletes, regardless of level of participation, should be 
managed using the same management principles noted above.
The child and adolescent athlete
The management of SRC in children requires special paradigms 
suitable for the developing child. The paucity of studies that 
are specific to children, especially younger children, needs to be 
addressed as a priority, with the expectation that future CISG 
consensus meetings will have sufficient studies to review that are 
age-specific, of high quality, and with a low risk of bias.
We recommend that child and adolescent guidelines refer to 
individuals 18 years or less. Child-specific paradigms for SRC 
should apply to children aged 5–12 years, and adolescent-specific 
paradigms should apply to those aged 13–18 years. The literature 
does not adequately address the question of age groups in which 
children with SRC should be managed differently from adults. No 
studies have addressed whether SRC signs and symptoms differ 
from adults. The expected duration of symptoms in children with 
SRC is up to 4 weeks, and further research is required to identify 
predictors of prolonged recovery. It is recommended that age-spe-
cific validated symptom-rating scales be used in SRC assessment, 
and further research is required to establish the role and utility 
of computerised NP testing in this age group. Similar to adults, 
a brief period of physical and cognitive rest is advised after SRC 
followed by symptom-limited resumption of activity.
Schools are encouraged to have an SRC policy that includes 
education on SRC prevention and management for teachers, staff, 
students and parents, and should offer appropriate academic 
accommodation and support to students recovering from SRC. 
Students should have regular medical follow-up after an SRC to 
monitor recovery and help with return to school, and students 
may require temporary absence from school after injury.
Children and adolescents should not return to sport until they 
have successfully returned to school. However, early introduction 
of symptom-limited physical activity is appropriate.
An example of the return-to-school progression is in table 2.
Residual effects and sequelae
This summary statement regarding the potential for long-
term sequelae following recurrent head trauma must be read 
in conjunction with the systematic review paper, which details 
the background, search strategy, citations and reasoning for this 
statement.25
The literature on neurobehavioral sequelae and long-term 
consequences of exposure to recurrent head trauma is inconsis-
tent. Clinicians need to be mindful of the potential for long-
term problems such as cognitive impairment, depression, etc in 
the management of all athletes. However, there is much more to 
learn about the potential cause-and-effect relationships of repet-
itive head-impact exposure and concussions. The potential for 
developing chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) must be a 
consideration, as this condition appears to represent a distinct 
tauopathy with an unknown incidence in athletic populations. 
A cause-and-effect relationship has not yet been demonstrated 
between CTE and SRCs or exposure to contact sports. As such, 
the notion that repeated concussion or subconcussive impacts 
cause CTE remains unknown.
The new US National Institutes of Neurological Disease and 
Stroke (NINDS) and National Institute of Biomedical Imaging 
and Bioengineering (NIBIB) consensus criteria provide a stan-
dardised approach for describing the neuropathology of CTE. 
More research on CTE is needed to better understand the inci-
dence and prevalence, the extent to which the NP findings cause 
specific clinical symptoms, the extent to which the neuropa-
thology is progressive, the clinical diagnostic criteria, and other 
risk or protective factors. Ideally, well-designed case–control or 
cohort studies can begin to answer these important questions.
Risk reduction
Role of pre-participation SRC evaluation
Acknowledging the importance of an SRC history, and appreci-
ating the fact that many athletes will not recognise all the SRCs 
they may have suffered in the past, a detailed SRC history is of 
value.26–29 Such a history may identify athletes who fit into a 
high-risk category and provides an opportunity for the health-
care provider to educate the athlete as to the significance of 
concussive injury.
A structured SRC history should include specific questions as 
to previous symptoms of an SRC and length of recovery, not 
just the perceived number of past SRCs. Note that dependence 
on the recall of concussive injuries by teammates or coaches is 
unreliable.26 The clinical history should also include informa-
tion about all previous head, face or cervical spine injuries, as 
these may also have clinical relevance. In the setting of maxillo-
facial and cervical spine injuries, coexistent concussive injuries 
may be missed unless specifically assessed. Questions pertaining 
to disproportionate impact versus symptom-severity matching 
may alert the clinician to a progressively increasing vulnerability 
to injury. As part of the clinical history, the health practitioner 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
26 April 2017. 
10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 8 (native) -----
845
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;51:838–847. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699
Consensus statement
should seek details regarding protective equipment used at the 
time of injury for both recent and remote injuries.
There is an additional and often unrecognised benefit of the 
pre-participation physical examination insofar as the evaluation 
provides an educative opportunity with the player concerned, 
as well as consideration of modification of playing behaviour if 
required.
Prevention
While it is impossible to eliminate all concussion in sport, concus-
sion-prevention strategies can reduce the number and severity of 
concussions in many sports. Until the past decade, there has been 
a relative paucity of scientifically rigorous evaluation studies 
examining the effectiveness of concussion-prevention strategies 
in sport.
The evidence examining the protective effect of helmets in 
reducing the risk of SRC is limited in many sports because of 
the nature of mandatory helmet regulations. There is sufficient 
evidence in terms of reduction of overall head injury in skiing/
snowboarding to support strong recommendations and policy to 
mandate helmet use in skiing/snowboarding. The evidence for 
mouthguard use in preventing SRC is mixed, but meta-analysis 
suggests a non-significant trend towards a protective effect in 
collision sports, and rigorous case–control designs are required to 
further evaluate this finding.
The strongest and most consistent evidence evaluating policy 
is related to body checking in youth ice hockey (ie, disallowing 
body checking under age 13), which demonstrates a consistent 
protective effect in reducing the risk of SRC. This evidence has 
informed policy change in older age groups in non-elite levels, 
which requires further investigation.
There is minimal evidence to support individual injury-preven-
tion strategies addressing intrinsic risk factors for SRC in sport. 
However, there is some promise that vision training in collegiate 
American football players may reduce SRC. Limiting contact in 
youth football practices has demonstrated some promising results 
in reducing the frequency of head contact, but there is no evidence 
to support the translation of these findings to a reduction in SRC. 
Evaluation of fair play rules in youth ice hockey, tackle training 
without helmets and shoulder pads in youth American football, 
and tackle technique training in professional rugby do not lead 
to a reduction in SRC risk. A recommendation for stricter rule 
enforcement of red cards for high elbows in heading duels in 
professional soccer is based on evidence supporting a reduced risk 
of head contacts and concussion with such enforcement.
Despite a myriad of studies examining SRC-prevention inter-
ventions across several sports, some findings remain inconclusive 
because of conflicting evidence, lack of rigorous study design, 
and inherent study biases. A clear understanding of potentially 
modifiable risk factors is required to design, implement and eval-
uate appropriate prevention interventions to reduce the risk of 
SRC. In addition, risk factors should be considered as potential 
confounders or effect modifiers in any evaluation. Biomechan-
ical research (eg, video-analysis) to better understand injury risk 
behaviour and mechanisms of injury associated with rules will 
better inform practice and policy decisions. In addition, psycho-
logical and sociocultural factors in sport play a significant role 
in the uptake of any injury-prevention strategy and require 
consideration.
Knowledge translation
The value of knowledge translation (KT) as part of SRC educa-
tion is increasingly becoming recognised. Target audiences 
benefit from specific learning strategies. SRC tools exist, 
but their effectiveness and impact require further evalua-
tion. The media is valuable in drawing attention to SRC, but 
efforts need to ensure that the public is aware of the right 
information, including uncertainties about long-term risks of 
adverse outcomes. Social media is becoming more prominent 
as an SRC education tool. Implementation of KT models is 
one approach organisations can use to assess knowledge gaps, 
identify, develop and evaluate education strategies, and use 
the outcomes to facilitate decision-making. Implementing 
KT strategies requires a defined plan. Identifying the needs, 
learning styles and preferred learning strategies of target 
audiences, coupled with evaluation, should be a piece of the 
overall SRC education puzzle to have an impact on enhancing 
knowledge and awareness.
As the ability to treat or reduce the effects of concus-
sive injury after the event is an evolving science, education 
of athletes, colleagues and the general public is a mainstay 
of progress in this field. Athletes, referees, administrators, 
parents, coaches and healthcare providers must be educated 
regarding the detection of SRC, its clinical features, assess-
ment techniques and principles of safe return to play. Methods 
to improve education, including web-based resources, educa-
tional videos and international outreach programmes, are 
important in delivering the message. Fair play and respect for 
opponents are ethical values that should be encouraged in all 
sports and sporting associations. Similarly, coaches, parents 
and managers play an important part in ensuring these values 
are implemented on the field of play.30–43
In addition, the support and endorsement of sporting bodies 
such as the International Ice Hockey Federation, Fédération 
Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) and the Interna-
tional Olympic Committee who initiated this endeavour, as well 
as organisations that have subsequently supported the CISG 
meetings, including World Rugby, the International Equestrian 
Federation and the International Paralympic Committee, should 
be commended.
Conclusion
Since the 1970s, clinicians and scientists have begun to distin-
guish SRC from other causes of concussion and mTBI, such 
as motor vehicle crashes. While this seems like an arbitrary 
separation from other forms of TBI, which account for 80% of 
such injuries,44 45 it is largely driven by sporting bodies that see 
the need to have clear and practical guidelines to determine 
recovery and safe return to play for athletes with an SRC.
In addition, sports participation provides unique opportuni-
ties to study SRC and mTBI, given the detailed SRC phenotype 
data that are typically available in many sports.46 Having said 
that, it is critical to understand that the lessons derived from 
non-sporting mTBI research informs the understanding of 
SRC (and vice versa), and this arbitrary separation of sporting 
versus non-sporting TBI should not be viewed as a dichoto-
mous or exclusive view of TBI. One of the standout features 
of the Berlin CISG meeting was the engagement by experts 
from the TBI, dementia, imaging and biomarker world in the 
process and as coauthors of the systematic reviews, which are 
published in issue 10 of the British Journal of Sports Medicine 
(Volume 51, 2017).
This consensus document reflects the current state of knowl-
edge and will need to be modified according to the development 
of new knowledge. It should be read in conjunction with the 
systematic reviews and methodology papers that accompany this 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
26 April 2017. 
10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 9 (native) -----
846
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;51:838–847. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699
Consensus statement
document (British Journal of Sports Medicine, issues 11 and 12, 
2017). This document is first and foremost intended to inform 
clinical practice; however, it must be remembered that, while 
agreement exists on the principal messages conveyed by this 
document, the authors acknowledge that the science of concus-
sion is incomplete and therefore management and return-to-play 
decisions lie largely in the realm of clinical judgement on an indi-
vidualised basis.
Author affiliations
1The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Heidelberg, Victoria, 
Australia
2Sport Injury Prevention Research Centre, Faculty of Kinesiology, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, Canada
3Swiss Concussion Center, Zurich, Switzerland
4Spine Unit, Schulthess Clinic, Zurich, Switzerland
5International Ice Hockey Federation, Zurich, Switzerland
6Department of Neurosurgery, North Shore University Health System, Evanston, 
Illinois, USA
7Department of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
8Centre for the Study of Traumatic Encephalopathy, Boston University School of 
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
9Division of Health Care and Outcomes Research, Toronto Western Research 
Institute, Toronto, Canada
10Department of Psychology, University of Missouri - Kansas City, State College, 
Pennsylvania, USA
11Psychological and Neurobehavioral Associates, Inc
12Department of Pathology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Baltimore, Maryland, 
USA
13Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health - Austin Campus, Heidelberg, 
Victoria, Australia
14Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia
15Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington, USA
16Department of Kinesiology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada
17Department of Orthosurgery, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway
18Department of Neurology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
19Schulthess Clinic, Zurich, Switzerland
20Department of Neurosurgery, UCLA Steve Tisch BrainSPORT Program, Los Angeles, 
California, USA
21Department of Pediatrics / Pediatric Neurology, Mattel Children’s Hospital UCLA, 
Los Angeles, California, USA
22Sports Medicine Research laboratory, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
23Departments of Rehabilitation Medicine, Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine and 
Neurological Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
24Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical School; & Red Sox 
Foundation and Massachusetts General Hospital Home Base Program, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA
25Department of Neurosurgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
26Kanata, Ontario, Canada
27The Sports Neurology Clinic, Brighton, Michigan, USA
28Department of Orthopaedics, SUNY Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA
29Centre for Health Exercise and Sports Medicine, The University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia
30Melbourne Brain Centre, Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health - 
Austin Campus, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia
31Olympic Park Sports Medicine Centre, Melbourne, Australia
32Department of Neurosurgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
California, USA
33Neurosurgery, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA
34Sports Medicine, Children’s Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
35Department of Emergency Medicine, Children’s Hospital Boston, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA
36Tokushima Daigaku Byoin, Tokushima, Japan
37Section of Sports Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Pretoria, 
Johannesburg, South Africa
38Department of Emergency Medicine. Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the 
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa
39Department of Athletic Medicine, Princeton University, Princeton, USA
40Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada
41Department of Neurological Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Franklin, 
Tennessee, USA
42Vanderbilt Sports Concussion Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Franklin, 
Tennessee, USA
43Division of Neurosurgery, Toronto Western Hospital and University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada
44Canadian Sports Concussion Project, Toronto, Canada
45International Concussion and Head Injury Research Foundation (ICHIRF), London, 
UK
46Department of Neurology, Slingeland Ziekenhuis, Doetinchem, The Netherlands
Competing interests  None declared.
Provenance and peer review  Not commissioned; internally peer reviewed.
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
References
	 1	 Aubry M, Cantu R, Dvorak J, et al; Concussion in Sport (CIS) Group. Summary and 
agreement statement of the 1st international symposium on concussion in sport, 
Vienna 2001. Clin J Sport Med 2002;12:6–11.
	 2	 McCrory P Johnston K, Meeuwisse W, et al. Summary and agreement statement of the 
2nd international conference on concussion in sport, Prague 2004. Br J Sports Med 
2005;39:i78–i86.
	 3	 McCrory P, Meeuwisse W, Johnston K, et al. Consensus statement on concussion 
in sport - the third international conference on concussion in sport held in Zurich, 
November 2008. Phys Sportsmed 2009;37:141–59.
	 4	 McCrory P, Meeuwisse WH, Aubry M, et al. Consensus statement on concussion 
in sport: the 4th international conference on concussion in sport held in Zurich, 
november 2012. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:250–8.
	 5	 Meeuwisse WH, Schneider KJ, Dvořák J, et al. The Berlin 2016 process: a summary of 
methodology for the 5th International Consensus Conference on Concussion in Sport. 
Br J Sports Med 2017;51:873–876.
	 6	 Maddocks D, Dicker G. An objective measure of recovery from concussion in Australian 
rules footballers. Sport Health 1989;7:6–7.
	 7	 Maddocks DL, Dicker GD, Saling MM. The assessment of orientation following 
concussion in athletes. Clin J Sport Med 1995;5:32–5.
	 8	 McCrea M. Standardized mental status assessment of sports concussion. Clin J Sport 
Med 2001;11:176–81.
	 9	 McCrea M, Kelly JP, Randolph C, et al. Standardized assessment of concussion 
(SAC): on-site mental status evaluation of the athlete. J Head Trauma Rehabil 
1998;13:27–35.
	10	 McCrea M, Randolph C, Kelly J. The Standardized Assessment of Concussion (SAC): 
Manual for Administration, Scoring and Interpretation. 2nd ed. Waukesha: WI, 2000.
	11	 McCrea M, Kelly JP, Kluge J, et al. Standardized assessment of concussion in football 
players. Neurology 1997;48:586–8.
	12	 Collie A, Darby D, Maruff P. Computerised cognitive assessment of athletes with 
sports related head injury. Br J Sports Med 2001;35:297–302.
	13	 Collie A, Maruff P. Computerised neuropsychological testing. Br J Sports Med 
2003;37:2–3.
	14	 Collie A, Maruff P, McStephen M, et al. Psychometric issues associated with 
computerised neuropsychological assessment of concussed athletes. Br J Sports Med 
2003;37:556–9.
	15	 Collins MW, Grindel SH, Lovell MR, et al. Relationship between concussion 
and neuropsychological performance in college football players. Jama 
1999;282:964–70.
	16	 Lovell MR. The relevance of neuropsychologic testing for sports-related head injuries. 
Curr Sports Med Rep 2002;1:7–11.
	17	 Lovell MR, Collins MW. Neuropsychological assessment of the college football player. 
J Head Trauma Rehabil 1998;13:9–26.
	18	 Bleiberg J, Cernich AN, Cameron K, et al. Duration of cognitive impairment after 
sports concussion. Neurosurgery 2004;54:1073–78–78–80.
	19	 Bleiberg J, Warden D. Duration of cognitive impairment after sports concussion. 
Neurosurgery 2005;56:E1166.
	20	 Broglio SP, Macciocchi SN, Ferrara MS. Neurocognitive performance of concussed 
athletes when symptom free. J Athl Train 2007;42:504–8.
	21	 Broglio SP, Macciocchi SN, Ferrara MS. Sensitivity of the concussion assessment 
battery. Neurosurgery 2007;60:1050–7–7–8.
	22	 Gioia G, Janusz J, Gilstein K, et al. Neueopsychological management of consussion in 
children and adolescents: effects of age and gender on ImPact. abstract). Br J Sp Med 
2004;38:657.
	23	 McCrory P, Collie A, Anderson V, et al. Can we manage sport related concussion in 
children the same as in adults? Br J Sports Med 2004;38:516–9.
	24	 Makdissi M, Schneider KJ, Feddermann-Demont N, et al. Approach to investigation 
and treatment of persistent symptoms following sport-related concussion: a 
systematic review. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:958–68.
	25	 Manley G, Gardner AJ, Schneider KJ, et al. A systematic review of potential long-term 
effects of sport-related concussion. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:969–77.
	26	 McCrory P. Preparticipation assessment for head injury. Clin J Sport Med 
2004;14:139–44.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
26 April 2017. 
10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as

----- Page 10 (native) -----
847
McCrory P, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;51:838–847. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699
Consensus statement
	27	 Johnston KM, Lassonde M, Ptito A. A contemporary neurosurgical approach to sport-
related head injury: the McGill concussion protocol. J Am Coll Surg 2001;192:515–24.
	28	 Delaney J, Lacroix V, Leclerc S, et al. Canadian football league season.. Clin J Sport 
Med 1997;2000:9–14.
	29	 Delaney JS, Lacroix VJ, Leclerc S, et al. Concussions among university football and 
soccer players. Clin J Sport Med 2002;12:331–8.
	30	 Johnston KM, Bloom GA, Ramsay J, et al. Current concepts in concussion 
rehabilitation. Curr Sports Med Rep 2004;3:316–23.
	31	 Denke NJ. Brain injury in sports. J Emerg Nurs 2008;34:363–4.
	32	 Gianotti S, Hume PA. Concussion sideline management intervention for rugby  
union leads to reduced concussion claims. NeuroRehabilitation 2007;22:181–9.
	33	 Guilmette TJ, Malia LA, McQuiggan MD. Concussion understanding and management 
among new England high school football coaches. Brain Inj 2007;21:1039–47.
	34	 Hootman JM, Dick R, Agel J. Epidemiology of collegiate injuries for 15 sports: 
summary and recommendations for injury prevention initiatives. J Athl Train 
2007;42:311–9.
	35	 Valovich McLeod TC, Schwartz C, Bay RC. Sport-related concussion misunderstandings 
among youth coaches. Clin J Sport Med 2007;17:140–2.
	36	 Sye G, Sullivan SJ, McCrory P. High school rugby players’ understanding of concussion 
and return to play guidelines. Br J Sports Med 2006;40:1003–5.
	37	 Theye F, Mueller KA. "Heads up": concussions in high school sports. Clin Med Res 
2004;2:165–71.
	38	 Kashluba S, Paniak C, Blake T, et al. A longitudinal, controlled study of patient 
complaints following treated mild traumatic brain injury. Arch Clin Neuropsychol 
2004;19:805–16.
	39	 Gabbe B, Finch CF, Wajswelner H, et al. Does community-level Australian football 
support injury prevention research? J Sci Med Sport 2003;6:231–6.
	40	 Kaut KP, DePompei R, Kerr J, et al. Reports of head injury and symptom knowledge 
among college athletes: implications for assessment and educational intervention. 
Clin J Sport Med 2003;13:213–21.
	41	 Davidhizar R, Cramer C. "The best thing about the hospitalization was that the nurses 
kept me well informed" Issues and strategies of client education. Accid Emerg Nurs 
2002;10:149–54.
	42	 McCrory P. What advice should we give to athletes postconcussion? Br J Sports Med 
2002;36:316–8.
	43	 Bazarian JJ, Veenema T, Brayer AF, et al. Knowledge of concussion guidelines among 
practitioners caring for children. Clin Pediatr 2001;40:207–12.
	44	 Langlois JA, Rutland-Brown W, Wald MM. The epidemiology and impact of traumatic 
brain injury: a brief overview. J Head Trauma Rehabil 2006;21:375–8.
	45	 Langlois JA, Sattin RW. Traumatic brain injury in the United States: research and 
programs of the centers for disease control and prevention (CDC). J Head Trauma 
Rehabil 2005;20:187–8.
	46	 Kelly JP, Rosenberg JH. The development of guidelines for the management of 
concussion in sports. J Head Trauma Rehabil 1998;13:53–65.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. 
by guest
 
on November 1, 2025
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
26 April 2017. 
10.1136/bjsports-2017-097699 on 
Br J Sports Med: first published as