

----- Page 1 (native) -----
The Role of Imagery in Information
Processing: Review and Extensions
DEBORAH J. MACINNIS
LINDA L. PRICE*
Mental imagery is receiving increased attention in consumer behavior theory and
research. This article describes imagery, characterizing it as a processing mode in
which multisensory information is represented in a gestalt form in working memory
and discusses research on the unique effects of imagery at low levels of cognitive
elaboration. It specifies researchable propositions for the relationship between high
elaboration imagery processing and consumer choice and consumption behaviors
Finally, it reviews specific methods for studying imagery.
I
nformation processing research has traditionally fo-
cused on discursive or descriptive information pro-
cessing (Bettman 1979; Greenwald 1968; Olson, Toy,
and Dover 1982; Swasy and Munch 1985; Wright 1974,'
1980).' As such, researchers have examined how sym-
bols (most commonly words and numbers) are com-
bined in working memory to represent and solve prob-
lems. Discursive (symbolic, language-like) information
processing encompasses a broad range of strategies.
Compositional choice strategies, counterarguments,
attributions, and formulations of choice rules are illus-
trations of discursive information processing. Increas-
ingly, however, attention has been given to the role of
mental imagery in information processing (Childers and
Houston 1982, 1984; Childers, Houston, and Heckler
1985; Lutz and Lutz 1977, 1978; Rethans and Hastak
1981; Rossiter 1982; Rossiter and Percy 1983; Smith,
Houston, and Childers 1984). Imagery is a conceptually
distinct way of representing information, a way that is
"very like picturing and very unlike describing" (Fodor
1981, p. 76).^ To date, this emergent research stream
has focused predominantly on imagery processing at
low levels of cognitive elaboration—for example, men-
tally picturing a stimulus object. More recently, there
have been discussions that refer to imagery processing
at higher levels of elaboration. These discussions suggest
that elaborated imagery plays a role in influencing (1)
affective responses to stimuli, and (2) behavior (Calder
•Deborah J. Maclnnis is Assistant Professor, Department of Mar-
keting, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721. Linda L. Price is
Assistant Professor, Department of Marketing. University of Pitts-
burgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260. Authors are listed in alphabetical order
to reflect equal contributions. The authors would like to acknowledge
the many helpful comments of C. Whan Park and three anonymous
reviewers on earlier versions of this article.
1978; Cohen 1982; Greenwald and Leavitt 1984; Ros-
siter and Percy 1978, 1983; Smith et al. 1984).
This article addresses the meaning of imagery pro-
cessing, how it differs from discursive processing—par-
ticularly under varying degrees of cognitive elaboration,
and what unique effects it has on processing outcomes!
It also reviews research on the unique effects of imagery
under conditions of low elaboration and explores the
potentially unique effects of imagery at higher levels of
elaboration. The article gives specific attention to the
role of imagery in problem framing, assessing proba-
bilities, forming intentions, and generating affect. In
addition, it considers the use of imagery in consumer
settings throughout the phases of consumption and de-
velops researchable propositions to guide future re-
search on elaborated imagery. Finally, it explores issues
related to the conduct of research on imagery.
THE MEANING OF IMAGERY
Imagery is defined here as (1) a process (not a struc-
ture) by which (2) sensory information is represented
in working memory. Imagery processing, and infor-
mation processing in general, fall on an elaboration
continuum that ranges from processes limited to the
simple retrieval or evocation of a cognitive concept to
As used here, discursive means passing from premises to conclu-
sions; proceeding by reasoning or argument (Oxford dictionary). De-
scriptive processing is a somewhat broader term suggesting any
meaningful combination of verbal or other symbolic units. Although
the two terms have a slightly different connotation, they will be used
interchangeably here for ease of presentation.
•This is not to say that the debate of what imagery is and what it
is not has been resolved (cf Block 1981). Processing probably often
occurs on a continuum between "pictures" and "symbols." For ex-
ample, maps and stick figures (as mental images) would have features
of both (Fodor 1981).
473
© JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH • Vol. 13 • March 1987

----- Page 2 (native) -----
474
processes involving multiple concepts and constructions
(e;g., problem solving, creative thinking, and day-
dreaming). The following section will describe each of
these issues in greater detail, and will serve to (1) dis-
tinguish imagery processing from schemas and scripts,
(2) distinguish imagery processing from discursive pro-
cessing, and (3) describe the elaboration continuum for
imagery processing.
Imagery as a Process, Not a Structure
While the idea of imagery processing is widely ac-
cepted, the assumption that knowledge is stored or rep-
resented as images has been hotly debated (Pinker and
Kosslyn 1983). Propositional theorists (e.g., Anderson
:1978; Anderson and Bower 1973; Lang 1979; Pylyshyn
1973, 1981) argue that knowledge is represented only
as a set of verbal propositional networks composed of
nodes (representing concepts) and connected by links
(representing relationships between concepts; see also
Kieras 1978). Others have argued that knowledge can
be stored as images. In support of their argument they
note that studies on mental rotation of objects, image
size, and parallel processing are more consistent with
an imagery' perspective than a propositional one (Bug-
elski 1983'; Kieras 1978; Kolers 1983; Kosslyn 1975;
Kosslyn and Pomerantz 1977; Kosslyn et al. 1981).
These researchers contend that images have emergent
properties that cannot be explained by propositjonal
network theories.
While the debate between propositional theorists and
imagery theorists is far from resolved, Yuille and
Catchpole (1977) have developed a compromise posi-
tion based on the work of Piaget and Inhelder (1973).
They propose that the ability to generate images does
not necessarily imply that knowledge is stored as images.
They argue that knowledge is stored in an abstract (but
not necessarily verbal) operational code. The well-sub-
stantiated ability to move from words to pictures and
pictures to words suggests that there is a representation
in memory that encompasses both. Once a knowledge
structure has been activated, imagery can be generated
from information contained in that structure. For ex-
ample, after activating the knowledge structure for
birds, an individual may imagine a prototypical bird
such as a sparrow (see Mervis and Rosch 1981 for a
review).
Consistent with the views of Yuille and Catchpole
(1977), imagery is conceptualized here as a mode of
processing information. In other words, imagery pro-
cessing is viewed as distinct from information structure
(knowledge storage). This distinction serves to differ-
entiate imagery from such knowledge structures as
schemas and scripts. The latter constructs refer to
knowledge structures regarding an object, person, role,
event, or action (cf. Abelson 1976; Rosch 1978). It is
the instantiation of a schema or script that generates
imagery, not the schema or script itself. For example.
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
an individual may draw upon a script of a "romantic
evening" in imagining such an evening. Information
from schemas or scripts can also be processed in a dis-
cursive mode. Hence, the information structure is
viewed as distinct from processing mode.
Since imagery processing relies on stored knowledge,
the evocation and vividness of the image is likely to
depend on the level of knowledge development. Con-
sistent with this notion. Smith et al. (1984) found that
individuals who possessed a script for a given event re-
ported evoking imagery experiences when they instan-
tiated that script. Moreover, inclividuals with well-de-
veloped scripts reported that their imagery experiences
were significantly more vivid than did individuals with-
out well-developed scripts.
Imagery as a Sensory Process
Imagery processing has several qualities that distin-
guish it from discursive processing. Most fundamen-
tally, imagery processes are evoked as sensory experi-
ences in working memory. Imagery processing includes
perceptual or sensory representations in working mem-
ory that are used in much the same way as perceptions
of external stimuli. Thus, imagery involves concrete
sensory representations of ideas, feelings, and memo-
ries, and it permits a direct recovery of past experiences
(Yuille and Catchpole 1977). The evocation of iniagery
may be multi-sensory—involving images that incor-
porate, for example, smell, taste, sight, and tactile sen-
sations—or may involve a single sensory dimension,
such as sight. In contrast, discursive processing (such
as verbal retrieval, cognitive responding, and verbal en-
coding) is more detached from internal sensor>- expe-
riences. The absence of sensory dimensions of infor-
mation in working memory- makes these discursive
processes less concrete (more abstract) than imagery
processes. Moreover, unlike discursive processing, im-
agery can be described along several unique sensory-
related dimensions. For example, vividness refers to the
clarity of images. And controllability reflects the extent
to which images can be held in mind and/or altered in
specific ways at will (Marks 1972).
That imagery involves internal sensory experiences
has both intuitive and empirical support. Early research
suggested that people can confuse imaging with per-
ceiving (Perky 1910). Even before research on imagery
existed, people talked naturally about the "pictures" in
their heads. Research has since indicated that imagery
and perceiving (or sensing) share the same physiological
machinery, and that imagery produces physiological ef-
fects that'mirror perceptual processes (Deckert 1964;
Finke 1980; Lang 1979; Perky 1910; Shaw 1940). Im-
agery content also influences a broad range of physio-
logical responses (e.g., muscular reactions, heart rate,
eye movements, galvanic skin response; Lang 1979).
Other research stresses the analogue relationship be-
tween imagery and pictures (Kosslyn 1980; Kosslyn et

----- Page 3 (native) -----
IMAGERY PROCESSING
al. 1983; Paivio 1975; Shepard 1978; Shepard and
Meltzer 1971). Specifically, imagery is presumed to have
properties that preserve the spatial and size dimensions
in actual stimuli. Thus, just as an ant looks small com-
pared to a butterfly, imagery would reproduce their rel-
ative relationship. Compared with symbolic or lan-
guage-like processing, imagery processing bears a non-
arbitrary correspondence to the thing being represented.
While it is recognized that imagery is a sensory and
sometimes a multisensory process, the remainder of this
article focuses predominantly on visual imagery. That
is, the examples and discussion tend to emphasize pic-
turing and visualizing rather than other sensory prop-
erties ofthe informatioti in working memory.
The Elaboration Continuum Of Imagery
Several streams of research have proposed that in-
formation can be processed at different levels of cog-
nitive elaboration (Cacioppo and Petty 1984; Chaiken
1980; Craik and Lockhart 1972; Craik and Tulving
1975; Greenwald and Leavitt 1984; Mitchell 1981; Petty
and Cacioppo 1983). Elaboration reflects the extent to
which information in working memor>' is integrated
with prior knowledge structures. Information processed
at a low level of elaboration may elicit only a recognition
response. Information processed at higher levels of
elaboration, however, establishes connections between
encoded information and prior knowledge, and thus
involves the activation and integration of data from
multiple knowledge structures. Thinking, problem
solving, cognitive responding, and daydreaming are all
processes involving high degrees of cognitive elabora-
tion (Arieti 1976; Bugelski 1983; Greenwald and Leavitt
1984; Simon 1978).
There has been an implicit confound in some research
between processing mode (imagery vs. discursive) and
processing level (high vs. low elaboration; Craik and
Lockhart 1972; Craik and Tulving 1975; Petty and Ca-
cioppo 1983). Specifically, low elaboration has been
implicitly linked to imagery and high elaboration to
discursive (symbolic, language-like) processing. How-
ever, both imagery- and discursive processes can be de-
scribed on an elaboration continuum (see the Figure).
At the low end ofthe elaboration continuum are simple
responses such as the retrieval of a verbal label, and/or
an image of a perceptual object. At the high end ofthe
elaboration continuum are discursive processes such as
counterarguments, attributions, and compositional
choice strategies (Wright 1980), and imagery processes
such as daydreams, fantasies, and visual problem solv-
ing (Hilgard 1981; Richardson 1983). The same factors
that influence elaborated discursive processing also
stimulate elaborated imagery processing. For example,
involvement in an activity (Greenwald and Leavitt
1984; Klinger 1977; Mitchell 1981; Sarbin 1972) and
prior knowledge (Burnkrant and Sawyer 1983; Ca-
cioppo and Petty 1984; Petty and Cacioppo 1983; Smith
475
et al. 1984; Yalch and Yalch 1984) can elicit elaborated
imagery processing, elaborated discursive processing,
or both.
It is important to remember that imagery and dis-
cursive processing are not mutually exclusive processes
(Arieti 1976; Bugelski 1983; Holbrook and Moore
1981 a). For example, an individual may evoke an image
and give it a verbal label or generate cognitive responses
based on imagined (visualized) scenarios. When con-
sumers in "real" contexts engage in imagery, it is quite
likely that discursive and imagery processing and the
contents of each become elaborately intertwined.' Based
on current research, it is difficult to disentangle imagery
and discursive processing and ensure that the unique
effects of each processing mode are independent of con-
tent effects. Nevertheless, it is important to understand
the situations that influence the dominance of one pro-
cessing mode over the other. Understanding the unique
effects of each processing mode on processing outcomes
is an equally important issue. Research that addresses
these issues is summarized in the Figure, which serves
as a framework for the remainder of this article.
Our attention will now turn to the unique effects of
low elaboration imagery (vs. low elaboration symbolic/
language-like processing) on learning and memor>s the
potential effects of elaborated imagery on information
processing and the phases of consumption, and finally,
issues involved in the conduct of research on imagery
(imagery-eliciting strategies and measures of imagery
processing).
REVIEW OF LOW-ELABORATION
IMAGERY PROCESSING
The bulk of research on imagery has examined im-
agery experiences that fall at the low end ofthe elabo-
ration continuum. Two broad imagery research streams
are: (1) studies ofthe effect of imagery as a mnemonic
device, and (2) studies of the effect of imagery in en-
hancing incidental learning. Excellent reviews of these
studies exist elsewhere (cf. Ernest 1977; Lutz and Lutz
1978; Paivio 1971; Richardson 1983); hence, the review
provided here is brief and selective.
Imagery as a Mnemonic Tool
General Findings. One research stream indicates
that, compared to non-imagerj' processing strategies
such as verbal rehearsal, imagery can substantially en-
hance memory for pairs of stimuli (Bower 1970, 1972;
Paivio 1969, 1971; Yates 1966). A factor explaining the
effect of imagery on paired associate learning is that
imagery provides a holistic construction that serves to
'One reviewer noted that a related but separate line of inquio'
would not seek to disentangle the experimentally divisible process
and content domains, but would instead focus on consumers' use of
imagerj' in naturalistic settings.

----- Page 4 (native) -----
476
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
FIGURE
ANTECEDENTS AND CONSEQUENCES OF IMAGERY PROCESSING
Antecedents
Pictures
Alesandrini and Sheikh 1983*
Childers and Houston 1984"
Lutz and Lute 1978*
Paivio 1971*"
Rossiter 1982'
Shepard 1967"
Concrete words
Alesandrini and Sheikh 1983'
Cartwright 1980"
Cartwright et al. 1978"
Lutz and Lute 1978*
Paivio etal. 1968"
Paivio and Foth 1970"
Rossiter 1982'
Instructions to imagine
Carroll 1978"
Rossiter 1982'
Sherman et al. 1984"
Wright and Rip 1980"
Guided imagery
Wolltnan1981'
Current concerns
Klinger 1977*"'
Singer 1978'
Needs for enhanced or
reduced stimutation
Doob 1972'
Singer 1978*
Tushup and Zuckerman
1977"
-*• Processing
Low elaboration
Imagery -
-Discursive
High elaboration
Moderators: Individu^ Differences in
tmagery Processing
Imagery vividness
Marks 1972*
Marks 1973"
Sheehan 1967"
Singer and Antrobus 1972"
Controttabitity of imagery
Gordon 1949"
Richardson 1969"
tmagery content
Singer and Antrobus 1963"
Singer and Antrobus 1972"
Spatiat abitity
Shepard and Melteer 1971"
Processing styte
Childers et al. 1985"
Holbrook et al. 1984"
Kunzendorf 1982"
Paivio 1971*"'
Richardson 1977"
• Review article.
" Empirical article.
' Theoretical article.
unify object pairs in a meaningful association (Bower
1970, 1972). Thus, memory for a pair of words like
"tub" and "bug" can be etihanced by imagining a bug
taking a bath. These memory effects may be substantial
if the unification ofthe object pairs results in a bizarre
image. Miller, Galanter, and Pribram (1960) found that
subjects could remember as many as 500 responses by
Consequences
Effects on memory
Childers and Houston 1984"
Emest 1977*
Lute and Lute 1977"
Lute and Lute 1978'
Miller etal. 1960"
Paivio 1969"
Paivio (1971)'"
Paivio and Csapo 1973"
Paivio and Foth 1970"
Yates 1966"'
Effects on incidental learning
Bower 1972"
Butter 1970"
Sheehan 1972"
Sheehan and Neisser 1969"
Swann and Miller 1982"
Effects on problem framing
Simon and Hayes 1976
Holbrook and Moore 1981b
Effects on probability assessment
Carroll 1978"
Einhom and Hogarth 1984"
Kahneman and Tversky 1982"'
Sherman etal. 1984"
Effects on intentions and purchase timing
Anderson 1983"
Bandura 1982"
Cautela and McCuiiough 1978*
Lang 1977"
Lang 1979*
McMahon 1973*
Mischel 1974*
Mischel and Moore 1973'
Staats and Lohr 1979'
Wolpe 1958"
Imagery as a consumption experience
Arieti 1976'
Doob 1972*
Hilgard 1978*"
Hirschman and Holbrook 1982'
Holbrook etal. 1984"
Undauer 1972*
Undauer 1983*
Singer 1978*
imagining a stimulus in a bizarre image. The unusual
image created by a bizarre association may create a more
distinctive memory trace that enhances the likelihood
that subjects will recall the appropriate target word
(Nelson, Reed, and McEnvoy 1977). Paivio and Csapo
(1973) found that memory for objects increased as the
concreteness of the stimulus words increased. Thus,

----- Page 5 (native) -----
IMAGERY PROCESSING
memory was greatest for pictures, less for concrete
words, and least for abstract words. In sum, imagery
has greater effects on paired associate learning when the
stimuli are concrete (particularly if they can be unified
in an interactive image).
Marketing Applications. In marketing, the effects of
imagery on paired associate learning have been applied
in several ways. Lutz and Lutz (1977) found that pic-
tures (imagery-eliciting stimuli) in advertisements had
a positive effect on memory for product-relevant infor-
mation when the brand (company) name and product
attribute were unified in a picture (interactive image).
Memory was reduced when items in the pair did not
interact. Childers and Houston (1984) found that re-
dundancy between pictorial and visual information in
advertisements produced a superior effect on recall for
the advertisement, particularly when a sensory pro-
cessing strategy, as opposed to a verbal (symbolic) pro-
cessing strategy, was used. The authors proposed that
because of chunking at encoding, interactive images
create a stronger memory trace that facilitates retrieval.
While much of the research on imagery effects upon
intentional learning has focused on memory for noun
or item pairs, Wright and Rip (1980) examined the role
of imagery in learning a problem-framing rule. They
hypothesized that imagery instructions might enhance
learning by making the attributes more concrete and
salient, and hence, more memorable. However, the ef-
fects of imagery on learning were modest at best. One
important factor influencing these results may be that
the subjects, as novices, had little schematic information
about the attributes or the problem situation. For them,
attribute-based information was abstract, not concrete.
Thus, their ability to generate imagery may have been
limited.
Imagery Efiects on Incidental Learning
General Findings. Several studies indicate that im-
agery-eliciting stimuli (e.g., pictures, concrete words,
instructions to imagine) enhance incidental learning,
and thus reduce the gap between incidental and inten-
tional learning-task conditions (Bower 1972; Butter
1970; Sheehan 1972; Sheehan and Neisser 1969). Stim-
ulus concreteness is one factor that may help to reduce
this gap. Butter (1970) asked subjects to read pairs of
words that were either abstract or concrete. Subjects
did not expect a recall test, making the task an incidental
learning situation. Subjects recalled a significantly
greater number of concrete than abstract word pairs.
Butter hypothesized that concrete words elicit imagery
that enhances incidental learning. In several studies re-
ported in Sheehan 1972, Sheehan manipulated both the
concreteness of the word pairs (concrete vs. abstract)
and the learning conditions of subjects (incidental vs.
intentional learning). In these studies, subjects in the
intentional learning condition remembered both ab-
477
Stract and concrete pairs. However, in the incidental
learning situation, subjects recalled significantly more
concrete than abstract words. Sheehan (1972) proposes
that imagery-eliciting stimuli in general (e.g., pictures,
concrete words, imagery instructions), and not merely
concrete words, enhance incidental learning. Consistent
with Sheehan's hypothesis. Bower (1972) found that
imagery instructions facilitated incidental learning. Half
of the subjects were told to memorize 20 noun pairs
and expect a recall test (intentional learning). The others
were told to rate the vividness of mental images gen-
erated by the word pairs. No mention of a recall task
was made to this group (incidental learning). The results
indicated that imagery-orienting instructions at encod-
ing significantly reduced the gap between intentional
and incidental learning.
Marketing applications. The effects of low-elabo-
ration imagery on consumer learning and memory offer
a rich domain for future research. For example, given
the often cited notion that much of consumer behavior
is ofthe "low involvement" variety (e.g., Batra and Ray
1983), studies ofthe role of imagery in enhancing in-
cidental learning would be quite informative. Since both
imagery vividness and stimulus concreteness affect the
usefulness of imagery in incidental learning tasks
(Swann and Miller 1982), marketers need to explore
the factors under their control that can influence im-
agery vividness and concreteness and that thus affect
consumers' abilities to remember product-related in-
formation.
ELABORATED IMAGERY: REVIEW
AND EXTENSIONS
In a consumer context, the role of imagery processing
at high levels of the elaboration continuum remains
illusory, although it is also important. Research in other
fields indicates that elaborated imagery experiences
(such as daydreams, fantasies, and visual problem-solv-
ing) are ubiquitous across cultures (Doob 1972) and
age groups (Giambra 1977). Elaborated imagery pro-
cessing can help an individual anticipate future situa-
tions (Kolers 1983; Singer 1974. 1978; Singer and An-
trobus 1972) and work out solutions to current prob-
lems (Klinger 1977), and can influence affective
experiences. Few consumer researchers have examined
the types of consumption experiences that may evoke
elaborated imagery processing or the types of con-
sumption-related experiences that are processed as im-
agery.'' Moreover, little is known about whether elab-
'Exceptions are studies by Holbrook el al. (1984) and Rethans and
Hastak (1981). Holbrook et al. found that individuals enjoyed games
more when their preferred cognitive style (imagery vs. verbalization)
matched the game format (visual vs. verbal). Rethans and Hastak
found that a significant portion of consumers' fears about product
hazards is evoked as imagery' experiences.

----- Page 6 (native) -----
478
orated imagery produces effects that differ from dis-
cursive processing.
The following section reviews studies on elaborated
imagery processing made elsewhere and develops prop-
ositions about the potentially unique effects of elabo-
rated imagery on selected consumer behaviors. In par-
ticular, the influence of elaborated imagery on problem
framing, the assessment of probabilities, purchase in-
tentions, and affect are explored. Research relevant to
this discussion is listed in the Figure.
Consumer Imagery and Problem Framing
Research in human problem solving indicates that
problem framing is an important part of subsequent
problem-solving activities. Both discursive and imagery
processes can be used to frame problems (Simon and
Hayes 1976). For example, an individual may visually
imagine a product in use and use that evoked scenario
as a basis for subsequent problem-solving activities (e.g.,
attribute evaluations, risk assessment). Alternatively,
using discursive processing, an individual might ex-
amine a series of brands and attributes in a matrix and
invoke a choice heuristic (e.g., a lexicographic strategy)
to make a product selection decision. Research has
demonstrated that the way in which a problem is rep-
resented (visually or otherwise) can have a dramatic
impact on the amount of time it takes to solve a prob-
lem. It also affects the solution strategies used (Simon
and Hayes 1976). While research in the choice and de-
cision making literature has been extensive in marketing
(e.g., Bettman and Park 1980; Bettman and Zins 1977;
Grether and Wilde 1984; Lussier and Olshavsky 1984;
Park and Lessig 1981; Wright 1974), little is known
about whether imagery is used in these decision making
activities and whether imagery influences decision
making strategies and outcomes.
The Effect of Imagery Processing on Brand Evalua-
tion Strategies. Most research has assumed that con-
sumers either combine attributes to make an overall
brand evaluation (choice by processing brands) or
compare all brands on one or more attributes, such as
price or quality (denoted as choice by processing attri-
butes; Bettman 1979). Discursive processing obviously
allows for both types of brand-evaluation strategies.
Research has demonstrated that the structure of the
task, information presentation format, and the prior
experience and learning goals ofthe consumer ali affect
the use of brand- and attribute-evaluation strategies
(Bettman and Kakkar 1977; Biehal and Chakravarti
1982; Brucks 1985; Johnson and Russo 1980).
The effect of imagery processing on brand evaluation
strategies has not been explored. However, Park and
Mittal (1985) indicate that elaborated imagery pro-
cessing is likely to differ in important ways from elab-
orated discursive processing, in particular, while dis-
cursive processing can be characterized as an implicit
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
or explicit summary of features or attributes using some
combination rules, imagery is holistic. A particularly
interesting study suggests the impact of mental imaging
on the presence of cue configurality (feature interac-
tions) in a product evaluation task (Holbrook and
Moore 1981b).' While the study focused predominantly
on processing differences for verbal versus pictorial
presentations, the subject's claimed processing strategy
(discursive vs. imagery) was found to exert a significant
moderating effect on the presence of cue configurality
for different input formats. As such, imagery processing
does not readily lend itself to piecemeal comparisons
across brands. Hence, as a tool for framing problems,
imagery is more appropriately characterized as a brand-
based processing strategy.
As a within-brand problem-framing tool, imagery
becomes an effective strategy for making a single out-
come or scenario specific and concrete. For example,
the individual may first simply imagine (visualize) the
product. Having made this construction, the image may
be elaborated as the individual develops a scenario of
the product being used. Of course, alternative scenarios
might be imagined to reflect multiple-usage situations.
There is obviously a tradeoff between evaluating a single
brand thoroughly and evaluating multiple brands using
fewer criteria. Since imagery encourages a focus on a
single brand, resources available for processing infor-
mation about other brands are reduced.' It is important
to remember, however, that the use of imagery in choice
contexts does not imply that the individual ignores in-
formation about other brands. Specifically, imagery
may be used as part of a phased decision-making strat-
egy along with other choice rules (Cohen 1982; Park
and Mittal 1985). For example, the individual may use
discursive processing to reduce the number of alter-
natives and then use imagery to evaluate the few that
remain.
Decision Complexity and Imagery Processing. The
extent to which consumers use imagery as an alternative
to complex information-integration rules is not known.
The issue is an important one, however, because it has
implications for consumers' abilities to deal with a large
array of data for a single product. Using a linear conti-
pensatory choice model, there is a positive relationship
between the number of attributes or brands considered
and the complexity of the problem: the greater the
number of attributes or brands, the more information
that must be evaluated, and hence, the more complex
the decision. This guideline has been implicit in re-
searchers' understanding of information load. While
'The presence of feature interactions is consistent with holistic and
integrative processing.
'This effect may be heightened if visualizing the brand has arousal
value (i.e., it's exciting and fun to imagine use of the brand). The
arousal effects of imagery are discussed in subsequent sections of this
article.

----- Page 7 (native) -----
IMAGERY PROCESSING
479
consumers in general seem to be able to handle a few
more attributes than alternatives before information
overload sets in, both attributes and alternatives affect
decision complexity (Malhotra 1982).
Using imagery, it is much easier to consider a larger
set of attributes than to evaluate a larger set of brands.'
While considering a larger set of brands requires the
construction of additional images, a larger set of attrib-
ute information may be helpful in "filling out" or en-
hancing an image. In fact, for imagery processing, there
may be an inverse relationship between the number of
attributes and the complexity of the decision. When
attributes are not given, the image is likely to be vague,
making the evocation ofthe image and the evaluation
ofthe product more difficult. In contrast, greater num-
bers of attributes add clarity and precision to the image,
which could facilitate the evaluation ofthe product. Of
course, as noted in previous sections, this would depend
on the concreteness and hence imagability ofthe attri-
butes. Comparable to the novelist's detailed description
of characters, detailed information on the features of a
product may make visualizing the product and its uses
much easier.
Missing Information and Imagery Processing. Fi-
nally, since imager>' processing encourages within-brand
product-evaluation strategies, it has some important
implications for how consumers deal with missing in-
formation in product selection decisions. Recent re-
search suggests that consumers use information about
comparable brands to fill in missing information on a
partially described alternative (Huber and McCann
1982; Meyer 1981, 1982). For example, consumers us-
ing an across-brand strategy (or processing by attributes)
may assign a discounted mean value to the missing at-
tribute (Huber and McCann 1982). Other research sug-
gests that consumers use information about other at-
tributes ofthe partially described alternative to fill in
the missing values (within-brand strategy: Ford and
Smith 1985). Both types of inferences have been dem-
onstrated, but the conditions that lead to across-brand
versus within-brand inferences have not been deter-
mined. Understanding the type of processing used could
improve predictions of the likelihood of differing in-
ferential strategies. While consumers using discursive
processing might infer price by substituting a discounted
average price ofthe product across brands, consumers
using imagery would be more likely to infer price by
first representing the product based on available infor-
'This would not necessarily generalize lo sequential tasks (i.e.. where
additional attributes are provided at a second exposure) since the
nature ofthe information stored in memory for imaginal versus dis-
cursive processing may vary (see Fiske 1982). Little is known about
the factors that affect information use in memory-based choice, but
there is some evidence that consumers use prior overall evaluations
and that the extent of brand-attribute feature processing in general
is reduced (Biehal and Chakravarti 1986; Lingle and Ostrom 1979;
Loken and Hoverstad 1985).
mation for the brand and then determining value. The
following propositions summarize this discussion ofthe
influence of elaborated imagery on problem framing*:
PI: When imagery processing is used, consumers
will be more likely to rely on within-brand
processing strategies as opposed to across-
brand strategies.
P2: Consumers will evaluate fewer brands when
imagery processing rather than discursive
processing is used, controlling for processing
motivation.
P3: There will be an inverse relationship between
the number of attributes given and perceived
decision complexity when imagery process-
ing is used. In contrast, there will be a positive
relationship between the number of attri-
butes given and perceived decision complex-
ity when a discursive processing strategy is
used.
P4: When imagerj' processing is used, consumers
will infer missing attributes based on existing
information about the product rather than
on estimation ofthe mean value ofthe miss-
ing attribute from information on other
brands.
Imagery Effects on Probability Assessment
and Consumer Satisfaction
In framing consumption problems and product al-
ternatives, consumers are likely to elaborate on the
consequences of product use (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980:
Wright 1980). In using imagery to elaborate on product
or purchase outcomes, systematic effects in probability
assessment and behavioral intentions may arise. These
effects are explored in the sections that follow.
Conjunctive Probability Assessment. 
Recent re-
search suggests that individuals overestimate conjunc-
tive probabilities (i.e., the likelihood that two events
will occur together: Fischhoff 1985: Tversky and
Kahneman 1983: Wallsten and Budescu 1983). While
there are many possible sources of biases in predictive
judgments of this sort, one ofthe most important ap-
pears to be elaborated imagery. Recent research by
Kahneman and Tversky (1982) indicates that when in-
dividuals imagine a future scenario they attach proba-
bilities to the scenario as a whole, not to the individual
sequences of events that make up the scenario. As
Kahneman and Tversky note, "the cumulative proba-
bility of at least one fatal failure in the sequence of
'It is recognized that discursive processing refers to a broad set of
processing strategies, including cognitive responses and cognitive al-
gebra. For ease of presentation, these (and subsequent) propositions
are simply formulated around the general term, without specifying
the specific form of discursive processing.

----- Page 8 (native) -----
480
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
images could be overwhelmingly high, even though the
probability of each individual cause of failure is negli-
gible" (1982, pp. 207-208). Relatedly, Einhorn and
Hogarth (1984) found that individuals tend to assign a
high probability to conjunctive events that they can
readily imagine and pay little attention to the number
of contingent outcomes between the two events. More-
over, the authors suggest that imagery may be one of
the most frequently used methods for estimating con-
junctive probabilities. Thus, when asked about the
probability of event 1 and event 2 co-occuring, respon-
dents may decide about the plausibility ofthe scenario
by imagining (visualizing) a scenario in which the events
co-exist. The research discussed earlier on the relation-
ship between the presence of feature interactions and
processing strategy (discursive vs. imagery) also provides
indirect support for the importance of processing strat-
egy in conjunctive probability assessment (Holbrook
and Moore 1981b).
Likelihood Assessment. Because of its impact on
conjunctive probability assessment, imagery is likely to
increase the perceived likelihood that the visualized
scenario will unfold as imagined. That is, probabilities
of individual events that make up the scenario are dis-
counted in judging the likelihood ofthe imagined sce-
nario. However, imagery also affects perceived likeli-
hoods more directly. Some research suggests that the
very act of visualizing an event can make the event
seem more likely. Carroll (1978) conducted experiments
in which individuals were asked to imagine a specific
outcome for a future event (e.g., the outcome of a pres-
idential election or a football game). The remaining
subjects were given no imagery instructions. For sub-
jects who imagined the outcome, a portion was asked
to verbally elaborate on the reasons for the imagined
outcome, while the remainder engaged in imagery
without verbal elaboration. The dependent variable was
the perceived likelihood that the event would occur as
imagined. Subjects who imagined the future outcome
perceived a higher likelihood ofthe event occurring than
did subjects who did not imagine the future event.
Moreover, verbal elaboration (a discursive processing
strategy) had no additional effect on expectations. This
effect has been explained in terms of the availability
heuristic: imagining outcomes increases their perceived
likelihood by making the outcomes more salient and
easier to recall.
Several other studies have demonstrated that imag-
ining or explaining a hypothetical future event increases
subjects' subjective probability estimates that the event
will actually occur (Anderson 1983; Gregory, Cialdini.
and Carpenter 1982; Hoch 1984; Sherman et al. 1981,
1983, 1984). Sherman et al. (1984) told college students
about a new disease that was increasingly prevalent on
campus. The disease was described to one group of sub-
jects in terms of several concrete, easy-to-imagine
symptoms. To the other group, the disease was described
with nebulous, difficult-to-imagine conditions. When
these two groups were asked to imagine themselves
contracting the disease, only those given the easy-to-
imagine symptoms increased their estimated likelihood
of getting it. (Those given the difficult-to-imagine
symptoms actually reduced their perceived chance of
contracting the disease.) These results suggest that im-
agery can upwardly bias perceived likelihoods, partic-
ularly when subjects are provided with concrete infor-
mation that enhances the vividness of images.
While several studies suggest that the presence (vs.
absence) of imagery can influence likelihood assess-
ments, the results do not clearly establish whether elab-
orated discursive processing (such as the construction
of explanations or reasons) and elaborated imagery have
equivalent or differing effects on perceived likelihoods.
For example, Carroll's 1978 study suggests only that
the effects of imagery are not enhanced by the addition
of verbal arguments. Moreover, the extent to which the
effect is the consequence ofthe nature of imagery pro-
cessing itself or the indirect effect of imagery on content
is also unclear. Certainly, providing a construction of
explanations or reasons for a particular outcome differs
from visualizing the outcome—not only in processing
style, but also in content.
There are several reasons to suspect that elaborated
imagery may affect perceived likelihoods more than
would elaborated discursive processing. For example,
imagery is likely to be more concrete and bear a closer
resemblance to perceptual phenomena (perhaps in-
creasing the salience of imagined outcomes over verbal
arguments). Nevertheless, it is clear that both types of
processing can affect likelihood estimation, and there
is, at present, no unambiguous test of which type of
processing has the greater impact.
Extremity of Decision Outcomes Considered and
Consumer Satisfaction. In addition to its potentially
biasing effect on likelihood assessment and estimates
of conjunctive probabilities, elaborated imagery- may
lead to a positivity bias with regard to future decision
outcomes (O'Neal 1974). The fact that imagery provides
a sensory analogue makes it natural for consumers to
focus on outcomes that feel good. Note that the posi-
tivity bias is an indirect effect of imagery processing.
The sensory analogue properties of imagery processing
cause consumers to focus on positive consequences.
If imagery does promote a positivity bias, it has se-
rious implications for consumer satisfaction, especially
when examined in conjunction with the biases discussed
above. For example, as a brand-based evaluation strat-
egy, imagery may reduce the number of brands that
consumers consider in their evoked set. Instead of thor-
oughly evaluating a number of alternatives, consumers
may focus on a single brand, imagining one or several
scenarios that are both positively biased and seen as
highly likely (e.g., conjunctive biases and perceived
likelihoods). The likelihood that the imagined scenario

----- Page 9 (native) -----
IMAGERY PROCESSING
481
will unfold as planned is quite low. Even if the actual
outcome is favorable, it is likely to differ from the imag-
ined outcome. Deviations ofthe actual outcome from
the imagined outcome give rise to surprise. Deviations
of this sort have been noted in the satisfaction literature
as an imponant cause of consumer dissatisfaction (An-
derson 1973). The effect of imagery on the extremity
of the decision outcomes considered before purchase
and post-purchase satisfaction has not been investi-
gated.
Individual difTerences in product- or purchase-related
knowledge are likely to influence the magnitude of a
"halo effect" and the number of alternative scenarios
generated. A better developed knowledge base allows
for the construction of greater numbers of alternative
scenarios. Consequently, if consumers are willing and
sufficiently knowledgeable to imagine multiple scena-
rios, they are less likely to expect any one of these to
unfold as planned (Carroll 1978). Moreover, in a prob-
abilistic sense, there is an enhanced likelihood that at
least one of the scenarios will unfold as planned. In
addition, an experienced consumer might not only draw
favorable outcomes but may develop unfavorable out-
come scenarios as well. These imagined negative sce-
narios not only affect the direction of expectations; they
also make it possible for the individual to engage in pre-
purchase behaviors that reduce the likelihood that the
negative imagined event will occur (risk-reduction
strategies).'
Based on this discussion, several propositions for the
effects of imagery on probability assessment and con-
sumer satisfaction can be developed:
P5: Consumers will estimate higher conjunctive
probabilities for decision outcomes when an
imagery processing mode as opposed to a
discursive processing mode is used.
P6: Consumers will estimate higher likelihoods
for the decision outcomes when an imagery
processing mode as opposed to a discursive
processing mode is used.
P7: When imagery processing is used, the level
of prior knowledge moderates the relation-
ship between imagery and satisfaction. Spe-
cifically, the lower the level of prior knowl-
edge, tiie higher the level of purchase dissat-
isfaction (for a given level of decision
involvement).
Imagery Effects on Purchase Intentions
and Purchase Timing
Imagery Effects on Purchase Intentions. Since an-
tiquity, philosophers have suggested that elaborated
'Other individual differences (e.g., optimism vs. pessimism), past
experiences, and particular circumstances may also affect the extent
of a posiliviiy bias.
imagery (such as daydreams) affects intentions to act
(see McMahon 1973). Research in some areas has sub-
stantiated this effect (Cautela and McCuiiough 1978;
Staats and Lohr 1979; Wolpe 1958). In clinical psy-
chology, research indicates that elaborated imagery of
a feared outcome is a major factor perpetuating phobias
(intentions to avoid an object). Moreover, imagery-
based treatment strategies can successfully reverse these
intentions (Bandura 1982; Cautela and McCuiiough
1978; Wolpe 1958). At least in clinical contexts, imagery
processing has been found to be more effective than
discursive processing in influencing behavioral inten-
tions (Cautela and McCuiiough 1978). The latter ex-
plain imagery's effect on intentions as a form of "covert
conditioning," suggesting that people approach (avoid)
objects that they associate with positive (negative) re-
wards via imager>'. Similarly, Staats and Lohr (1979)
view imagery as a stimulus that can elicit approach
(avoidance) responses.
On the basis of several experiments, Lang (1977,
1979) concludes that intentions are affected only if there
is an emotional reaction evoked by the imagined sce-
nario. On the basis of experimental results he argues
that emotional reactions to imagined scenarios that in-
clude feared objects are highest when elaborated im-
agery processing is used. In particular, the strongest ef-
fects were observed when subjects imagined themselves
interacting with the feared object (rather than simply
imagining the feared object or reading about the feared
object).
Outside ofthe clinical context, there is little research
on the connection between imager> processing and be-
havioral intentions. In one study, however, Gregor\ et
al. (1982) found that subjects who imagined themselves
enjoying the benefits of cable TV were more likely to
subscribe to cable TV service than were subjects who
only heard of these benefits. Anderson (1983) had sub-
jects imagine either themselves, a liked friend, or a dis-
liked acquaintance performing (or not performing) a
set of behaviors (e.g., donating blood, taking a trip).
The effect on intentions was most dramatic for sell"-
related imagery. Subjects who imagined themselves
performing the set of behaviors significantly changed
their behavioral intentions. Furthermore, greater
changes in intentions were found the longer subjects
imagined themselves performing the behavior. The ef-
fect of self-oriented imagery on intentions was also quite
enduring (at least 3 days).
The effect of self-related imagery- on intentions might
be explained in two ways: by the concreteness of the
imagined scenarios and/or by the greater emotionality
ofthe imagery. It might be that individuals can imagine
their reactions to constructed scenarios better than they
can imagine the reactions of others. Thus, the imagined
scenario (including responses) is more concrete (An-
derson 1983). Alternatively, the effect might occur be-
cause imagery is more emotionally provocative when
it is self- versus other-oriented. Recall that Lang's (1977.

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Ail
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
1979) results suggested that the extent to which imagery
affects intentions is related to the emotionality of the
image. Self-oriented imagery may also make more in-
formation available. Mowen (1980) examined the re-
lationship between imagery and purchase intentions,
hypothesizing that imagery would make information
more available and, hence, impact intentions. He found
no effects. According to Mowen, however, several as-
pects ofthe study and the manipulations used may have
led to the null effects. Thus this hypothesis deserves
further testing.
Imagery Effects on Purchase Timing. Research on
delay of gratification (Mischel 1974; Mischel and Moore
1973) indicates that the degree of elaboration invoked
in imagery can influence subjects' abilities to delay
gratification. It finds that imagery of having and using
a desired object produces a positive sensory and emo-
tional experience, which in turn enhances desires for
the object. The emotions induced by elaborated imager%
reduce subjects' abilities to delay gratification. The im-
plicit reasoning is that while the imagery itself offers a
positive sensory and emotional experience, actual con-
sumption ofthe product would offer more tangible sen-
sory and, thus, emotional benefits. Research by Mischel
also suggests that when subjects simply generate static
images of the desired object, but do not engage in an
elaboration of these images, imagery enhances their
abilities to delay gratification. While it is easy to see
how using imagery to produce a positive sensory and
emotional experience would decrease the ability to delay
gratification, it is not intuitive why imagining a static
image ofthe desired object (versus imagining nothing
at all) would increase the ability to delay gratification.
Mischel (1974) proposes that generating an image of
the object serves to remind individuals that the object
is still there to be acquired at some future time. Because
the image is not elaborated, emotional responses (and
resulting frustrations) are kept to a minimum.
The relationship between elaborated imagery and
enhanced purchase desire is directly relevant to pro-
motional strategy. To be effective in reducing the delay
between purchase consideration and actual purchase,
persuasive communication strategies need to focus on
helping audiences imagine the positive sensory and
emotional experiences they would derive from having
the object. Just reminding consumers ofthe product's
existence is not sufficient to stimulate desires. In fact,
it may even help them to delay purchase. Despite the
intuitive importance of the relationship between elab-
orated imagery and reduced purchase acquisition time,
this relationship has not been investigated in consumer
research.
Summarizing the preceding discussion of imagerj^ ef-
fects on purchase intentions and timing in the form of
propositions:
P8: There will be a greater change in behavioral
intentions when elaborated imagerj' as op-
posed to discursive processing is used.'
P9: Self-related imagery will affect intentions
more than will imagery that does not include
the self.
PIO: The more concrete and emotional the im-
agery, the greater the change in behavioral
intentions.
Pll: Controlling for ability to buy, elaborated
imagery will reduce the delay between pur-
chase consideration and actual purchase.
PI 2: The degree of elaboration moderates the re-
lationship between imagery and purchase
motivation. Specifically:
a: Controlling for ability to buy, elaborated
imagery will reduce the delay between
purchase consideration and actual pur-
chase.
b: Controlling for ability to buy, visualizing
the desired object (low-elaboration im-
agery) will increase the delay between
purchase consideration and actual pur-
chase.
Imagery as a Consumption Experience
One of the most important and unique qualities of
high-elaboration imager>' is that it is a sensory analogue
that provides the imager with a surrogate experience
(Arieti 1976). Doob (1972) proposes that high-elabo-
ration imagery- enables people to secure "substitute sat-
isfaction." Hilgard (1978), Lindauer (1972, 1983), and
Singer (1978) provide evidence that high-elaboration
imagery offers a form of self-entertainment, gratifica-
tion, and stimulation. The ability to secure substitute
satisfaction through imager>' applies not only to pre-
consumption activites. but to activities throughout the
phases of consumption: preconsumption. consumption,
and post-consumption.
Preconsitmpiion Imagery. At the preconsumption
stage, imager>' processing allows vicarious consumption
through browsing or shopping. While researchers have
noted that experiential pleasures can result from
browsing and shopping (Bloch, Sherrell, and Ridgway
1986; Hirschman 1980), the extent to which imagery
affects satisfaction with these browsing and shopping
activities has received little attention.
In facilitating vicarious consumption, elaborated
imager)' is likely to be most valued and prevalent when
consumers perceive actual consumption to be blocked
by situational contingencies. For example, inability to
buy, risk associated with product use, or other personal
circumstances make imager>' an important tool for at-
taining some of the entertainment, gratification, and
stimulation that would derive from actual consumption.
The implication is that elaborated imagery is most use-
ful as a substitute experience when actual consumption
is not a viable alternative and when some ofthe benefits

----- Page 11 (native) -----
IMAGERY PROCESSING
483
of consumption can be attained from imagined con-
sumption. Obviously, there are limits to the benefits
that can be attained with imagined consumption. In
particular, since imagery offers a sensory substitute, it
is most useful when the benefits of product use involve
sensor>' stimulation (as opposed to, for example, func-
tional benefits). Thus, elaborated imagery is most useful
as a substitute experience when the benefits of con-
sumption are sensory and high, and the costs and/or
risks of product acquisition are also high. In this case
consumers can attain some of the benefits of product
consumption without incurring the costs. Interestingly,
whereas elaborated imagery with ability to buy can in-
crease frustration and reduce the delay between pur-
chase consideration and actual purchase, elaborated
imager>- without the ability to buy may provide satis-
faction through a substitute sensory and emotional ex-
perience. Thus, whether elaborated imagery processing
leads to reduced or enhanced purchase desire depends
on whether actual consumption is viewed as possible
or not (given the costs and risks of consumption).
Consumption Imagery. Imagery can also play an
important role during the actual consumption experi-
ence. Many products are purchased explicitly for the
fantasy imagery they generate (Hirschman and Hol-
brook 1982; Holbrook and Hirschman 1982). Products
are often viewed as important for their role in stimu-
lating imagery (e.g., records, books, movies). Playful
consumption, which includes leisure activities, sports,
games, etc, is a domain where imagery appears to play
a panicularly important value-enhancing role (Hol-
brook et al. 1984). As such, the value of many products
is a function of both intrinsic qualities and qualities
imbued by imagery during the consumption experience.
Thus, imagery in the consumption phase has the po-
tential for increasing product satisfaction. Lindauer
(1983) provides an extensive review of the use of im-
agery experiences in the pursuit of hedonic consump-
tion activities (e.g., listening to music, through litera-
ture, etc.). Research has suggested that some individuals
report substantial levels of imagery when engaged in
hedonic consumption activities (Hilgard 1978). Nev-
ertheless, the connection between imagery processing
during consumption and levels of consumption satis-
faction has not been established. Some indirect evidence
in consumer behavior of this connection is the finding
that enjoyment of games (positive feelings and pleasure)
is a function of the congruency between the type of
game and the preferred cognitive style (imagery or dis-
cursive). Hence, at least for people who like to engage
in imagery, products that facilitate imagery provide
more pleasure and fun (Holbrook et al. 1984).
The relationship between imagery and hedonic and
symbolic consumption experiences offers a rich terrain
for future consumer research. Unfortunately, as Lin-
dauer (1983) notes, much ofthe research thus far has
been poorly conceptualized and methodologically
flawed. Important and interesting questions for mar-
keters include the role of imagery in the stimulation of
hedonic and symbolic consumption, and satisfaction
with hedonic and symbolic consumption activities.
Understanding the fantasies consumers associate with
the consumption of hedonic and symbolic products can
facilitate the promotion of these products. Further, un-
derstanding consumption imagery can provide mar-
keters with an important way of increasing satisfaction
with the consumption experience.'" If imagery enhances
the value of the consumption experience, products
(especially hedonic and symbolic ones) can be designed
to stimulate imagery. Even consumption of certain
functional products may be enhanced by associating
the product with positive imagery. For example, the
communications research manager at Coke summarizes
one advertising strategy as imbuing the object with im-
agery to give it added value (Wall Street Journal 1984).
He goes on to note that concrete cues can be associated
with positive imagery such that the presence of these
cues in other circumstances elicits positive imagery re-
garding the product.
Post-Consumption Imagery. 
Remembered con-
sumption has long been viewed as an important input
into decisions about future consumption activities (En-
gel and Blackwell 1982). Nevertheless, little attention
has focused on the nature of remembered consumption.
Tendencies to save mementos, ticket stubs, and photos
indicates consumers' desires to relive consumption ex-
periences. Imagery can play an important role in reliv-
ing these experiences. Recent work indicates that valued
possessions are often treasured for the imagery expe-
riences and memories they generate (Csikszentmihalyi
and Rochberg-Halton 1981: Wallendorf 1984). Consis-
tent with earlier discussions, research has indicated that
imagery of past experiences is most often associated
with experiences and events that were particularly sa-
lient and/or emotional at the time (Marks 1972). Hil-
gard's (1978) work refers to "reintegrating stimuli"—
stimuli that reinvoke a state-dependent retrieval ex-
perience. She observes that stimuli are most successful
in retrieving a memory image if they include some of
the direct perceptual properties (e.g., sights, sounds,
smells) associated with the remembered experience.
These stimuli serve as concrete cues that elicit imagery.
Imager>' used to relive consumption experiences
should be of interest to marketers for several reasons.
First, using imagery to relive a valued consumption ex-
perience suggests that a consumption experience can
iive well beyond its typically conceived duration. Flow-
ers, champagne corks, photographs, and other items
may be saved for a lifetime and used to relive important
events. Huge expenditures for events like weddings,
proms, and special vacations are often justified not
solely by their present value, but by their future value.
'"This would probably come as no surprise to the novelist or movie
director concerned with helping audiences "live the story." Nev-
ertheless, the importance of imager>- in other consumption activities
has been overlooked.

----- Page 12 (native) -----
484
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
If marketers want to encourage investment in appar-
ently transient consumption experiences, they may find
it useful to emphasize the lasting power of these expe-
riences through imagery. Moreover, elaborated imagery
after consumption can increase the remembered satis-
faction of consumption. The same kind of "halo" effect
that appears to operate with imagery processing in gen-
eral is likely to operate with imagery of remembered
events. In this way, consumption experiences that in-
cluded a mixture of good and bad events may be re-
membered in a positive light. Finally, elaborated im-
agery after consumption can encourage repurchase be-
havior. Recall that elaborated imagery, by providing a
positive sensory and emotional experience, is likely to
reduce ability to delay gratification when controlling
for ability to buy." The relationship between elaborated
imagery and consumption experiences can be sum-
marized in several propositions:
PI3: Vicarious consumption facilitated by imag-
er>' will be most satisfying when the perceived
benefits from actual consumption are sen-
sory in nature and the cost/risks of actual
consumption are perceived as prohibitive.
P14: Consumption satisfaction for hedonic and
symbolic products will be higher when elab-
orated imagery as opposed to discursive pro-
cessing is used.
P15: Consumers will report higher levels of sat-
isfaction with the recall of a past consump-
tion experience when elaborated imagery as
opposed to discursive processing is used.
PI6: Elaborated imagery of a past consumption
experience will increase intention to repur-
chase (controlling for ability to buy).
CONDUCTING RESEARCH
ON IMAGERY
The final section addresses issues involved in the
conduct of research on imagery. Intended as a brief
overview of research on the manipulation and mea-
surement of imagery processing, the section's primary'
purpose is to acquaint the unfamiliar reader with the
basic tools for conducting imagery research. Two do-
mains, summarized in the Figure, are reviewed: (1)
strategies for manipulating imagery, and (2) strategies
for measuring the extent of imagery processing.
Imagery-Eliciting Strategies
As the Figure indicates, a number of external sources
can induce imagery (see Alesandrini and Sheikh 1983
"In this conlcxl it is useful to note that certain consumption ex-
periences may be viewed as unrepeatable and hence positive imagery
would not imply repurchase. Howeyer. as one reviewer noted, a pos-
itive imagery experience may generate word-of-mouth communica-
tions that affect others" purchase ofthe consumption experience.
and Lutz and Lutz 1978 for reviews). The sources de-
scribed briefly here are: pictures, concrete words, in-
structions to imagine, and guided imagery. Throughout
this discussion it is useful to keep in mind that imagery
can also occur in the absence of external stimuli simply
via information voluntarily retrieved from memory.
"Current concerns" or "unfinished business" often
trigger daydreams of potential, anticipated, or future
outcomes (Klinger 1977). Needs for stimulation caused
by sensory deprivation also increase spontaneous im-
agery (Singer 1978; Tushup and Zuckerman 1977). Fi-
nally, needs to escape an excessively stimulating envi-
ronment can also give rise to an internal focus on im-
agery (Singer 1978). 
1
Pictures. Pictures are well-established predictors of
imagery (Bugelski 1983; Finke 1980; Paivio 1971; Ros-
siter 19'82; Shepard 1967; Singer 1978). The fact that
visual information tends to be remembered better than
verbal information (the picture superiority effect) has
also been explained through imagery (Alesandrini and
Sheikh 1983; Childers and Houston 1984; Lutz and
Lutz 1977; Paivio 1971). However, pictures need not
induce only imagery processing (Kieras 1978; Rossiter
and Percy 1983); hence, it is dangerous to equate the
mode of information presentation with its representa-
tion in working memory (Rossiter and Percy 1983).
With the increased focus on the impact of pictures in
consumer information processing (e.g.. Childers and
Houston 1984; Edell and Staelin 1983; Kisielius and
Sternthal 1984; Rossiter 1982; Rossiter and Percy 1983).
understanding the conditions under which pictures
produce imagery becomes important.
Concrete Hord.s. Concrete words can stimulate the
generation of imagery as well (Paivio and Csapo 1973:
Paivio and Foth 1970; Paivio. Yuille. and Madigan
1968: Richardson 1980). Ratings ofthe concreteness of
words are highly related to their rated imagery value
(Paivio et al. 1968). Recent work by Cartwright (1980:
Canwright. Marks, and Durrett 1978) indicates that
abstract words can be made imaginal by instructing
subjects to think of an imager>'-based exemplar. For
example, abstract words like "peace" and "quarrel" can
be made concrete by evoking an image of a dove (an
exemplar of peace) or an image of people actually en-
gaged in a quarrel. Thus, the relationship between con-
crete and abstract words and imagery' may be more
complex than initially thought.
Instructions to Imagine. 
Instructions to imagine
represent another external source to the generation of
imagery. Some marketing researchers (Mowen 1980;
Wright and Rip 1980) have relied on instructions to
imagine in stimulating imagery. These studies reported
negligible effects on learning and attitudes from the im-
agery manipulation. However, other studies using this
manipulation have reported important and significant
effects (cf. Carroll 1978: Gregory et al. 1982; Sherman
et al. 1984). Rossiter (1982) suggests that in an adver-

----- Page 13 (native) -----
IMAGERY PROCESSING
485
tising context, instructions to imagine are less effective
as imagery-eliciting strategies than are "high imagery
visuals." However, this interpretation should be qual-
ified. Instructions to imagine may be ineffective in sit-
uations where little schematic knowledge exists (Wright
and Rip 1980) or where external stimulation interferes
with the generation of imagery (Mowen 1980). How-
ever, imagery instructions may be an important ma-
nipulation strategy when consumers are allowed the
time to generate vivid imagery, when cues are concrete
(Paivio and Csapo 1973; Richardson 1983), when in-
structions focus on subjects' reactions to the image
(Lang 1979), and when consumers have sufficient
knowledge to generate imagery about reactions (Re-
thans and Hastak 1981; Smith, Houston, and Childers
1983).
Guided Imagery. 
"Guided imagery" (Wollman
1981) is an imager>'-eliciting strategy that resembles
imager>-based methods used in clinical settings. Par-
ticipants are first asked to relax and then practice de-
veloping vivid imagery scenarios. To facilitate imagery
evocation and vividness, participants are given cues that
help to guide their imagery. The procedure is repeated
for several trials, and finally, subjects are asked to
imagine the object that is the focus ofthe study. Woll-
man (1981) warns that the usefulness of this procedure
may be confined to those who have vivid, controllable
imagery\ Demand characteristics may also operate with
this procedure.
Measuring Imagery Processing
Measuring the presence and content of imagery rep-
resents a significant challenge to researchers. Several
different methods have been used to measure imagery
processing, each with its own unique limitations. Cur-
rently, few guidelines for imager>' measurement have
been established, but a considerable amount of research
has focused on developing scales to measure individual
differences in imagery- processing. The next section
provides a brief overview of this research.
Overview of Imagery-Measurement Approaches.
Many researchers rely on criterion-based responses, not
manipulation checks, in assessing imagery processing.
Thus. imager>' processing is manipulated by one ofthe
strategies already discussed and inferred from the results
(cf. Anderson 1983; Carroll 1978; Lutz and Lutz 1978;
Paivio 1971; Sheehan 1972). An important exception
is the research by Lutz and Lutz (1977). They manip-
ulated mental imagery with the use of pictures, but also
provided simple manipulation checks to ensure that
groups provided only with verbal stimuli generated less
mental imager\^ than the experimental groups.
Other researchers have given explicit consideration
to measuring the content of imagery processing using
both simple and complex verbal responses. Klinger
(1978) recommends a procedure called "thought sam-
pling," where the experimenter interrupts individuals
involved in imagery processing and asks them to de-
scribe the content of their imaginal experiences. In a
related procedure called "event sampling," imager>'
content is assessed by asking subjects to indicate when-
ever a certain type of image is aroused. Smith et al.
(1984) asked subjects to write out their script for visiting
the school placement office and indicate whether im-
agery was present or absent and high or low in vividness.
Rethans and Hastak (1981) relied on a free-elicitation
procedure described by Olson and Muderrisoglu (1979)
to tap imagery associated with product hazards. It is
possible to criticize these measurements on several
counts. First, most require that respondents translate
imager}' processing into a discursive mode (e.g., verbal
responses), confusing even more the distinction between
the processing modes. Moreover, individual differences
in verbosity or vocabulary can influence the nature of
this translation. In addition, studies that ask individuals
to detail imager\' scenarios may not be assessing the
extent of detail contained in the image, but rather sub-
jects' abilities to control their image so that details can
be specified.
Physiological reactions are also used as indicators of
imagery processing. Brain wave patterns (see Ley 1983)
are presumed to indicate the presence of imagery, but
are extremely difficult to interpret and highly intrusive.
Some psychologists have suggested that muscular ac-
tivation mirrors imagery content and have therefore
used electromyogram readings to assess imagery- content
(see Ley 1983). Again, however, these measures are in-
ferential and highly obtrusive. Moreover, assessments
require a considerable level of technical sophistication.
.Measuring Individual Differences in Imagery Pro-
cessing. A number of scales have been developed to
study the role that individual differences play in imager\
processing (see Ernest 1977 and Sheehan et al. 1983 for
reviews of several of these scales). The scales can be
classified into four basic categories: (1) scales of imager>-
ability (vividness and controllability). (2) scales of im-
agery content, (3) scales of spatial ability, and (4) scales
of imagery vs. verbal processing styles.
Scales of imagery ability assess individual differences
in imagery vividness and controllability. Imagery viv-
idness is a known moderator of imagery effects in in-
cidental learning (Ernest 1977: Sheehan and Neisser
1969: Swann and Miller 1982). It also moderates the
relationship between imagery and emotional and phys-
iological arousal (Drummond. White, and Ashton 1978:
Grossberg and Wilson 1968). Two commonly used
scales to assess individual differences in imagery viv-
idness are The Betts Questionnaire Upon Mental Im-
agery (QMI: see Durndell and Wetherick 1976: Rich-
ardson 1977; Sheehan 1967; Westcoff and Rosenstock
1976) and Marks' Vividness of Visual Imagery Ques-
tionnaire (see Childers et al. 1985; Marks 1973: Rossi
1977). The controllability of imagery has also been
demonstrated to influence a number of cognitive pro-

----- Page 14 (native) -----
486
cesses, including mental rotations (Ernest 1977). A
commonly used measure of imagery control was de-
veloped by Gordon (1949) and modified by Richardson
(1969; see Childers et al. 1985; Westcott and Rosenstock
Scales of imagery content have been developed by
Singer and Antrobus (1963, 1972) and Huba et al.
(1982). The shorter version ofthe Imaginal Process In-
ventory (IPl; Huba et al. 1982) taps imagery vividness,
the use of imagery to relieve boredom, general feelings
about the usefulness of imagery, the use of imagery in
anticipating the future and solving problems, fantasy
imagery, distractibility, and emotional arousal from
imagery. The scale is infrequently used in research ap-
plications, but has adequate internal consistency and
test-retest reliabilities.
Spatial ability tests are designed to assess individuals'
abilities to hold pictures of visual objects in memory
and perform mental operations (e.g., mental rotations).
While clearly related to the controllability of imagery,
tests of spatial ability are generally independent of tests
of imagery vividness (Richardson 1983). Several tests
of spatial ability are available and commonly used (see
Bennett, Seashore, and Wesman 1947; Likert and
Quasha 1970; Shepard and Meltzer 1971; Thurstone
1938).
Finally, scales to measure processing style are de-
signed to assess preferences for using imagery versus
verbal processing in thinking, studying, and problem
solving. The Visualizer-Verbalizer Questionnaire (WQ)
is a commonly used measure developed by Richardson
(1977). The VVQ has been shown to influence imagery
effects on cognitive processing (Ernest 1977) and to me-
diate the relationship between visually presented ads and
measures of attitudes (Rossiter and Percy 1978). Two
measures have been developed in consumer behavior that
appear to overcome some of the criticisms of the VVQ.
Childers et al. (1985) developed a new measure called the
Style of Processing Questionnaire (SOP), which more
clearly differentiates ability dimensions from processing
preferences. The SOP scale has been related to measures
of advertising recognition and recall (Childers et al. 1985).
Another scale, the V/V Index, takes as its starting point
the Prevalence of Visual Imagery Test (PVIT) developed
by Kunzendorf (1981, 1982) to resolve some ofthe dif-
ficulties with the VVQ. Developed by Holbrook et al.
(1984), the V/V Index differs from the PVIT by using
both pictorial and verbal anchors for each scale, thus
overcoming some of the earlier criticisms of measuring
imagery preferences on verbal scales.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Even though there is considerable debate about the
meaning of imagery processing and the causal role of
imagery in problem-solving and sensory experiences,
there is little doubt that imagery seems to play an im-
portant role in information processing (Block 1981).
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
Empirical evidence is mounting that imagery processing
affects a multitude of cognitive, physiological, and be-
havioral phenomena. In a marketing context, imagery
processing is likely to be important in understanding
incidental learning, numerous facets ofthe choice pro-
cess, the likelihood and timing of purchases, and the
nature of many hedonic and symbolic consumption ex-
periences and re-experiences (remembered consump-
tion). The purpose of this article has been to review
research on imagery processing, contrast it with dis-
cursive (symbolic, language-like) processing, and sug-
gest important ways in which imagery impacts con-
sumers' learning, choices, and satisfaction. The article
has also considered the role that imagery is likely to
play throughout the phases of consumption. Although
other research suggests that imagery is pervasive, little
is known about its relative impact in consumption con-
texts.
A review ofthe research on imagery processing sug-
gests several important possibilities to consumer be-
havior researchers. First, imagery is likely to have a
positive impact on incidental learning. Since much of
consumer learning is incidental, imagery may be even
more important in consumer contexts than in other
problem-solving contexts. Second, imagery processing
may encourage within-brand product evaluation strat-
egies. Within-brand strategies, in turn, have implica-
tions for how missing information is dealt with. Third,
the conditions for decision complexity are likely to differ
between imagery processing and cognitive algebra
models. In particular, imagery processing seems best
suited for the evaluation of very few brands on many
attributes. Fourth, imagery niay bias estimates of con-
junctive probabilities and estimates of the likelihood
and positivity of outcomes. These biased estimates may
lead to disappointment with post-purchase outcomes.
Fifth. imager>' (especially self-related imagery') affects
purchase intentions and the timing of purchases (by
inhibiting the ability to delay gratification). Finally,
imagery can offer a positive sensory and emotional ex-
perience that can substitute for consumption (e.g., vi-
carious consumption), enhance or supplement con-
sumption (i.e., make hamburger taste more like steak),
and play an important role in remembered consump-
tion and intention to repurchase.
While this article has outlined some promising do-
mains for imagery research and provided a basic over-
view of some of the tools of imagery research, much
remains to be done. Even such basic issues as what fac-
tors stimulate imagery processing and how imagery
processing is to be measured are far from resolved. Re-
search is needed to explore the types of consumption
problems consumers represent with imagery and the
ways that imagery interacts with consumption experi-
ences. Similarly, while this article focused on concep-
tually distinguishing imagery processing from discursive
processing, there are likely to be important interplays
between these two processing modes. Research inves-
tigating the stages in the decision process where imagery

----- Page 15 (native) -----
IMAGERY PROCESSING
487
is most commonly used would be important in describ-
ing part ofthe interplay between imagery and discursive
processing.
Significant challenges lie ahead in imager>' research.
Methodological practices need improvement, and
theoretical grounding is necessary. Because the science
is in its infancy, imagery research—and elaborated im-
agery processing, in particular—offers an opportunity
to construct theory. Consumption-related choices and
experiences provide a rich domain for theory construc-
tion. The nature of learning, problem-solving, and ex-
periences in the consumer domain are well suited to
exploration of elaborated imagery processing. Con-
sumers often make decisions with less than full infor-
mation, considering only one or two alternatives.
Moreover, in many cases evaluation ofthe decision re-
quires information about sensor>' and emotional reac-
tions to the experience. For example, in the choice of
many services and symbolic or hedonic products, the
most important part of the choice involves assessing
how it will feel (the sensations surrounding the antici-
pated consumption). Imagery processing provides a
uniquely appropriate mode for evaluating the sensory
qualities of products. Finally, a considerable proponion
of people's hopes and dreams focuses on consumption
related experiences—spending a million dollars, owning
a fast car, building their own home. As such, consumer
researchers are provided with a natural environment in
which to explore some of consumers' most important
imager>' experiences.
[Received February 1985. Revised August 1986.]
REFERENCES
.'Vbelson. Roben P. (1976). "Script Processing in .Attitude
Formation and Decision Making." in Cognition and So-
cial Behavior eds. John S. Carroll and John W. Payne.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 33-45.
Ajzen. Icek and Manin Fishbein (1980), Understanding .At-
titudes and Predicting Social Behavior. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Alesandrini, Kathy and Aness Sheikh (1983), "Research on
Imagery: Applications to Advenising." in Imagery: Cur-
rent Theory. Research and Application, ed. Aness Sheikh.
New York: John Wiley, 535-556.
Anderson. Craig A. (1983), "Imagination and Expectation:
The Effect oflmagining Behavioral Scripts on Personal
Intentions." Journal of Personality and Social Psvclwl-
ogy. 45 (2), 293-305.
Anderson. John R. (1978), "Arguments Concerning Repre-
sentations for Mental Imagery," Psvchological Review
85.249-277.
and Gordon H. Bower (1973). Human .A.'ssociative
.A/fwory. Washington. D.C.: Winston.
.Anderson. Rolph E. (1973), "Consumer Dissatisfaction: The
Effect of Disconfirmed Expectancy on Perceived Product
Imponance." Journal of .Marketing Research. 10 (Feb-
ruary), 38-44.
Arieti, Silvano (1976), Creativity: The .\fagic Synthesis. New
York: Basic Books.
Bandura, Alben (1982), "Self-Efficacy Mechanisms in Human
Agency," .4wencan Psychologist. 37 (2), 122-147.
Batra, Rajeev and Michael L. Ray (1983), "Advenising Sit-
uations: The Implications of Differential Involvement
and Accompanying Affect Responses," in Informaiion
Processing Research in Advertising, ed. Richard J. Harris,
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 127-152.
Bennett, George K., Harold G. Seashore, and Alexander G.
Wesman (1947), Differential .Aptitude Tests. New York:
The Psychological Corporation.
Bettman, James R. (1979), An Information Processing Theory
of Consumer Choice, Reading. MA: Addison-Wesley.
and Pradeep Kakkar (1977), "Effects of Informaiion
Presentation Format on Consumer Information Acqui-
sition Strategies," Journal of Consumer Research. 3
(March), 233-240.
and C. Whan Park (1980), "The Effects of Prior
Knowledge and Experience and Phase of the Choice
Process on Consumer Decision Processes," Journal of
Consumer Research, 7 (December), 234-248.
and Michael .A. Zins (1977). "Constructive Processes
in Consumer Choice." Journal of Consumer Research.
4 (September). 75-87.
Biehal. Gabriel and Dipankar Chakravani (1982). "Infor-
mation-Presentation Format and Learning Goals as De-
terminants of Consumers' Memor>- Retrieval and Choice
Processes," Journal of Consumer Research. 8 (March),
431-442.
and Dipankar Chakravani (1986), "Consumers" Use
of Memory and External Information in Choice: Macro
and Micro Perspectives," Journal of Consumer Research
12 (March). 382-405.
Bloch. Peter H.. Daniel L. Sherrell. and Nancy M. Ridgway
(1986), "Consumer Search: .An Extended Framework."
Journal 
of Consumer 
Research. 
13 (June), 119-127.
Block. Ned (1981). Imagery. Cambridge. MA: MIT Press.
Bower. Gordon (1970). "Imagery as a Relational Organizer
in Associative Learning." Journal ofl'erhal Learning and
ierbal Behavior. 9. 529-533.
—(1972), "Mental Imagery and Associative Learning."
in Cognition in Learning and .Memory, ed. Lee Gregg,
.New York: John Wiley.
Brucks. Merrie (1985). "The Effectsof Product Class Knowl-
edge on Information Search Behavior." Journal of Con-
sumer Research. 12 (June). 1-16.
Bugelski, B. Richard (1983), "Imagery and the Thought Pro-
cesses," in Imagery: Current Theory. Research and .Ap-
plication, ed. Aness Sheikh. New '^'ork: John Wiley. 72-
95.
Burnkrant, Roben E. and Alan G. Sawyer (1983), "Effects of
Involvement and Message Content on Information Pro-
cessing Intensity," in Information Processing Research
in.Advertising, ed. Richard J. Harris, Hillsdale, NJ: Law-
rence Erlbaum, 43-64.
Butter, M. Johnna (1970), "Differential Recall of Paired As-
sociates as a Function of Arousal and Concreteness of
Imagery Levels." Journal of E.xperimental Psvcholoi:v.
84. 252-256.
Cacioppo, John T. and Richard E. Petty (1984). "The Elab-
oration Likelihood Model of Persuasion." in .Advances
in Consumer Research, Vol. II, ed. Thomas Kinnear,
Ann Arbor. MI: Association for Consumer Research
673-675.

----- Page 16 (native) -----
488
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
Calder, Bobby J. (1978), "Cognitive Response, Imagery and
Scripts: What is the Cognitive Basis ofAttitude?" in Ad-
vances in Consumer Research, Vol. 5, ed. H. Keith Hunt,
Ann Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer Research,
630-634.
Carroll, John (1978), "The Effect oflmagining an Event on
Expectations for the Event: An Interpretation in Terms
ofthe Availability Heuristic," Journat of Experimental
Social Psychology, 14,88-96.
Cartwright, Desmond S. (1980), "Exploratory Analyses of
Verbally Stimulated Imagery of the Self," Journal of
Mental Imagery, 4, 1-21.
, Mao' E. Marks, and John H. Durrett (1978). "Def-
inition and Measurement of Three Processes of Imagery
Representation: Exploratory Studies of Verbally Stim-
ulated Imagery," Multivariate Behaviorat Research. 13,
449-473.
Cautela, Joseph R. and Leigh McCuiiough (1978), "Covert
Conditioning: A Learning Theory Perspective on Im-
agery," in The Power of Human Imagination, eds. J.L.
Singer and K.S. Pope, New York: Plenum, 227-250.
Chaiken, Shelly (1980), "Heuristic vs. Systematic Information
Processing and the Use of Source vs. Message Cues in
Persuasion," Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy. 39 (5), 752-766.
Childers, Terry L. and Michael Houston (1982), "Imagery
Paradigms forConsumer Research: Alternative Perspec-
tives from Cognitive Psychology," in Advances in Con-
sumer Research, Vol. 10, eds. Alice M. Tybout and
Richard P. Bagozzi, Ann Arbor, MI: Association for
Consumer Research, 59-64.
and Michael Houston (1984), "Conditions for a Pic-
ture Superiority Effect on Consumer Memory," Journal
of Consumer Research. II (September), 643-655.
-, Michael J. Houston, and Susan E. Heckler (1985),
"Measurement of Individual Differences in Visual vs.
Verbal Processing." Journal of Consumer Research. 12
(September), 125-134.
Cohen, Joe! B. (1982), "The Role of Affect in Categorization:
Toward a Reconceptualization of the Concept of Atti-
tude," in Advances in Consumer Research. Vol. 9, ed.
Andrew A. Mitchell, Ann Arbor, Ml: Association for
Consumer Research, 94-100.
Craik. Fergus I.M. and Robert S. Lockhart (1972), "Levels
of Processing: A Framework for Memory Research,"
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11,
671-684.
and Endel Tulving (1975), "Depth of Processing and
the Retention of Words in Episodic Memory." Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General. 104, 268-294.
Csikszentmihalyi. Mihaly and Eugene Rochberg-Halton
(1981), The Meaning of Things: Domestic Symbols and
the Self New York: Cambridge University Press.
Deckert, Gordon H. (1964), "Pursuit Eye Movements in the
Absence of Moving Visual Stimulus." Science, 143.
1192-1193.
Doob, Leonard (1972), "The Ubiquitous Appearance of Im-
ages," in The Function and Nature of Imagery, ed. Peter
Sheehan. New York: Academic Press. 311-331.
Drummond. Peter, Ken White, and Rod Ashton (1978).
"Imagerv' Vividness and Habituation Rate," Fsycho-
phvsiolo'gy. 15 (May), 193-195.
Durndell, A.J. and N.E. Wetherick (1976), "The Relation of
Reported Imagery to Cognitive Performance." British
Journal of Psychology, 67,501 -506.
Edell, Julie A. and Richard Staelin (1983), "The Information
Processing of Pictures in Print Advertisements," Journal
of Consumer Research, 10 (June), 45-61.
Einhorn, Hillel J. and Robin M. Hogarth (1984), "Probable
Cause: A Decision Making Framework," unpublished
paper. University of Chicago, Graduate School of Busi-
ness, Center for Decision Research.
Engel, James F. and Roger D. Blackwell (1982), Consumer
Behavior, New York: Dryden.
Ernest, Carole (1977), "Irhagery Ability and Cognition: A
Critical Review," Journal of Mental Imagery, 1. 181-
216.
Finke, Ronald A. (1980), "Levels of Equivalence in Imagery
and Perception," Psychological Review. 87 (March), 113-
132.
Fischhoff, Baruch (1985), "Judging Unlikely Conjunctions."
working paper. Decision Research Institute, Eugene.
Oregon.
Fiske, Susan T. (1982), "Schema-Triggered Affect: Applica-
tions to Social Perception," in Affect and Cognition, the
Seventeenth Annual Carnegie Symposium on Cognition.
eds. Margaret Sydt»or Clark and Susati T. Fiske. Hillsdale.
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 55-77.
Fodor, Jerry A. (1981), "Imagistic Representation," in Im-
agerv, ed. Ned Block, Cambridge. MA: MIT Press, 63-
86. •
Ford, Gary T. and Ruth Ann Smith (1985), "Inferential Beliefs
In Consumer Evaluations: An Assessment of Alternative
Processing Strategies," working paper, American Uni-
versity.
Giambra, Leonard M. (1977), "A Factor Analytic Study of
Daydreaming, Imaginal Processes and Temperament: A
Replication on an Adult Male Life-Span Sample," Jour-
nal of Gerontology. 32, 675-680.
Gordon. Rosemary (1949), "An Investigation into Some of
the Factors that Favour the Formation of Stereotyped
Images." British Journal of Psychology. 39, 156-167.
Greenwald. Anthony G. (1968), "Cognitive Learning. Cog-
nitive Response to Persuasion and Attitude Change," in
Psychological Foundations of Attitudes, eds. Anthony
Greehwald, Timothy C. Brock, and Timothy C. Ostrom.
New York: Academic Press.
and Clark Leavitt (1984), "Audience Involvement in
Advertising: Four Levels." Journal of Consumer Re-
search. 11 (June), 581-592.
Gregory, W. Larry, Robert B. Cialdini, and Kathleen M. Car-
penter (1982), "Self-relevant Scenarios as Mediators of
Likelihood Estimates and Compliance: Does Imagining
Make It So?" Journal of Personality and Social P.u-
chology, 43, 89-99.
Grether, David and Louis Wilde (1984), "An Analysis of
Conjunctive Choice: Theory and Experiments," Journal
of Consumer Research. 10(4), 373-385.
Grossberg, John M. and Helen F. Wilson (1968). "Physio-
logical Changes Accompanying the Visualization of
Fearful and Neutral Situations," Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 10, 124-13 3.
Hilgard, Ernest R. (1981). "Imagery and Imagination in
American Psychology." Journal of Mental tmagery. 5.
5-19.
Hilgard, Josephine R. (1978), Hypnosis: A Study of I magi-

----- Page 17 (native) -----
IMAGERY PROCESSING
489
native Involvement, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Hirschman, Elizabeth C. (1980), "Innovativeness, Novelty
Seeking, and Consumer Creativity," Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 1 (December), 283-295.
and Morris B. Holbrook (1982), "Hedonic Con-
sumption: Emerging Concepts, Methods, and Proposi-
tions," Journal of Marketing, 46 (Summer), 92-101.
Hoch, Stephen J. (1984), "Availability and Interference in
Predictive Judgment," Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 10 (4), 649-
662.
Holbrook, Morris B., Robert W. Chestnut, Terence A. Oliva,
and Eric A. Greenleaf (1984), "Play as a Consumption
Experience: The Roles of Emotions, Performance, and
Personality in the Enjoyment of Games," Journal of
Consumer Research. 11 (September), 728-739.
and Elizabeth C. Hirschman (1982), "The Experiential
Aspects of Consumption: Consumer Fantasies, Feelings,
and Fun," Journal of Consumer Research, 9 (September),
132-140.
and William L. Moore (1981a), "Cue Configurality
in Esthetic Responses," in Symbolic Consumer Behavior,
eds. Elizabeth C. Hirschman and Morris B. Holbrook,
Ann Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer Research. 16-
25.
and William L. Moore(1981b), "Feature Interactions
in Consumer Judgments of Verbal Versus Pictorial Pre-
sentations," Journal of Consumer Research, 8 (June),
103-113.
Huba, G.J., J.L. Singer, C.S. Aneshensel, and J.S. Antrobus
(1982), Short Imaginat Processes Inventory, Port Huron,
MI: Research Psychologists Press.
Huber, Joel and John McCann (1982), "The Impact of In-
ferential Beliefs on Product Evaluations." Journal of
Marketing Research, 10 (August). 324-333.
Johnson, Eric J. and J. Edward Russo (1980), "Product Fa-
miliarity and Learning New Information," in .Advances
in Consumer Research, Vol. 8. ed. Kent B. Monroe. .Ann
Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer Research. 151-
155.
Kahneman, Daniel R. and Amos Tversky (1982), "The Sim-
ulation Heuristic," in Judgments Under Uncertainty:
Heuristics and Biases, eds. Daniel R. Kahneman, Paul
Slovic, and Amos Tversky, New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 201-208.
Kieras, David (1978), "Beyond Pictures and Words: Alter-
native Information Processing Models for Imagery Effects
in Verbal Memory," Psychological Bulletin, 85,532-554.
Kisielius, Jolita and Brian Sternthal (1984), "Detecting and
Explaining Vividness Effects in Attitudinal Judgments."
Journal of Marketing Research, 21 (February), 54-64.
Klinger, Eric (1977), Meaning and Void: Inner Experience
and the Incentives in Peoptes' Lives. Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
(1978), "Modes of Normal Conscious Flow," In The
Stream of Consciousness: Scientific Investigations Into
the Flow of Human Experience, eds. Kenneth Pope and
Jerome Singer, New York: Plenum, 225-258.
Kolers, PaulA. (1983), "Perception and Representation,"
Annual Review of Psychology. 34, 129-166.
Kosslyn. Stephen M. (1975), "Information Representation in
Visual Images," Cognitive Psychology. 7, 341-370.
(1981), "The Medium atid the Message in Mental
Imagery: A Theory," Psvchological Review, 88 (January),
46-66.
, Steven Pinker, George E. Smith, and Steven Shwartz
(1981), "On Demystification of Mental Imagery," in
Imagery, ed. Ned Block, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
131-150.
and James R. Pomerantz (1977), "Imagery, Propo-
sitions and the Form of Internal Representations," Cog-
nitive Psychology, 9, 52-76.
, Brian Reiser, Martha Farah, and Sharon Fliegel
(1983), "Generating Visual Images: Units and Rela-
tions," Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 112
(2), 278-303.
Kunzendorf, Robert G. (1981), "Individual Differences in
Imagery and Autonomic Control," Journat of Mental
Imagery. 5 (Fall), 47-60.
(1982), "Mental Images, Appreciation of Grammatical
Patterns and Creativity," Journal of Mental Imagery. 6.
183-202.
Lang, Peter J. (1977), "Imagery in Therapy: An Information
Processing Analysis of Fear," Behavior Therapy, 8, 862-
886.
(1979), "A Bio-Informational Theory of Emotional
j',"' Psychophysiology, 16 (6), 495-512.
Ley. Robert G. (1983), "Cerebral Laterality and Imager\,"
in Imagery: Current Theory. Research and .Application.
ed. Aness Sheikh, New York: John Wiley, 252-287.
Likert, Rensis and Howard W. Quasha (1970), Revised Min-
nesota Paper Form Board Test. New York: The Psycho-
logical Corporation.
Lindauer, Martin S. (1972), "The Sensory Attributes and
Functionsof Imagery and Imagery Evoking Stimuli." in
The Function and Nature of Imagery, ed. Peter Sheehan.
New York: Academic Press, 132-148.
(1983). "Imagery' and the Arts." in Imagery: Current
Theory. Research and .Application, ed. Aness Sheikh. New
York: John Wiley, 468-506.
Lingle, John H. and Thomas Ostrom (1979), "Retrieval Se-
lectivity in Memory-Based Impression Judgments."
Journal of Personality 
and Social Psvclwlogv. 
37 (2).
180-194.
Loken, Barbara and Ronald Hoverstad (1985), "Relationships
Between Information Recall and Subsequent Attitudes:
Some Exploratory Findings," Journal of Consumer Re-
search. 12 (September), 155-168.
Lussier, Denis A. and Richard W. Olshavsky (1979), "Task
Complexity and Contingent 
Processing in Brand
Choice," Journal of Consumer Research, 6 (September),
154-165.
Lutz, Kathryn A. and Richard J. Lutz (1977), "The Effects
of Interactive Imagery and Learning: Application to Ad-
vertising," Journal of"Applied Psychology. 62, 493-498.
and Richard J. Lutz (1978), "Imagery-Eliciting Strat-
egies: Review and Implications of Research," in Advances
in Consumer Research. Vol. 5, ed. H. Keith Hunt, Ann
Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer Research, 611-
620.
Malhotra, Naresh K. (1982), "Information Load and Con-
sumer Decision Making." Journat of Consumer Re-
search, S (March). 
4\9-430.
Marks, David F. (1972), "Individual Differences in the Viv-
idness of Visual Imager)' and Their Effects on Function,"

----- Page 18 (native) -----
490
THE JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
in The Function and Nature of Imagery, ed. Peter S.
Sheehan, New York: Academic Press, 83-107.
(1973), "Visual Imagery Differences in the Recall of
Pictures," British Journal of Psychology, 64 (1), 17-24.
McMahon, C.E. (1973), "Images as Motives and Motivators:
A Historical Perspective," Journal of Psychology, 86 (3),
465-490.
Mervis, Carolyn B., and Eleanor Rosch (1981), "Categori-
zation of Natural Objects," Annual Review of Psychology,
32,89-115.
Meyer, Robert J. (1981), "A Model of Multiattribute Judg-
ments Under Attriljute Uncertainty and Informational
Constraint." Journal of Marketing Research, 18 (No-
vember). 428-441.
(1982). "A Descriptive Model of Consumer Infor-
mation Search Behavior," .A/a/-A:e//ng SdeMCf, 1 (Winter),
93-121.
.Miller, George A., Eugene Galanter, and Karl H. Pribram
(1960). Plans and the Structure of Behavior. New York:
Holt, Rinehart, & Winston.
Mischel, Walter (1974), "Processes in Delay of Gratification,"
in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology. Vol. 7,
ed. L. Berkowitz, New York: Academic Press. 238-292.
and Bert Moore (1973), "Effects of Attention to Sym-
bolically Presented Rewards on Self-Control," Journat
of'Personatity and Social Psychology 28, 172-179.
Miichell. Andrew A. (1981). "The Dimensions of Advertising
Involvement," in Advances in Consumer Research. Vol.
8, ed. Kent B. Monroe, Ann Arbor. Ml: Association for
Consumer Research, 25-30.
Mowen. John C. (1980), "The Availability Heuristic: The Ef-
fect oflmagining the Use of a Product on Intentions to
Purchase," unpublished paper. University of Oklahoma.
.Nelson. Douglas L.. Valerie S. Reed, and Cathy L. McEnvoy
(1977), "Learning to Order Pictures and Words: .\ Model
of Sensory and Semantic Encoding." Journal of Exper-
imental Psvchology: Human Learning and Memory. 3
(5). 485-497.
Olson. Jerry C. and Aydin Muderrisoglu (1979), "The Stability
of Responses Obtained by Free Elicitation: Implications
for Measuring Attribute Salience and Memory Struc-
ture." in .Advances in Consumer Research. Vol. 6. ed.
William L. Wilkie, Ann Arbor, Ml: Association forCon-
sumer Research, 269-275.
^. Daniel R. Toy, and Phillip A. Dover (1982). "Do
Cognitive Responses Mediate the Effectiveness of Ad-
vertising Content on Cognitive Structure?" Journal of
Consumer Research. 9 (December), 245-262.
O"Neal, Edgar (1974), "Influence of Future Choice Impor-
tance and .\rousal Upon the Halo Effect," in Thought
and Feeling, eds. Harvey London and Richard Nisbett.
Chicago. IL: Aldine, 27-43.
Paivio, Allen (1969), "Mental Imagery and Associative
Learning and Memory," Psvchological Review. 76 (May),
241-263.
(1971), Imagery and Verbal Processes, New ^'ork:
Holt, Rinehart, & Winston.
(1975), "Perceptual Comparisons Through the Mind's
Eye," Memory and Cognition, 3 (6), 635-647.
and K. Csapo (1973). "Picture Superiority in Free
Recall: Imagery or Dual Coding," Cognitive Psvchologv,
5,176-206.
and Dennis Foth (1970), "Imaginal and Verbal Me-
diators and Noun Concreteness in Paired Associate
Learning: The Elusive Interaction," Journal of Verbal
Learning and Behavior, 9, 384-390.
-, John C. Yuille, and Stephen A. Madigan (1968),
"Concreteness, Imageo' and Meaningfulness Values for
925 Nouns," Journal of Experimental Psychology, 76,
1-25.
Park. C. Whan and V. Parker Lessig (1981), "Familiarity and
its Impact on Consumer Decision Biases and Heuristics,"
Journal of Consumer Research, 8 (September). 223-230.
and Banwari Mittal (1985). "A Theory of Involvement
in Consumer Behavior: Problems and Issues." in Re-
search in Consumer Behavior, Vol. 1, ed. Jagdish N.
Sheth, Greenwich. CT: JAI Press, 201-231.
Perky, C.W. (1910), "An Experimental Study of Imagina-
tion," Journal of Psychology, 
21, 422-425.
Petty. Richard E. and John Cacioppo (1983). Attitudes and
Persuasion: Classic and Contemporary .Approaches, Du-
buque. IA: William C. Brown.
Piaget. Jean and Barbel Inhelder (1973). .Memory and Intel-
ligence, New York: Basic Books.
Pinker. Steven and Stephen M. Kosslyn (1983), "Theories of
Mental Imagery," in Imagery: Current Theory. Research
and Application, ed. Aness Sheikh, New York: John
Wiley, 43-71.
Pylyshyn. Zenon W. (1973). "What the Mind's Eye Tells the
Mind's Brain: A Critique of Mental Imagery," Psycho-
logical Bulletin. 
80(1). 1-22.
(1981). "The Imagery Debate: Analogue Media vs.
Tacit Knowledge," Psychological Review. 85 (1), 16-45.
Rethans, Arno and Manoj Hastak (1981), "Representations
of Product Hazards in Consumer Memory," Working
Paper #116. Pennsylvania State University.
Richardson, Alan (1969), .Mental Imagery. London: Rout-
ledge and Kegan Paul.
(1977). "Verbalizer. Visualizer: A Cognitive Style Di-
mension." Journal of .Menial Imagery. 1. 109-125.
• (1983). "Imagery: Definition and Types." in Imagery-
Current Theory. Research and .Application, ed. .^ncss
Sheikh. New York: John Wiley, 3-42.
Richardson. John T. (1980). "Concreteness. Imagery, and
Semantic Categorization." Journal of .Menial tmagery.
4.51-58.
Rosch. Eleanor (1978). "Principles of Categorization." in
Cognition and Categorization, eds. Eleanor Rosch and
Barbara L. Lloyd. Hillsdale. NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rossi. Joseph S. (1977). "Reliability of a Measure of Visual
Imagery." Perceptual and .Motor Skills. 45. 694.
Rossiter, John R. (1982), "Visual Imagery: Applications to
Advertising," in .Advances in Consumer Research, ed.
Andrew A. Mitchell, Ann Arbor, MI: Association for
Consumer Research, 101-106.
and Larry Percy (1978). "Visual Imagining Ability as
a Mediator of Advertising Response," in Advances in
Consumer Research, Vol. 5. ed. H. Keith Hunt. Ann
Arbor, Ml: Association for Consumer Research, 621-
629.
and Larry Percy (1983). "Visual Communication in
.^dvertising," in Information Processing Research in Ad-
vertising, ed. Richard J. Harris. Hillsdale. NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum, 83-126.
Sarbin. Theodore R. (1972), "Imagining as Muted Role-Tak-
ing: A Historical Linguistic Analysis," in The Function

----- Page 19 (native) -----
IMAGERY PROCESSING
491
and Nature of Imagery, ed. Peter Sheehan, New York:
Academic Press, 333-354.
Shaw, William A. (1940), "The Relation of Muscular Action
Potentials to Imaginal Weight Lifting," Archives of Psy-
chology, 247, 50.
Sheehan, Peter (1967), "A Shortened Form of Betts' Ques-
tionnaire Upon Mental Imagery," Journal of Clinical
Psychology. 23, 386-389.
(1972), "A Functional Analysis ofthe Role of Visual
Imagery in Unexpected Recall," in The Function and
Nature of Imagery, ed. Peter Sheehan, New York: Aca-
demic Press. 149-174.
, R. Ashton, and K. White (1983), "Assessment of
Mental Imagery," in Imagery: Current Theory, Research
and Application, ed. Aness Sheikh, New 'i'ork: John
Wiley, 189-221.
and Ulric Neisser (1969), "Some Variables Affecting
the Vividness of Imagery in Recall," British Journal of
Psychotogy, 60,1 
\-S0.
Shepard, Roger N. (1967), "Recognition Memory for Words.
Sentences and Pictures," Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 6, 156-163.
(1978), "The Mental Image,".^mer/ran Psychologist,
33 (February), 125-137.
and J. Meltzer (1971), "Mental Rotation of Three
Dimensional Objects," Science. 171, 701-703.
Sherman, Steven J., R.B. Cialdini, D.F. Schwartzman, and
K.D. Reynolds (1984), "Imagining Can Heighten Or
Lower the Perceived Likelihood of Contracting a Dis-
ease," unpublished working paper, Arizona State Uni-
versity.
, Richard B. Skov, Esther F. Hervitz, and Caryl B.
Stock (1981), "The Effects of Explaining Hypothetical
Future Events: From Possibility to Probability to Ac-
tuality and Beyond," Journal of Experimental 
Social
Psychology 17, 142-158.
-. Kim S. Zehmer, James Johnson, and Edward R. Hirt
(1983), "Social Explanation: The Role of Timing. Set
and Recall on Subjective Likelihood Estimates," Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology. 44, 1127-1143.
Simon, Herbert .\. (1978), "What the Knower Knows: Al-
ternative Strategies For Problem Solving Tasks," in Hu-
man and Artificial Intelligence, ed. F. Klix, Berlin: VEB
Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften, 89-100.
and John R. Hayes (1976), "The Understanding Pro-
cess: Problem Isomorphs," Cognitive Psvchotogv. 8, 165-
190.
Singer. Jerome (1978). "Experimental Studies of Daydream-
ing and the Stream of Thought," in The Streani of Con-
sciousness: Scientific Investigations into the Flow of Hu-
man Experience, eds. Kenneth Pope and Jerome Singer,
New York: Plenum.
and John Antrobus (1963), "Imaginal Process Inven-
tory," Perceptual and Motor Skills, Monograph Supple-
ment, 17(3), 187-209.
and John Antrobus (1972), "Daydreaming, Imaginal
Processes and Personality: A Normative Study," in The
Function and Nature of Imagery, ed. Peter Sheehan, New
York: Academic Press, 174-232.
Smith, Ruth Ann, Michael J. Houston, and Terry L. Childers
(1984), "Verbal vs. Visual Processing Modes: An Em-
pirical Test of the Cyclical Processing Hypothesis," in
Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 11, ed. Thomas
Kinnear, Ann Arbor, MI: Association forConsumer Re-
search, 75-80.
Staats, Arthur W. and Jeffrey M. Lohr (1979), "Images, Lan-
guage, Emotions and Personality: Social Behaviorism's
Theory," Journal of Mental Imagery, 3, 85-106.
Swann, William B. and Lynn C. Miller (1982), "Why Never
Forgetting a Face Matters: Visual Imagery and Social
Memory," Journal of Personality and Social Psvchologv,
41 (3), 475-480.
Swasy, John L. and James M. Munch (1985), "Examining
Target Receiver Elaborations: Rhetorical Question Ef-
fects on Source Processing and Persuasion," Journal of
Consumer Research, 11 (March), 877-886.
Thurstone, L.L. (1938), "Primary Mental Abilities," P.'iy-
chometrika. Monographs No. 1.
Tushup, Richard J. and Marvin Zuckerman (1977), "The Ef-
fects of Stimulus Invariance on Daydreaming and Di-
vergent Thinking," Journal of .Mental Imagery, 2, 291-
302.
Tversky. Amos and Daniel Kahneman (1983), "Extensional
Versus Intuitive Reasoning: The Conjunction Fallacy."
Psychological Review. 90. 293-315.
Wallendorf. Melanie (1984). personal communication.
Wallsten, Thomas S. and David V. Budescu (1983), "Encod-
ing Subjective Probabilities: A Psychological and Psy-
chometric Analysis," Management Science. 29 (2), 151-
173.
Ha// Street Journal (1984), "Coca-Cola Turns to Pavlov
. . . ," January 19. p. 31.
Westcott. Thomas B. and Edward Rosenstock (1976), "Re-
liability of Two Measures of Imagery," Perceptual and
.Motor Skills. 2. 245-252.
Wollman. Neil J. (1981). "The Employment of Imagery to
Study Social Psychological Phenomena." Journat of
.Mental Imagery, 5, 137-142.
Wolpe. Jerome (1958), Psychotherapy by Reciprocal Inhibi-
tion, Stanford CA: Stanford University Press.
Wright, Peter (1974), "The Harassed Decision Maker: Time
Pressures, Distraction, and the Use of Evidence," Journal
of .Applied Psychotogy 59, 555-561.
(1980), "Message-Evoked Thoughts: Persuasion Re-
search Using Thought Verbalizations," Journal of Con-
sumer Research. 7 (September), 151-175.
and Peter Rip (1980), "Product Class Advertising Ef-
fects on First-Time Buyers' Decision Strategies." Journal
of Consumer Research. 1 (September), 176-188.
Yalch, Richard F. and Rebecca Elmore Yalch (1984). "The
Effect of Numbers on the Route to Persuasion," Journal
of Consumer Research, 11 (June), 522-527.
Yates, Frances A. (1966), The Art of Memory. London: Rout-
ledge and Kegan Paul.
Yuille, John C. and Michael J. Catchpole (1977), "The Role
of Imagery in Models of Cognition," Journal of Mental
Imagery, 1, 171-180.

----- Page 20 (ocr) -----
Copyright of Journal of Consumer Research is the property of Journal of Consumer Research, Inc.
and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the
copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email
articles for individual use.