

----- Page 1 (native) -----
1 
 
Spirituality and Performance in Organizations:  A Literature Review 
 
 
Dr. Fahri Karakas 
Research Fellow 
The Open University, Business School 
IMPEL (International Management Practice, Education, and Learning) Centre 
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes MK7 6AA 
United Kingdom 
Tel: +44 (0) 1908 655 888 - ext. 58068

----- Page 2 (native) -----
2 
Spirituality and Performance in Organizations:  A Literature Review 
 
Abstract: 
The purpose of this paper is to review spirituality at work literature and to explore how 
spirituality improves employees’ performances and organizational effectiveness.  The paper 
reviews about 140 papers on workplace spirituality to review their findings on how 
spirituality supports organizational performance.  Three different perspectives are introduced 
on how spirituality benefits employees and supports organizational performance based on the 
extant literature: a) Spirituality enhances employee well-being and quality of life; b) 
Spirituality provides employees a sense of purpose and meaning at work; c) Spirituality 
provides employees a sense of interconnectedness and community.  The paper introduces 
potential benefits and caveats of bringing spirituality into the workplace; providing 
recommendations and suggestions for practitioners to incorporate spirituality positively in 
organizations.   
 
Key words:   Spirituality at work, performance, organizations, human resources, well-being, 
benefits, caveats, review   
Paper type:  Literature review

----- Page 3 (native) -----
3 
A new paradigm in organizations:  Spirituality movement 
The purpose of this paper is to review spirituality at work literature and to explore how 
spirituality improves employees’ performances and organizational effectiveness.  The paper 
reviews about 140 papers on workplace spirituality to review their findings on how 
spirituality supports organizational performance.  Three different perspectives are introduced 
on how spirituality benefits employees and supports organizational performance based on the 
extant literature.  The paper also introduces four potential caveats of bringing spirituality into 
the workplace; and provides recommendations for practitioners to incorporate spirituality 
positively in organizations.   
A number of scholars mention a paradigm shift in organizational sciences, management 
theory and practice in the past two decades (Capra, 1996; Giacalone and Dafna, 2000; 
Harman and Hormann, 1990; Ray and Rinzler, 1993; Wheatley, 1992).  It seems this 
paradigm shift is complex and includes multiple dimensions such as moving from a 
predictable outlook to chaos (Gleick, 1987), from command and control or fear-based 
approaches to trust and empowerment (Conger and Kanungo, 1988), from simplicity to 
complexity (Lewin, 1992), from transactional leadership to transformational leadership 
(House and Shamir, 1993), and from closed systems to complex adaptive systems (Dooley, 
1997).  These changes in management include a shift from an economic focus to a balance of 
profits, quality of life, spirituality, and social responsibility concerns (Walsh, Weber, and 
Margolis, 2003; DeFoore and Renesch, 1995), a shift from self-centeredness to 
interconnectedness (Capra, 1993), a shift from self-interest to service and stewardship 
(Block, 1993; Neck and Milliman, 1994), and a change from materialistic to a spiritual

----- Page 4 (native) -----
4 
orientation (Fox, 1994; Neal, 1997,  DeFoore and Renesch, 1995).   In line with this 
paradigm shift, we have witnessed that organizations and managers have been discovering 
and experimenting with new ways and methods to help employees balance work and family, 
such as flexible work arrangements (Gottlieb, Kelloway, and Barham, 1998) and 
telecommuting (Kugelmass, 1995). In relation to these practices, organizations in North 
America have been increasing their focus on strategies of empowerment (Byman, 1991; 
Conger and Kanungo, 1988) to enable and increase employee involvement and participation 
(Hyman and Mason, 1995; Cotton, 1993). These innovations and new ways of working aim 
to be mind-enriching, heart-fulfilling, and spirit-growing for employees and still be 
financially rewarding at the same time.  
This new paradigm that is emerging in organizations has also been called as “the spirituality 
movement”. Ashmos and Duchon (2000) have described the spirituality movement as “a 
major transformation” (p. 134) where organizations make room for the spiritual dimension, 
which has to do with meaning, purpose, and a sense of community. This new spiritual 
dimension embodies employees’ search for simplicity, meaning, self-expression, and 
interconnectedness to something higher (Marques, Dhiman, and King, 2007).  This paper will 
contribute to the spirituality at work literature by inquiring its benefits for employees and its 
relationship with organizational performance. To start doing this, it would be useful to 
review the growing interest in spirituality at work literature and the definitions of spirituality.   
Over the last decade, scholars report a steady increase of interest in spirituality at work issues 
among management researchers and practitioners in North America (Cavanagh, 1999; 
Giacalone and Jurkiewicz, 2003b; Ashmos and Duchon, 2000, Tischler, 1999).  Howard

----- Page 5 (native) -----
5 
(2002) argues the “explosion of interest in spirituality as a new dimension of 
management…probably the most significant trend in management since the 1950s.” (p. 230).  
Wagner-Marsh and Conley (1999) suggested that there has been “an organizational fourth 
wave”, referring to an aftermath of Toffler’s (1980) technological third wave and they called 
this “the spiritually based firm” (p.292).   
The growing interest in workplace spirituality is also evident in bookstores, virtual 
bookstores and the recent spirituality books on the issue. A search on spirituality and 
business on Google Book yields around 2990 results, while the same search on Amazon.com 
gives more than 3140 book titles; though not all results are directly related to the core issue 
(October, 2008).  Some of these books on spirituality at work or spirituality and leadership 
have been among the best sellers, such as A Spiritual Audit of Corporate America (Mitroff 
and Denton, 1999b), Liberating the Corporate Soul (Barrett, 1998), Spirit at Work (Conger, 
1994), The Soul of a Business: Managing for Profit and the Common Good (Chappell, 1993), 
Leading with Soul (Bolman and Deal, 1995) and The Heart Aroused: Poetry and 
Preservation of the Soul in Corporate America (Whyte, 1994).   
Finally, the growing interest in spirituality is evident in corporations, corporate meeting 
rooms, and the business world as well. For example, a growing numbers of organizations, 
including large corporations such as Intel, Coca-Cola, Boeing, and Sears, are reported to 
have incorporated spirituality in their workplaces, strategies, or cultures (Burack, 1999; Konz 
and Ryan, 1999, Wagner-Marsh, and Conley, 1999; Gogoi, 2005).  Some spiritual practices 
include holding Bible, Quran, or Torah study groups; forming voluntary prayer groups; 
having “higher power lunches”; forming interfaith dialog groups; organizing reflection

----- Page 6 (native) -----
6 
sessions; offering meditation exercises; and starting servant leadership development 
programs.   
Some corporations incorporate spirituality into their strategies within the framework of 
corporate social responsibility.  For example, Anita Roddick, founder of the Body Shop, is 
committed to contributing to Glasgow through social responsibility projects aimed at solving 
the problems of high unemployment, crime rates and urban decay in the region.  She invests 
a quarter of net profits back to the community to ‘keep the soul of the company alive’.  Many 
companies that are grounded in spiritual values and principles also are committed to social 
responsibility and community service.  Another example is Tom’s of Maine, which gives 
away 10% of pre-tax profits to charities for common good and provides employees four paid 
hours a month to volunteer for community service.  These examples provide anecdotal 
evidence of how organizations can incorporate spirituality and social responsibility into their 
mission while still performing well.     
Although the literature and interest on spirituality at work is growing rapidly; there is 
confusion around how spirituality influences organizational performance.  The objective of 
this paper is to review current literature on spirituality at work and organizational 
performance; in order to explore how spirituality is related to organizational performance.  
The paper reviews the workplace spirituality literature to synthesize theoretical and empirical 
findings on how spirituality benefits employees and supports organizational performance.  
Three different perspectives are introduced on how spirituality supports organizational 
performance based on the extant literature: a) Spirituality enhances employee well-being and 
quality of life; b) Spirituality provides employees a sense of purpose and meaning at work; c)

----- Page 7 (native) -----
7 
Spirituality provides employees a sense of interconnectedness and community.  The paper 
introduces potential benefits and caveats of bringing spirituality into the workplace; 
providing recommendations and suggestions for practitioners to incorporate spirituality 
positively in organizations.   
Definitions of spirituality at work 
There are more than seventy definitions of spirituality at work, and still, there is no widely 
accepted definition of spirituality (Markow and Klenke, 2005). There are indeed many 
possible ways to define such a complex and diverse term as spirituality at work. For example, 
spirituality has been defined as our inner consciousness (Guillory, 2000), a specific form of 
work feeling that energizes action (Dehler and Welsh, 1994), “a process of self-
enlightenment” (Barnett, Krell, and Sendry, 1999, p. 563), “a worldview plus a path” 
(Cavanagh et. al., 2001, p. 6), “access to the sacred force that impels life” (Nash and 
McLennan, 2001, p. 17), and “the unique inner search for the fullest personal development 
through participation into transcendent mystery” (Delbecq, 1999, p.345).  In these 
definitions, spirituality is mostly described as an idiosyncratic, multifaceted, elusive concept; 
difficult to be captured in a common definition.  
Laabs (1995) points out that “defining spirituality in the workplace is like capturing an angel 
- it's ethereal and beautiful, but perplexing” (p.63). The term “spirituality” comes from the 
Latin word “spiritus” or “spiritualis” that means breathing, breath, air or wind (Merriam-
Webster).  Spiritus is defined as “an animating or vital principle held to give life to physical 
organisms” (Merriam-Webster).  This implies spirit is the life force that inhabits us when we 
are alive and breathing (Garcia-Zamor, 2003).  Scott (1994) offers a parallel definition for

----- Page 8 (native) -----
8 
spirit as “the vital principle or animating force within living beings; that which constitutes 
one's unseen intangible being; the real sense or significance of something” (p.64). 
Spirituality, as defined by Mitroff and Denton (1999a), is “the basic feeling of being 
connected with one’s complete self, others and the entire universe” (p.83).  As noted above; 
the fuzziness, ambiguity and the complexity of the construct makes spirituality a difficult 
research topic to investigate.  In this paper, spirituality is defined as the journey to find a 
sustainable, authentic, meaningful, holistic and profound understanding of the existential self 
and its relationship/interconnectedness with the sacred and the transcendent.  Spirituality is 
distinguished from institutionalized religion by being characterized as a private, inclusive, 
non-denominational, universal human feeling; rather than an adherence to the beliefs, rituals, 
or practices of a specific organized religious institution or tradition.  This distinction is 
important in the spirituality at work literature, as manifested by Mitroff and Denton’s (1999) 
study where 60 percent of the respondents had positive views of spirituality while negative 
views of religion. 
Spirituality and organizational performance 
Whether applying, enabling, or incorporating spirituality practices in organizations result in 
increase in productivity or profitability is a very complex and controversial issue.  Dent, 
Higgins, and Wharff (2005) review the controversies around the measurement and rigor 
issues of how spirituality and performance are related.  There are two opposite camps or 
positions regarding the inquiries on the relationship between spirituality and organizational 
performance.  On the one hand, some researchers view spirituality as anti-materialist (Lips-
Wiersma, 2003; Gibbons, 2000) and anti-positivist (Fornaciari, Lund Dean, and McGee, 
2003) by its nature and question positivist research methods on spirituality (see Fornaciari

----- Page 9 (native) -----
9 
and Lund Dean, 2001; Mitroff and Denton, 1999; Palmer, 1994; Fornaciari, Lund Dean, and 
McGee, 2003; Gibbons, 2000, Lips-Wiersma, 2003). These researchers argue that the anti-
materialist characteristic of spirituality may pose important challenges in the scientific 
investigation of its links to financial performance (Fornaciari and Lund Dean, 2001; Dent et. 
al, 2005; Fornaciari, Lund Dean, and McGee, 2003). Some researchers supporting this 
position point out to the fact that there may indeed be ethical pitfalls and moral concerns in 
the research question of whether enabling or incorporating spirituality at work results in 
better organizational performance or profitability (Dent, Higgins and Wharff, 2005; 
Fernando, 2005).  Other researchers also mention their concerns about spirituality being used 
as an administrative tool to manipulate employees (Brown, 2003; Fernando, 2005; Mirvis, 
1997; Cavanagh and Bandsuch, 2002). These scholars argue that spirituality should be seen 
as an end in itself and should not be used as a managerial tool for increasing financial 
performance in organizations (Fernando, 2005; Cavanagh and Bandsuch, 2002). Some 
scholars indeed express their reservations and urge caution on the potential abuses or misuses 
of spirituality at work (Brown, 2003; Mitroff and Denton, 1999; Jackson, 2000; Cavanagh 
and Bandsuch, 2002).   
On the other hand, some scholars argue that spirituality can be used to improve 
organizational performance (Ashmos and Duchon, 2000; Garcia-Zamor, 2003; Giacalone and 
Jurkiewicz, 2003a; Fry, 2005); and spirituality research should demonstrate spirituality’s 
links with productivity and profitability (Ashmos and Duchon, 2000; Giacalone, Jurkiewicz 
and Fry, 2005; Fry, 2005; Garcia-Zamor, 2003; Giacalone and Jurkiewicz, 2003a and 
2003b).  These researchers, such as Giacalone, Jurkiewicz and Fry (2005), make a call to 
spirituality at work researchers to empirically and rigorously demonstrate the positive effects

----- Page 10 (native) -----
10 
of spirituality on performance to prevent the marginalization of spirituality at work research. 
This position can be summarized as the strategy to empirically demonstrate positive effects 
and outcomes of spirituality in organizations. The basic aim is to make the area of spirituality 
at work research more legitimate and mainstream to organizational studies.   Indeed, it has 
been suggested that organizations that encourage spirituality experiences improved their 
organizational performance and profitability (Biberman and Whitty, 1997; Biberman et al., 
1999; Burack, 1999; Kriger and Hanson, 1999; Korac-Kakabadse, Kouzmin, and Kakabadse, 
2002; Neck and Milliman, 1994; Thompson, 2000). In the last decade, several research 
projects have been conducted that reported positive relationships between spirituality at work 
and organizational productivity and performance (Bierly, Kessler, and Christensen, 2000; 
Delbecq, 1999; Korac-Kakabadse and Korac-Kakabadse, 1997; Mitroff and Denton, 1999b). 
Additional research reveals that organizations that have voluntary spirituality programs have 
had higher profits and success (Dehler and Welsh, 1994; Mitroff and Denton, 1999b; Konz 
and Ryan, 1999; Turner, 1999).   
Therefore, there have been a lot of controversies and confusion regarding the role and 
legitimacy of “spirituality at work” and its relationship with organizational performance 
(Giacalone and Jurkiewicz, 2003).  Despite growing recognition of spirituality at work as a 
significant area of inquiry, research conducted in the intersection of spirituality and 
organizational performance has not been consolidated and systematically reviewed.  This 
review aims to contribute to the spirituality at work field by integrating three different 
perspectives on how spirituality enables or leads to organizational performance (Figure 1): 
 
a) Human resources perspective: Spirituality enhances employee well-being and 
 
quality of life;

----- Page 11 (native) -----
11 
 
b)  Philosophical perspective:  Spirituality provides employees a sense of purpose and 
meaning at work;  
 
c) Interpersonal perspective: Spirituality provides employees a sense of 
interconnectedness and community. 
 
Therefore, the paper introduces an integrative view of how spirituality at work benefits 
organizations through these three perspectives.  In particular, the paper notes and attempts to 
explain the general lack of cumulative work and the lack of synthesis of work across these 
three perspectives.  I contend that the interplay between these three perspectives can provide 
us a more comprehensive understanding of how spirituality leads to effectiveness and better 
performance in organizations.   
 
Figure 1: Three Perspectives of Spirituality and Performance 
 
 
 
 
SPIRITUALITY 
Employee Well-Being 
Sense of Meaning & Purpose 
Sense of Community & 
Interconnectedness 
Increased 
Productivity 
And 
Performance

----- Page 12 (native) -----
12 
Perspective 1:  Employee well-being  
First, I approach the issue from a Human Resources perspective, the perspective of employee 
well-being.  This includes individual level positive effects of spirituality; including subjective 
well-being, morale, and commitment.  This perspective purports that incorporating 
spirituality at work a) increases employees’ well-being by increasing their morale, 
commitment, and productivity; b) decreases employees’ stress, burnout, and workaholism in 
the workplace.   
Proposition 1:  Spirituality enhances the general well-being of employees:  
a) by increasing their morale, commitment and productivity 
b) by reducing stress, burnout and workaholism  
This perspective is particularly salient in today’s workplaces where employees spend most of 
their time in their lives.  Work sites have become the central pieces in our lives and the 
source of values in society (Fairholm, 1996, p.11). Workplaces are the places where people 
spend most of their lives, develop friendships, create value, and make their most meaningful 
contributions to society (Fairholm, 1996). The organizations where people spend most of 
their time become their most important community, their gemeinschaft.  Thus, work has 
meanings beyond the “nine-to-five” working hours; it is even becoming the cradle of 
meaning in modern knowledge society.  For some people, work and colleagues at work have 
even taken the place of family or social groups. Conger (1994) observes workplace has 
become the fountainhead of community for many people.  However, together with the 
increasing importance and centrality of work in people’s lives, associated problems also have 
increased such as stress, burnout and workaholism.

----- Page 13 (native) -----
13 
Several scholars including Rifkin (2004), and Gini (1998) argue that workaholism has 
become a serious and growing problem for many Americans. The average worker in the U.S. 
started to work 163 extra hours annually in 1987 compared to 1969 (Schor, 1991).  Recent 
research conducted by Galinsky et al. (2005) found 44 % of U.S. workforce experienced 
overwork in the last month in their workplaces.  Hard work and long hours can become 
unhealthy and dissatisfying for employees as they confuse meaning and their inner worth 
with external rewards, promotion, striving for mastery, and affluenza (p. 10-20, Burke, 
2006).  Stress caused by workaholism and long hours at work can result in loss of spirituality, 
chronic illnesses, pain, chronic fatigue, fear, and guilt (Killinger, 2006).  Cartwright and 
Cooper (1997) report that increasing stress in the workplace leads to higher absenteeism, 
lower productivity, and increased health compensation claims in the U.S.  The collective cost 
of stress for U.S. corporations have been estimated to be around $150 billion due to 
absenteeism, loss of productivity, health insurance and medical expenses (Karasek and 
Theorell, 1990).   
In addition to increasing workaholism, several additional factors are reported that increase 
uncertainty and stress at work in American workplaces. There have been many changes in 
work environments over the past decades that created a climate of uncertainty, chaos, and 
fear among employees (Cacioppe, 2000; Harman, 1992; Kennedy, 2001). Ethical scandals, 
corporate crimes, downsizing, layoffs, mergers and acquisitions, September 11, global terror, 
market crashes, financial crises, and global competition characterize a business environment 
full of turmoil and uncertainty (Neal, 2000, Biberman and Whitty, 1997; Giacalone & 
Jurkiewicz, 2003a, Cacioppe, 2000). There is evidence in the literature that downsizing and 
layoffs have decreased the morale and commitment of employees (Brandt, 1996; Giacalone

----- Page 14 (native) -----
14 
and Jurkiewicz, 2003a; Duxbury and Higgins, 2002). Neal (1999) argues that there is a 
“legitimized schizophrenia” in today’s workplaces, referring to the uneasy feeling of putting 
on masks, hypocrisy, artificiality, and playing to be successful. According to Neal (1999), 
legitimized schizophrenia leads to an artificial separation between work and life, which 
results in lower productivity and higher stress and burnout.   
Contemporary evidence supports the statement that many employees in today’s workplaces 
feel unappreciated, unconnected, lost and insecure in their jobs (Sparrow and Cooper, 2003; 
Meyer and Allen, 1997). Several researchers found that employees began to feel distanced, 
vulnerable, and cynical as a result of downsizing, restructuring, reengineering, delayering, 
layoffs, and other current changes in organizations (Sparrow and Cooper, 2003; Bartlett and 
Ghoshal, 1995, Meyer and Allen, 1997; Biberman and Whitty, 1997).  Barrett (2004) cites a 
recent survey of more than 800 mid-career executives, which reports that unhappiness and 
dissatisfaction with work is at a 40-year high. Some researchers report a steady decline of 
employee respect, trust, and confidence in management (Burack, 1999; Shaw, 1997).  Mitroff 
and Denton (1999b) argue that today’s organizations suffer from a deep spiritual emptiness 
and many of problems in organizations result from this spiritual impoverishment.  A growing 
number of managers and employees are reported to resort to meditation, reflection and 
spiritual practices; wellness programs, as well as fitness and sports exercises at work as a 
method of coping with stress and uncertainty at work (Dehler and Welsh, 1994; Cartwright 
and Cooper 1997).   
Research suggests that the development and expression of the spirit at work may indeed 
solve these problems of stress and burnout, as well as have beneficial consequences for the

----- Page 15 (native) -----
15 
well-being of employees.  Reave (2005) mentions the review of Emmons (1999, p. 876) that 
summarizes seven studies that have reported “a significant correlation between spirituality 
and mental health indices of life satisfaction, happiness, self esteem, hope and optimism, and 
meaning in life” (p. 667).  There is growing evidence in spirituality research that workplace 
spirituality programs result in positive individual level outcomes for employees such as 
increased joy, serenity, job satisfaction and commitment (Paloutzian, Emmons, and Keortge, 
2003; Kouzes and Posner, 1995; Burack, 1999; Reave, 2005; Giacalone & Jurkiewicz, 
2003a, Krishnakumar and Neck, 2002; Fry, 2003, 2005). There is also evidence that these 
programs improve organizational productivity and reduce absenteeism and turnover (Fry, 
2003, 2005; Giacalone and Jurkiewicz, 2003a).  Milliman, Czaplewski, and Ferguson (2003) 
found a positive correlation between workplace spirituality and employee attitudes such as 
commitment to the organization, intrinsic work satisfaction, and job involvement.   Neck and 
Milliman (1994) claim spirituality values have positive effects on both personal well-being 
and job performance.   
More employers today are encouraging spirituality in the workplace as a way to enhance 
employee morale, commitment and productivity.  Research suggests fostering spirituality and 
allowing free expression of spirituality at work enables employees to feel complete and 
authentic at work (Burack, 1999); which leads to a high degree of personal fulfillment and 
morale; and this in turn results in increased organizational performance (Turner, 1999).  
Bento (1994) reviewed research proposing that spiritually empowered employees are found 
to be more honest, courageous, and compassionate individuals and they can represent these 
characteristics on their job. Krishnakumar and Neck (2002) suggested that the 
encouragement of spirituality in the workplace can lead to benefits in the areas of creativity,

----- Page 16 (native) -----
16 
honesty, personal fulfillment, and commitment, which will ultimately lead to increased 
organizational performance.  Some forms of encouragement of spirituality in the workplace 
include organizing optional morning prayers or yoga sessions; designing multi-faith prayer 
spaces; starting corporate chaplaincies, or introducing spiritual wellness and balance 
programs for employees (Krishnakumar and Neck, 2002; Mitroff and Denton, 1999).    
Further research revealed trust is crucial in forming a sound basis for commitment (Kriger 
and Hanson, 1999) and spirituality increases commitment by establishing a climate of trust in 
the workplace (Burack, 1999).  
This body of work provides preliminary support for the argument that incorporating spiritual 
practices at work can indeed increases employees’ morale, commitment, and productivity; 
while decreasing their stress and burnout at work.   
Perspective 2:  Sense of meaning and purpose  
Second, I approach the issue from philosophical and existentialist perspective; which is 
connected to the concepts such as the search for meaning and purpose in what employees are 
doing at the workplace.  Providing a deeper sense of meaning and purpose for employees is 
important; as this enables employees to perform better and to be more productive and 
creative at work.  This perspective contends that incorporating spirituality at work provides 
employees and managers a deeper sense of meaning and purpose at work.   
 
Proposition 2:  Spirituality provides employees and managers a deeper sense of 
 
meaning and purpose at work.

----- Page 17 (native) -----
17 
This perspective is based on the argument that today’s workplaces have increasingly been 
emotionally and spiritually barren, devoid of deeper meaning and spirit.  Organizations of the 
industrial age have been centered on creating material wealth; putting economic goals and 
profitability before the social and public ones (Walsh, Weber and Margolis, 2003).  As profit 
maximization has become the main strategic objective and success is measured in financial 
measures such as sales, cash flow, and market share; the social, interpersonal, and spiritual 
functions and goals of organizational life have taken a back seat in today’s corporations 
(Walsh, Weber and Margolis, 2003; Hertz, 2002; Gull and Doh, 2004; Post, Preston, and 
Sachs, 2002). In most of today’s corporations, the central focus persists to be on observable, 
external, controllable, empirical, and materialistic outcomes or variables (Gull and Doh, 
2004); which led to the creation of “a world without depth” (p. 129; Gull and Doh, 2004) and 
the isolation of the soulful aspects of work life (Bolman and Deal, 1995).  In line with this 
argument, Gozdz (1995) contends that organizations that value positivism, reductionism, and 
empiricism may fall into the trap of denying the existence of spirit. The assumption that 
material wealth and success will automatically lead to individual and collective well being is 
starting to be questioned as people desire more meaning and quality of life at work (Cash and 
Gray, 2000; Gull and Doh, 2004; Laabs, 1995; Pratt and Ashforth, 2003; Wrzesniewski, 
2003). Moreover, a half century of ethical scandals and corporate crimes coupled with 
environmental degradation necessitate radical improvement in social, environmental, and 
ethical performance of companies (Frederick, 2006; Waddock, 2006).   
A large number of employees today often feel psychological isolation and alienation at work 
(Cavanagh, 1999; Harman, 1992; Bolman and Deal, 1995); as well as a vacuum and a lack of 
meaning in their work lives (Pratt and Ashforth, 2003; Cavanagh, 1999, Dehler and Welsh,

----- Page 18 (native) -----
18 
1994). Separating work, life, family, and spirit into compartments may rip authenticity off 
employees; leaving them feeling unfulfilled, stressed and alienated (Cavanagh, 1999; 
Fairholm, 1996).  Accordingly, the saliency of the search for meaning and the need for inner 
satisfaction for employees in today’s workplaces is foreseeable and well-documented in the 
literature (Cavanagh, 1999; Fairholm, 1996; Jacobson, 1995).  Fairholm (1996) cites Renesch 
(1995) reporting more than forty million people “searching for a more intrinsically valued 
lifestyle” in the U.S. (p. 11).  Similarly, Johnson (2004) reports 61% individuals think their 
workplaces would benefit from a greater sense of meaning and spirituality.  Oldenburg and 
Bandsuch (1997) interpret this trend as a longing in people's souls for deeper meaning, 
deeper connection, greater simplicity, a connection to something higher.  In a time of rising 
emphasis on business ethics and work life balance; corporations feel compelled to respond to 
the employee need for meaning at work (Cavanagh, 1999; Pratt and Ashforth, 2003; Gull and 
Doh, 2004; Cacioppe, 2000).   
Indeed, many employees in today’s workplaces are reported to question themselves and their 
work, ask themselves about the essence and meaning of their work, and search for a sense of 
purpose and meaning at work (Neal, 1997; Brandt, 1996; Cacioppe, 2000; Ashmos and 
Duchon, 2000; Konz and Ryan, 1999; Kouzes and Posner, 2003; Burack, 1999; Fairholm, 
1996). The following set of existential questions employees reflect on and ask themselves, 
introduced by Kouzes and Posner (2003), exemplify this search of meaning and purpose for 
employees (p. 69-70):   
 “What do I stand for? What do I believe in? Why? 
 What is the meaning of the work I am doing? Where does this lead me to?

----- Page 19 (native) -----
19 
 Is there a reason for my existence and the organization's? 
 What brings me suffering? What makes me weep and wail? Why? 
 What am I passionate about? Why? What keeps me awake at night? Why? 
 What do I want for my life? Why? What do I really care about? Why?” (p. 69-70) 
These questions can go deep in the heart of employees and have implications for employees’ 
careers, lives, needs, aspirations, passions, and spirituality.  Responding to the needs of 
employees for meaning at work is turning into a critical success factor for companies as 
employees’ quest for deeper meaning and fulfillment in their careers is intensified.  A 
number of researchers argue that workplace spirituality has the potential to provide 
employees a feeling of purpose, a sense of connection, and a sense of meaning at work 
(Giacalone and Jurkiewicz, 2003a; Brandt, 1996; Bolman and Deal, 1995). Lips-Wiersma 
(2002) associated spirituality with finding meaning and purpose in life and living in 
accordance with this meaning and deeply held beliefs (p. 385). Mitroff and Denton (1999a) 
found that organizations that have a stronger sense of spirituality enable employees to 
exercise stronger values and ethical beliefs in their workplace and empower them to show 
more creativity and flexibility at work. Moreover, Mitroff and Denton (1999a) found workers 
who can express their spirituality through their work actually find work more satisfying and 
meaningful and accordingly perform better. This is in line with Gull and Doh (2004); who 
propose that employees become more engaged and can work more responsibly, ethically, 
collaboratively, and creatively when they find meaning in their work activities.  Supporting 
employees to incorporate their spirituality and values into their work is also reported to be 
increasing their personal satisfaction and joy (Dehler and Welsh, 1994; Reave, 2005). Lips-
Wiersma (2002) argued that employees fully expressing their spirituality can benefit their

----- Page 20 (native) -----
20 
organizations through “creativity and intuition”, “increased empowerment”, “more cohesive 
vision and purpose”; and “enhanced team and community building” (p. 385).  Paloutzian, 
Emmons, and Keortge (2003) report that work takes on new meaning and significance when 
it is seen as a calling, a sacred duty, a service opportunity or a way to serve God, other 
deities, or a higher purpose.  When work is seen as a calling, it becomes more meaningful 
and this increases productivity and commitment of employees (Reave, 2005; Paloutzian et 
al., 2003).  All this research supports and shows how productivity and performance increases 
as a result of deeper meaning at work; as well as how spirituality at work can provide 
employees a sense of meaning and purpose.  The common pattern in all these work seem to 
be the fact that workers want to be recognized for who they are; as whole persons with spirit, 
heart, soul, passions, hopes, talents, aspirations, families, private lives, emotions, ups and 
downs, and diverse perspectives on matters.   
 
Perspective 3:  Sense of community and interconnectedness  
Third, I approach the topic from an interpersonal and community perspective, which is 
connected to the concepts of belonging, community, and connectedness.   This perspective is 
centered on the interpersonal relationships, collective dimensions, and social dynamics of 
spirituality.  This perspective contends that incorporating spirituality at work provides 
organizational members a sense of community and connectedness; thus increases their 
attachment, loyalty and belonging to the organization.

----- Page 21 (native) -----
21 
 
Proposition 3: Spirituality provides employees a sense of community and 
 
connectedness; increasing their attachment, loyalty and belonging to the 
 
organization. 
Providing employees a sense of community and connectedness is critical in today’s 
workplaces and corporations.  Current concerns about ethical scandals and violations, such as 
Enron and Arthur Andersen, have negative effects such as the elimination of trust and sense 
of community in corporations (Gull and Doh, 2004; Schroth & Elliot, 2002; Neal, 2000). 
Waddock (2006) argues corporate scandals have resulted from self-centeredness, greed, 
egoism, and selfish passion instead of caring for others. As a result of the failure of trust in 
institutions; employees are searching for a sense of community, high quality connections 
(Dutton and Heaphy, 2003) and compassion at work (Frost et al., 2006).  Because of the 
decline of local communities and social groups that establish a sense of connectedness 
(Conger, 1994) and the dissolution of traditional support systems such as the church and 
family (Leigh, 1997); workplaces have replaced them as primary sources of community for 
many people.  It is also known that employees are seeking ways and means to connect to 
each other and to be united in a common vision that goes beyond materialistic aims (Miller, 
1998). Moreover, in times of uncertainty; employees and managers face significant 
challenges and traumatic experiences in their lives; such as death, divorce, illnesses, and 
layoffs (Weiss, et al., 2001) which force them to reach out to their communities for support, 
guidance, and help. This makes the aspects of community and connectedness in spirituality 
experiences even more important in today’s organizations.

----- Page 22 (native) -----
22 
The conception of workplaces as human communities with social functions and societal 
benefits is taking ground and momentum in organizations (Walsh, Weber, and Margolis, 
2003; Milliman et. al., 1999) There has been an invitation of researchers to consider 
organizations as communities that produce significant social values and outcomes for society 
(Walsh, Weber, and Margolis, 2003; Frost, Dutton, Mailis, Lilius, Kanov, and Worline, 
2006).  This perspective stresses that organizations are not just machines for producing goods 
but also forms of human community that foster satisfying and meaningful life experiences for 
individuals, families, and society (Gull and Doh, 2004). This perspective has its roots in 
Human Relations movement and the humanistic discourses in organizational theory (e.g. 
McGregor, 1960; Mayo, 1946). In line with this community oriented perspective, Cash and 
Gray (2000) observe American corporations move toward a more value-expressive 
philosophy and tolerant culture responding to employees' requests for spiritual connection 
and sense of community. This transition toward the need for spirituality and connection is 
also evident in changing managerial perceptions and values in today’s corporations. For 
example, according to a study conducted by Ashar and Lane-Maher (2004), mid- and senior 
level executives did not describe success in materialistic terms (such as money or 
promotion), but instead used terms such as being connected, balance, and wholeness to 
define success. 
Feeling part of a community and sharing a common purpose are two dimensions that have 
been frequently associated with workplace spirituality (Milliman et al., 1999; Brown, 1992, 
Gozdz, 1993; Ray, 1992).  A sense of connection and interconnectedness to something larger 
than oneself (Brown, 1992) has also been considered an important part of spirit at work 
(Milliman et. al., 1999).  A good sense of community and connectedness becomes possible

----- Page 23 (native) -----
23 
through high quality connections at the workplace (Dutton and Heaphy, 2003). Milliman et 
al. (1999) conducted a case study of Southwest Airlines demonstrating how incorporation of 
spiritual values at work and tapping into the deeper levels of employee spirituality and 
motivation can nurture a genuine sense of community, spirit and affection in the workplace.  
In agreement with this finding, Chappell (1993) suggests shared values and a shared sense of 
purpose can turn a company into a community where daily work takes on a deeper meaning 
and inner satisfaction.   
Spirituality at work provides employees a sense of community and connectedness. The 
consequences of spiritual experiences at work are discussed in the literature including higher 
levels of employee attachment, loyalty and belonging (Milliman et. al., 1999; Fairholm, 
1996; Duchon and Plowman, 2005). Consequences of spiritual relationships include 
intimacy, wholeness, authenticity, altruism, and integrity (Kendall, 1994; Burack, 1999; 
Stiles, 1994). In the spirituality literature, spirituality is often linked to positive outcomes and 
benefits associated with the “sense of community”; such as unifying and building community 
(Cavanagh, Hanson, Hanson, and Hinojoso, 2001), serving the need for connecting to others 
at work (Khanna and Srinivas, 2000), and being the source of daily expressions of 
compassion, wisdom, and connectedness (Maxwell, 2003).  There is also considerable 
amount of research linking spirituality to consideration towards others at work (Milliman, 
Czaplewski, and Ferguson, 2003; and Milliman, Ferguson, Trickett, and Condemi, 1999; 
Burack, 1999).  The International Center for Spirit at Work considers this the “horizontal” 
component in spirituality; the desire to be of service to other people.  This “horizontal 
spirituality” is demonstrated by a service orientation and deep concern for others.  
Consideration toward others (showing concern) and high quality interpersonal work

----- Page 24 (native) -----
24 
relationships have been correlated in empirical studies with high worker job satisfaction, low 
turnover, group cohesion, group performance, and group efficiency (Bass, 1990, Champoux, 
2000).  
Examples of research presented above provide initial empirical support for the proposition 
that spirituality provides employees a sense of community and connectedness; in turn 
increases employee commitment, belonging, and effectiveness.   
This paper has been built on the assumption that there is indeed a possibility of transforming 
“barren workplaces” into “abundant workplaces” by incorporating spirituality positively into 
our workplaces.  Therefore, this paper has proposed three main perspectives inquiring into 
how spirituality benefits employees and organizations: a) Spirituality enhances employee 
well-being and quality of life; b) Spirituality provides employees a sense of purpose and 
meaning at work; c) Spirituality provides employees a sense of interconnectedness and 
community.  Table 1 outlines these perspectives below.  These three perspectives can provide 
HR practitioners and managers new ways to develop new human resources approaches 
incorporating spirituality at work.  The paper also underlines the importance of taking all 
three perspectives (human resources, philosophical, and interpersonal) into account while 
designing spirited workplaces of the 21st century; which are engaged with passion, alive with 
meaning, and connected with compassion.

----- Page 25 (native) -----
25 
Table 1: 
 
Three Perspectives on Benefits of Spirituality for Employees and Organizations 
 
 
 
Human Resources 
Perspective 
 
Philosophical 
Perspective 
 
 
Interpersonal 
Perspective 
 
Focus on 
developing 
employees’ 
well-being 
purpose and meaning 
community and 
connectedness 
The problem: 
Barren 
Workplaces 
Emotionally barren 
workplaces 
Spiritually barren 
workplaces 
Socially barren 
workplaces 
 
Main 
problems/ 
gaps/        
necessity 
Stress, burnout,  
Workhaholism 
Absenteeism 
Low morale & 
commitment 
“Lethargy” 
Excessive materialism 
Loss of meaning & 
depth 
Low fulfillment, joy, & 
creativity 
“Atrophy” 
Self-centeredness, 
greed & egoism 
Isolation 
Low cohesion & 
belonging 
Lack of social support 
“Entropy” 
The solution: 
Abundant 
Workplaces 
Emotionally abundant 
workplaces 
Spiritually abundant 
workplaces 
Socially abundant 
workplaces 
Positive 
outcomes of 
incorporating 
spirituality 
Increased morale & 
commitment 
Increased employee 
well-being 
Increased employee 
productivity 
Increased sense of 
meaning & purpose 
Increased fulfillment & 
job satisfaction 
Increased hope & 
creativity 
Increased reflection  
Increased sense of 
connectedness & 
community 
Increased attachment, 
loyalty, & belonging 
High quality 
connections 
Ideal benefits 
for employees  
Empowered, 
committed, passionate 
employees 
Highly aware, self-
reflective, creative 
employees 
Compassionate, 
steward, benevolent 
employees 
Spirited 
workplaces of 
the 21st 
century are 
Engaged with passion  
Alive with meaning 
Connected with 
compassion

----- Page 26 (native) -----
26 
Discussion:  Caveats and cautions 
This paper has reviewed the potential benefits of incorporating spirituality into our 
workplaces.  However, there are several limitations and challenges regarding the practices of 
spirituality at work that need to be mentioned.  This section will discuss and outline four of 
the most important potential dangers or caveats about bringing a spiritual perspective into 
workplaces (See Table 2).  There are four good reasons to be cautious while incorporating 
spirituality into the workplaces in the business world.   
The first major problem is the danger of proselytism. The main potential danger of spiritual 
expression at the workplace is the risk of proselytizing other people from diverse religions, 
spiritualities or views (Krishnakumar and Neck, 2002) and this danger is widely recognized 
and put forth in spirituality literature (Mitroff and Denton, 1999; Mirvis, 1997; Cavanagh, 
1999; Milliman, Czaplewski, and Ferguson, 2003; Krishnakumar and Neck, 2002; Burack, 
1999).  Using spiritual beliefs to exclude others undermines the requirement for respect and 
inclusiveness at work.  Scholars also mention documented cases of companies that 
proselytize employees using particular religious or spiritual doctrines (Mirvis, 1997). 
Associated with this risk are the concerns about people feeling dissatisfaction and frustration, 
not being able to express their own spirituality, not being respected for their diversity, and 
feeling being coerced (Krishnakumar and Neck, 2002; Cavanagh, 1999; Milliman et al. 2003; 
Brown, 2003). Indoctrination will lead to coercion and alienation on part of the employees 
subjected to this. Moreover, implementing generic common spiritual principles or practices 
may result in alienated, isolated or threatened people (Mirvis, 1997; Krishnakumar and Neck, 
2002).  There is also a danger when a specific community of individuals with similar

----- Page 27 (native) -----
27 
interests dictates their own agenda in an organization (Cavanagh and Bandsuch, 2002). The 
existence of destructive groups such as “Al Kaide” imposing their agenda based on terror and 
hate also harm the reputation and legitimacy of the issue of spirituality at work (Cavanagh 
and Bandsuch, 2002; Mirvis, 1997).  Shortly, spirituality issues, especially religious issues, 
can have divisive and harmful influences in the workplace if there is not absolute respect for 
diversity (Krishnakumar and Neck, 2002).  There are all kinds of human rights and equity 
issues here; including dangers of favoritism, intolerance or discrimination (Cavanagh, 1999; 
Mirvis, 1997; Milliman, Czaplewski, and Ferguson, 2003).   
The second major problem is the issue of compatibility. For some corporate cultures 
(especially those characterized by a materialistic and positivist philosophy), it may be a 
challenge to incorporate spirituality issues into the workplace (Mirvis, 1997; Cavanagh, et 
al., 2001). Mirvis (1997) characterizes these corporate cultures as “antithetical” to 
spirituality.  Mirvis (1997) also mentions a corporate tendency of separating “church and 
state”, “faith and reason”, “the spiritual and the secular” (p. 202); which makes perspectives 
and feelings about spirituality “undiscussable” in many organizations (p. 203; Mirvis, 1997). 
The argument that there might be legitimate resistance to open expressions of religion and 
spirituality at work is a valid one in today’s corporate environments (Brown, 2003; Mirvis, 
1997). Incorporating spirituality into work can disturb some managers who are trying to 
protect their power and status quo.  Moreover, some employees may perceive spiritual 
conversations “too personal”; invasive of their privacy and may feel under pressure (Mirvis, 
1997; Cavanagh, 1999).

----- Page 28 (native) -----
28 
The third major problem is the risk of spirituality becoming a fad or a being used as a 
management tool to manipulate employees. This risk is the most mentioned and articulated 
one in spirituality literature (Fernando, 2005; Cavanagh and Bandsuch, 2002; Gibbons, 2000; 
Brown, 2003; Cavanagh, 1999; Mitroff and Denton, 1999; Milliman, Czaplewski, and 
Ferguson, 2003) and it is a very justifiable concern as there are already visible signs of this in 
popular spirituality books, training programs and corporate practices.  The danger here is that 
spirituality may lose all its essence, beauty, and authenticity if it is misused as a management 
tool or a marketing device (Mirvis, 1997; Fernando, 2005; Gibbons, 2000).  Spirituality at 
work practices will have short life and validity if they are adopted as management fads or 
programs used to increase worker productivity (Cavanagh and Bandsuch, 2002; Mirvis, 
1997). Without a genuine commitment to the authenticity of spirituality for its own sake, 
these programs of spirituality may turn into just “management fad, with sinister undertones, 
which, when unmasked, is likely to prove ineffective and ephemeral” (p. 396; Brown, 2003).  
Fineman’s (2006) recent criticism of positive programs of “empowerment”, “fun”, 
“emotional intelligence” also applies to spirituality programs; as these programs may 
“stigmatize” or “alienate” employees who may not feel comfortable with them (p. 277-278).  
This critical discourse explaining how employees are manipulated, controlled or bought into 
management interests is important (Brown, 2003; Milliman, Czaplewski, and Ferguson, 
2003), because it shows how misuse of spirituality robs managers and employees of deeper 
meaning, authenticity, and integrity (Cavanagh and Bandsuch, 2002, Brown, 2003).   
The fourth major problem is the legitimacy problem spirituality at work field faces in theory, 
research and practice.  As an emerging field, spirituality at work topics are not yet well 
established in the scientific literature as well as in professional practice (Giacalone,

----- Page 29 (native) -----
29 
Jurkiewicz and Fry, 2005; Giacalone and Jurkiewicz, 2003a and 2003b).  There is great 
ambiguity and confusion about the concept, definition, meaning, and measurement of 
spirituality (Giacalone and Jurkiewicz, 2003a; Hicks, 2003; Ashmos and Duchon, 2004).  
There are still controversies around methodology, validity, rigor and measurement of 
spirituality at work (Kinjierski and Skrypnek, 2004; Giacalone and Jurkiewicz, 2003a). The 
growing body of literature on spirituality at work has been criticized for being atheoretical 
and ungrounded (Lund Dean, Fornaciari and McGee 2003), as well as lacking rigor 
(Gibbons, 2000), and enough theory (Dent et. al. 2005). Dent, Higgins and Wharff (2005) 
suggest that researchers must be rigorous in defining and differentiating spirituality to 
prevent a “conceptual fog” (Bateson, 1972).  Another related criticism to spirituality research 
is that of “artificiality” which results from the lack of integration with established world 
religions and traditions (Gibbons, 2000). Mitroff and Denton (1999b) also mention issues 
that result from linguistic complexities within spirituality research; pointing out to the 
inadequate language and tools of positivist inquiry and narrow-minded rationalism that 
prevent deep understanding of the issue.   
Table 2 outlines these four problems and lists four suggestions for practitioners for proper 
implementation of spirituality at work.  The paper concludes with these suggestions to 
achieve the successful integration of spirituality into workplaces.

----- Page 30 (native) -----
30 
Table 2: 
 
Major Problems and Suggestions for Incorporating  
Spirituality in Organizations 
 
Four Problems 
Four Suggestions 
 The danger of proselytism 
 The issue of compatibility 
 The risk of spirituality becoming a fad or a 
management tool to manipulate employees 
 The legitimacy problem the field of 
spirituality at work faces in theory, 
research and practice 
 Accommodation of spiritual requests 
 Respect for diversity  
 Openness and freedom of expression   
 Acknowledgement of employees as 
whole persons   
 
 
Conclusion 
How can organizations best buffer themselves from the potential caveats or concerns when 
they are incorporating spirituality into work environments? For many employees, religion 
and spirituality are central to their identities and important aspects of their lives (Hicks, 
2003). To achieve successful integration of spirituality at work, major concerns and caveats 
of bringing spirituality at work should be adequately addressed.  It is critical to proceed 
carefully in implementing spirituality programs and incorporating spirituality at work; as 
imposing spirituality and religion on employees would be counterproductive, alienating, and 
disastrous for some people.  The following suggestions can be used by practitioners to 
address the caveats and potential dangers of bringing in spirituality into the workplace:

----- Page 31 (native) -----
31 
Accommodation of spiritual requests:  Although organizations may not have any spiritual 
orientation, still managers should try to accommodate and encourage spiritual requests from 
its employees, as suggested by Cash and Gray (2000). Organizations should encourage their 
employees to feel free to express their own spiritual beliefs (see Krishnakumar and Neck’s 
(2000) “spiritual freedom model” for details). Moreover, managers should accommodate 
their spiritual requests of its employees irrespective of their different spiritual beliefs 
(Cavanagh, 1999). This means; as long as the spiritual requests of some employees do not 
limit the freedoms of others, managers should respond to them (Cavanagh, 1999).   
Respect for diversity:  In the post-September 11 era, the debates over religious conflict and 
tolerance have become global (Hicks, 2003). Moreover, workplaces of today are more 
diverse and multicultural than ever before. Therefore, it has become crucial to acknowledge 
diversity in the workplace and absolutely respect individual differences (Krishnakumar and 
Neck, 2002). Since spirituality is a highly individual and idiosyncratic experience, it is 
necessary that spirituality practices be customized based on the principle of respecting and 
valuing individual’s unique inner landscape, values, and perspective (Krishnakumar and 
Neck, 2002).  Promoting “one right path” or favoring a specific spiritual or religious 
framework will not work in these diverse work environments (Hicks, 2003). A culture of 
respect for diversity of beliefs and faiths should be cultivated in the workplace by enforcing 
codes of conduct as well as instilling values of tolerance and compassion (Milliman, 
Czaplewski, and Ferguson, 2003; Milliman et. al., 1999; Kouzes and Posner, 1995). Hicks 
(2003) offers a model of “respectful pluralism” for addressing conflicts arising from religious 
and spiritual differences at work. Hicks (2003) asserts that leaders should strive for creating a

----- Page 32 (native) -----
32 
respectful and tolerant environment where employees can freely express their own beliefs 
and thoughts on spirituality.  
Openness and freedom of expression:  Spirituality practices and policies should put openness 
and respect for diversity at the center of their focus (Thompson, 2000).  Employees should be 
able speak openly and express their inner feelings, values and spirituality, regardless of fear, 
alienation or exclusion (Milliman, Czaplewski, and Ferguson, 2003; Thompson, 2000). 
Krishnakumar and Neck (2002) developed an individual level model of spiritual enrichment 
called “the spiritual freedom model”.   This model embodies the implementation of “spiritual 
freedom” that forms common good from diverse origins and spiritual orientations 
(Krishnakumar and Neck, 2002).   It is important to mention that the organization doesn’t 
establish or enforce any particular spiritual principle common to all its employees. Spiritual 
enrichment of the workplace is supported and ensured by the free and open expression of 
intuition, creativity, honesty, authenticity, trust, and personal fulfillment in a positive 
atmosphere (Krishnakumar and Neck, 2002).   
Acknowledgement of employees as whole persons:  It is important to acknowledge and know 
a person’s emotional, intellectual, and spiritual needs, values, priorities and preferences.  HR 
and OD professionals stress the importance of engaging whole persons at work (Kahn 1992, 
Hall and Mirvis 1996); with all their minds, hearts, spirits, and souls.  It is important to 
acknowledge people as spiritual beings, and take into account of people's spiritual lives and 
the value and richness of their collective potential (Garcia-Zamor, 2003). As Leigh (1997) 
states workplace spirituality starts with the acknowledgement that employees do not bring

----- Page 33 (native) -----
33 
only their bodies and minds to work; but also their hearts, souls, creativity, talents and unique 
spirits. 
At a time in which organizations are faced with more complexities, competition, and change 
than at any other time in history, the need for spirituality is a recurring theme in corporations 
and businesses (Karakas, 2006).  In the 21st century, organizations need to incorporate a set 
of humanistic and spiritual values into workplaces to enable human hearts, spirits and souls 
to grow and flourish.  Employees and managers increasingly need to reflect on the ways of 
incorporating spirituality, wisdom, reflection, inspiration, creativity, and compassion into 
work.  I humbly hope that this literature review can contribute to a conversation about 
spirituality at work and provide insights on the application and incorporation of spirituality in 
work settings.

----- Page 34 (native) -----
34 
References 
Ashar, H., and Lane-Maher, M.:  2004, Success and Spirituality in the New Business 
Paradigm. Journal of Management Inquiry, 13(3), 249. 
Ashmos, D. P., and Duchon, D.: 2000, Spirituality at work: A conceptualization and 
measure. Journal of Management Inquiry, 9(2), 134-145. 
Bartlett, C. A. and S. Ghoshal: 1995, Transnational Management (2nd edn.). Irwin, 
Chicago, IL. 
Barnett, C. K., Krell, T. C., & Sendry, J.: 2000, Learning to learn about spirituality: A 
categorical approach to introducing the topic into management courses. Journal of 
Management Education. Vol. 24(5), pp. 562-579.  
Barrett R.: 1998, Liberating the Corporate Soul: Building a Visionary Organisation, 
Butterworth. Heinemann. 
Barrett, R.: 2004, Liberating Your Soul: Accessing Intuition and Creativity. (Available at 
http://www.soulfulliving.com/liberateyoursoul.htm) 
Bass, B.M.: 1990, Bass and Stogdill's handbook of leadership: Theory, research, and 
managerial applications (3rd ed.), Free Press, New York.  
Bateson, G.: 1972, Steps to an ecology of mind. New York. Ballantine Books. 
Bento, R.: 1994, When the show must go on. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 9(6), 
35–44. 
Biberman, J., and Whitty, M.: 1997, A postmodern spiritual future for work. Journal of 
Organizational Change Management, 10(2), 130–138. 
Biberman, J., Whitty, M., and Robbins, L.: 1999, Lessons from Oz: Balance and 
wholeness in organizations. Journal of Organizational Change Management, 12(3), 243–252. 
Bierly, P., Kessler, E., and Christensen, E.: 2000, Organizational learning, knowledge 
and wisdom. Journal of Organizational Change Management, 13(6), 595–618. 
Block, P.: 1993, Stewardship: Choosing Service over Self-Interest. San Francisco: 
Berrett-Koehler.  
Bolman, L.G., Deal, T. E.: 1995, Leading with Soul: An Uncommon Journey of Spirit, 
Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA. 
Brandt, E.: 1996, Corporate Pioneers Explore Spirituality. HRMagazine, Vol. 41, 82-87.

----- Page 35 (native) -----
35 
Brown, R. B.: 2003, Organizational Spirituality: The Sceptic's Version. Organization. 
Vol. 10; 393-400.  
Brown, J.: 1992, Corporation as community: a new image for a new era.  In Renesch, J. 
(Eds), New Traditions in Business, Berrett-Koehler Publishers, San Francisco, CA, pp.123-
39.  
Burack, E.: 1999, Spirituality in the workplace. Journal of Organizational Change 
Management, 12(4), 280–291. 
Burke, R. J.:  2006, Research Companion to Working Time and Work Addiction.  
Cornwall: Elward Elgar.   
Byman, W.: 1991, Zapp! The Lightning of Empowerment, Century Business, London 
Cacioppe, R.: 2000, Creating spirit at work: Re-visioning organization development and 
leadership - Part II Leadership & Organization Development Journal. Bradford: 2000. Vol. 
21, Iss. 1/2: 110-120 
Capra, F: 1993, A systems approach to the emerging paradigm. In M. Ray andc A. 
Rinzler (Eds.), The new paradigm in business (pp. 230-237). New York: Tarcher Books 
Capra, F.:1996, The web of life: A new scientific understanding of living systems. New 
York: Anchor Books. 
Cartwright, S. and Cooper, C. L.: 1997, Managing Workplace Stress.  Sage Publications.   
Cash, K., and Gray, G.: 2000, A framework for accommodating religion and spirituality 
in the workplace. Academy of Management Executive, 14(3), 124-134. 
Cavanagh, G.: 1999, Spirituality for managers: context and critique. Journal of 
Organizational Change Management. 12(3), 186 
Cavanagh,  G. F. and Bandsuch, M. R.: 2002,  Virtue as a Benchmark for Spirituality in 
Business.  Journal of Business Ethics. Vol. 38, No:1-2; pp. 109-117. 
Cavanagh, G., Hanson, B., Hanson, K., and Hinojoso, J.:  2001, Toward a Spirituality for 
the Contemporary Organization:  Implications for Work, Family and Society,  in Champoux, 
J.E. (2000). Organizational behavior: Essential tenets for a new millennium. South-Western 
College Publishing, Cincinatti  
Chappell, T.: 1993, The Soul of a Business: Managing for Profit and the Common Good, 
Bantam Books, New York, NY. 
Chomsky, N.: 2001, 9–11. New York, NY: Seven Stories Press.

----- Page 36 (native) -----
36 
Conger, J and Kanungo, R.: 1988,  The empowerment process: integrating theory and 
practice. The Academy of Management Review, 13 (3), 471-482. 
Conger, J.: 1994, Spirit at work:  Discovering the spirituality in leadership. Jossey-Bass, 
San Francisco.   
Cotton, J.: 1993, Employee Involvement, Sage, Newbury Park, CA. 
Dean, K. L. and McGee, J. J.:  2003, Research in spirituality, religion, and work:  
Walking the line between relevance and legitimacy.  Journal of Organizational Change 
Management.  Volume 16 (4), 378-395.    
DeFoore, B., and Renesch, I.: 1995, Rediscovering the soul of business. San Francisco: 
New Leaders Press. 
Dehler, G., and Welsh, M.: 1994, Spirituality and organizational transformation: 
Implications for the new management paradigm. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 19(6), 
17–26. 
Delbecq, A.: 1999, Christian spirituality and contemporary business leadership. Journal 
of Organizational Change Management, 12(4), 345–349. 
Dent, E. B., Higgins, M. E.,Wharff, D. M.: 2005,  Spirituality and Leadership: An 
Empirical Review of Definitions, Distinctions, and Embedded Assumptions. The Leadership 
Quarterly. Vol. 16 (5). 
Dooley, K.: 1997, A complex adaptive systems model of organization change. Nonlinear 
Dynamics, Psychology and the Life Sciences, Vol. 3, 230-249. 
Duchon, D. and Plowman, D. A.: 2005, Nurturing the spirit at work: Impact on unit 
performance. The Leadership Quarterly.  Vol.16 (5); pp. 807-834. 
Dutton, J. E., and Heaphy, E. D.: 2003, The power of high-quality connections. In K. S. 
Cameron, J. E. Dutton, and R. E. Quinn (Eds.), Positive organizational scholarship: 
Foundations of a new discipline (pp. 263–278). San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler. 
Duxbury, L., Higgins, C.: 2002, Work-life Balance in the New Millennium: Where are 
We: Where do We Need to go? . Carleton University School of Business, Ottawa.   
Emmons, R.A.: 1999, Religion in the psychology of personality. Journal of Personality 
Vol. 67 (6), pp. 873–888.  
Fairholm, G. W.: 1996,  Spiritual leadership: fulfilling whole-self needs at work.  
Leadership and Organization Development Journal. Vol. 17 (5 ); pp. 11–17.

----- Page 37 (native) -----
37 
Fernando, M.:  2005, Workplace spirituality: Another management fad?, in M. Adams 
and A. Alkhafaji (eds.), Business Research Yearbook: Global Business Perspectives, Volume 
XII, No. 2, International Academy of Business Disciplines.   
Fineman, S.: 2006, On being positive: Concerns and counterpoints.  Academy of 
Management Review, Vol. 31, 270-291. 
Fornaciari, C., Lund Dean, K.: 2001, Making the quantum leap: lessons from physics on 
studying spirituality and religion in organizations. Journal of Organizational Change 
Management, Vol. 14 No.4, pp.335-51. 
Fornaciari, C., Lund Dean, K. and McGee, J. J.: 2003, Research in spirituality, religion, 
and work: Walking the line between relevance and legitimacy.  Journal of Organizational 
Change Management, Vol. 16 No.4, pp.378-395. 
Fox, M.: 1994, The reinvention of work: A new vision of livelihood for our time. San 
Francisco: HarperCollins. 
Frederick, W. C.: 2006,  Corporation, Be Good!: The Story of Corporate Social 
Responsibility.  Dog Ear Publishing.  
Frost, P., Dutton, J., Mailis, S., Lilius, J., Kanov, J. & Worline, M.: 2006, Seeing 
organizations differently: Three lenses on compassion. In Clegg, S.R., Hardy, C. Lawrence, 
T.B., & Nord, W. R.  Handbook of Organization Studies.  London: Sage Publications.   
Fry,  L.W.: 2005,  Toward a theory of ethical and spiritual well-being, and corporate 
social responsibility through spiritual leadership. In: C. Dunne, R.A. Giacolone and C.L. 
Jurkiewicz, Editors, Positive psychology and corporate responsibility, Information Age 
Publishing, Greenwich, CT. 
Fry, L. W.: 2003, Toward a theory of spiritual leadership. The Leadership Quarterly. Vol. 
14 (6): 693–727. 
Galinsky, E., Bond, J.T., Kim, S.S., Backon, L., Brownfield, E., & Sakai, K.: 2005, 
Overwork in America: When the way we work becomes too much.  New York: Families and 
Work Institute. 
Garcia-Zamor, J.: 2003, Workplace Spirituality and Organizational Performance.  Public 
Administration Review. Vol. 63 (3), pp. 355–363. 
Giacalone, E. & Dafna R. A.: 2000, The development of new paradigm values, thinkers, 
and business: Initial frameworks for a changing business worldview, The American 
Behavioral Scientist; Thousand Oaks; 43 (3), 1217-1230. 
Giacalone, R. A., and C. L. Jurkiewicz: 2003a, Handbook of workplace spirituality and 
organizational performance. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe.

----- Page 38 (native) -----
38 
Giacalone, R. A., and Jurkiewicz, C. L.: 2003b, Right from wrong: The influence of 
spirituality on perceptions of unethical business activities. Journal of Business Ethics, 46(1), 
85. 
Gibbons, P.: 2000, "Spirituality at work: definitions, measures, assumptions, and validity 
claims", in Biberman, J., Whitty, M. (Eds),Work and Spirit: A Reader of New Spiritual 
Paradigms for Organizations, University of Scranton Press, Scranton, PA, pp.111-31. 
Gini A.: 1998, Working Ourselves to Death: Workaholism, Stress, and Fatigue.  Business 
and Society Review, Vol. 100, No: 1, pp. 45-56.   
Gleick, J.: 1987, Chaos: Making a new science. New York: Viking. 
Gogoi, P.: 2005, A little bit of corporate soul. Retrieved March 30, 2006, from 
http://www.businessweek.com/bwdaily/dnflash/apr2005/nf2005045_0314_db016. htm?ca 
Gottlieb, B. H., Kelloway, E. K., & Barham, E.: 1998, Flexible work arrangements: 
Managing the work–family boundary. Chichester, UK: Wiley. 
Guillory, W.A.: 2000, The Living Organization: Spirituality in the Workplace. 
Innovations International Inc., Salt Lake City, UT. 
Gull, G. A., and Doh, J.: 2004, The "Transmutation" of the Organization: Toward a More 
Spiritual Workplace. Journal of Management Inquiry. 13(2), 128. 
Gozdz, K.: 1993, "Building community as a leadership discipline", in Ray, M., Rinzler, 
A. (Eds), The New Paradigm in Business, G.P. Putnam’s Sons, New York, NY, pp.107-19..  
Gozdz, K. (Ed.): 1995, Community Building: Renewing Spirit and Learning in Business. 
New Leaders Press. San Francisco, CA) 
Hall, D. T. and P. H. Mirvis: 1996,  The New Protean Career: Psychological Success and 
the Path with a Heart. In D. T. Hall and Associates (Eds.), The Career is Dead-Lorzg Live 
the Career, San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
Harman, W.:1992, 21st Century Business: A background for dialogue.  In J. Renexch 
(Ed.).  New traditions in business:  Spirit and leadership in the 21st century. 10-22. San 
Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.   
Harman, W., and Hormann, J.: 1990, Creative work, the constructive role of business in a 
transforming society. Indianapolis, IN: Knowledge Systems. 
Hertz, N.: 2002, The Silent Takeover: Global Capitalism and the Death of Democracy. 
Free Press.

----- Page 39 (native) -----
39 
Hicks, D. A.:2003, Religion and the Workplace: Pluralism, Spirituality, Leadership.   
Cambridge University Press 
House, R. J., and B. Shamir:1993, Toward the Integration of Transformational, 
Charismatic, and Visionary Theories.  In Leadership Theory and Research: Perspectives and 
Directions, edited by M. Chemers & R. Ayman, p. 81-107. New York: Academic Press.   
Howard, S.: 2002, A spiritual perspective on learning in the workplace, Journal of 
Managerial Psychology, Vol. 17, no. 3, pp 230-242. MCB University Press. 
Hyman, J., Mason, B.: 1995, Managing Employee Involvement and Participation, Sage, 
London.  
Jackson; Kevin T.: 1999, Spirituality as a foundation for freedom and creative 
imagination in international business ethics. Journal of Business Ethics, 19 (1), 61-70. 
Jackson, J.: 2000,  Some practical implications of Mitroff and Denton's 'Spirituality in the 
Workplace' study.  Spirituality Leadership and Management Conference Proceedings, 
SLAM, Sydney, Australia, pp. 20-25. 
Jacobson, S.: 1995, Spirituality and transformation leadership in secular settings: a 
Delphi study.  University of Georgia, Goleta, GA.      
Johnson, H.: 2004, Taboo No More. Training, April 1, 2004. 
Kahn, W. A.:1992, To Be Fully There: Psychological Presence at Work. Human 
Relations. Vol. 45, 4, 321-349. 
Karakas, F.: 2006, Towards a Universal Set of Values Bridging East and West:  Global 
Positive Spirituality for World Peace.  Journal of Globalization for the Common Good.  Fall 
2006 Issue.   
Karasek, R. and Theorell, T.: 1990,  Healthy Work: Stress, Productivity, and the 
Reconstruction of Working Life.  Basic Books.   
Kendall, J.: 1994, Wellness spirituality in homosexual men with HIV infection. Journal 
of the Association of Nurses in AIDS Care, 5(4), 28-34. 
Kennedy, H. K.: 2001, Spirituality in the workplace:  An empirical study of this 
phenomenon among adult graduates of a college degree completion program.  A dissertation 
submitted to Nova Southeastern University.   
Khanna, H., and Srinivas, E.: 2000,  Spirituality and leadership development.  Presented 
to the roundtable conference on developing leaders, teams, and organizations:  Meeting the 
challenges of global markets and technology.  Management Development Institute, Guragon.

----- Page 40 (native) -----
40 
Killinger, B.: 2006,  The workaholic breakdown syndrome.  in Burke, R. J. Research 
Companion to Working Time and Work Addiction.  Cornwall: Elward Elgar. p. 61-88.  
Kinjierski, V.M. and B.J. Skrypnek: 2004, Defining Spirit at Work: Finding Common 
Ground.  Journal of Organizational Change Management.  Vol. 17 (1), 26-42.   
Konz, G., and Ryan, F. : 1999, Maintaining an organizational spirituality: No easy task. 
Journal of Organizational Change Management, 12(3), 200–210. 
Korac-Kakabadse, A., and Korac-Kakabadse, N.: 1997, Best practice in the Australian 
Public Service (APS): An examination of discretionary leadership. Journal of Managerial 
Psychology, 12(7), 187–193. 
Korac-Kakabadse, N., Kouzmin, A., and Kakabadse, A.: 2002, Spirituality and leadership 
praxis. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 17(3), 165–182. 
Kouzes, J. M. and B. Z. Posner: 1995, The Leadership Challenge. Jossey-Bass, San 
Francisco. 
Kriger, M., and Hanson, B.: 1999, A value-based paradigm for creating truly healthy 
organizations. Journal of Organizational Change Management, 12(4), 302–317. 
Krishnakumar, S. and Neck, C. P.: 2002,  The “what”, “why” and “how” of spirituality in 
the workplace. Journal of Managerial Psychology. Vol. 17 (3), 153-164. 
Kugelmass J. :1995, Telecommuting: A Manager's Guide to Flexible Work 
Arrangements. New York: Lexington.  
Laabs, J. J.: 1995, Balancing spirituality and work. Personnel Journal, 74(9), 60-72. 
Leigh, P.: 1997, The new spirit at work.  Training and Development. 51(3), 26-33. 
Lewin, R.: 1992, Complexity: Life at the edge of chaos., Macmillan Pub. Co. ; Maxwell 
Macmillan Canada ; Maxwell Macmillan International, (x, 208), New York Toronto, New 
York. 
Lips-Wiersma, M.: 2003, Making Conscious Choices in Doing Research on Workplace 
Spirituality, Journal of Organisational Change Management Vol. 16 (4), pp. 406-425. 
Lips-Wiersma, M.: 2002, Analysing the career concerns of spiritually oriented people: 
Lessons for contemporary organizations. Career Development International, 7(6/7), 385. 
Markow, F. Klenke, K.: 2005,  The effects of personal meaning and calling on 
organizational commitment: An empirical investigation of spiritual leadership.  International 
Journal of Organizational Analysis.  Vol. 13 (1), pp. 8-27.

----- Page 41 (native) -----
41 
Marques, J.,  Dhiman, S. and King, R.: 2007, Spirituality in the Workplace: What It Is, 
Why It Matters, How to Make It Work for You.  Personhood Press.   
Maxwell, T.:  2003, Considering spirituality: Integral spirituality, deep science, and 
ecological awareness. Zygon. 38(2), pp. 257-276.   
McGregor, D.: 1960, The human side of enterprise. New York: McGraw Hill. 
Meyer, J. P. and A. N. J.: 1997, Commitment in the Workplace: Theory, Research, and 
Application.  Sage Publications.   
Miller, L.: 1998, After their checkup for the body, some get one for the soul. The Wall 
Street Journal, 20 July, pp. A1, A6.  
Milliman, J., Ferguson, J. J., Trickett, D. and Condemi, B.: 1999, Spirit and community at 
Southwest Airlines: An investigation of a spiritual values-based model. Journal of 
Organizational Change Management.  Vol. 12 (3); pp. 221-233.   
Milliman, J., Czaplewski, A. J. and Ferguson, J.: 2003,  Workplace spirituality and 
employee work attitudes: An exploratory empirical assessment.  Journal of Organizational 
Change Management.  Vol. 16 (4), pp. 426-447.  
Mirvis, P. H.:  1997,  “Soul Work” in Organizations.  Organization Science, Vol. 8, No. 
2, pp. 193-206. 
Mitroff, I. I., and Denton, E. A.: 1999a, A study of spirituality in the workplace. Sloan 
Management Review, Vol. 40; p. 83-92. 
Mitroff, I., and Denton, E.: 1999b, A Spiritual Audit of Corporate America: A Hard Look 
at Spirituality, Religion, and Values in the Workplace ( 1st ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass 
Publishers. 
Nash, L. and McLennan , S.: 2001, Church on Sunday, Work on Monday: The Challenge 
of Fusing Christian Values with Business Life. (Jossey-Bass). 
Neal, C.: 1999,  A conscious change in the workplace.  The Journal for Quality and 
Participation.  Mar/Apr 1999. 
http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qa3616/is_199903/ai_n8843120/pg_2  
Neal, J.: 1997, Spirituality in management education: A guide to resources. Journal of 
Management Education, 21, 121 -140. 
Neal, J.: 2000, Work as service to the divine. American Behavioral Scientist, 12(8), 1316-
1334

----- Page 42 (native) -----
42 
Neck, C.P. and Milliman, J.F.:1994, “Thought self-leadership: finding spiritual 
fulfillment in organizational life”, Journal of Managerial Psychology, Vol. 9. No. 6, pp. 9-
16. 
Oldenburg, D., & Bandsuch, M.: Wednesday, May 7, 1997, The spirit at work: 
Companies should nurture the soul if they want more from employees. The Detroit News.  
Palmer, P.: 1994, Leading from within: out of the shadow, into the light. In Conger, J. 
(Ed.), Spirit at Work, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA 
Paloutzian, R.F. Emmons, R.A. and Keortge, S.G.: 2003, Spiritual well-being, spiritual 
intelligence, and healthy workplace policy. In: R.A. Giacolone and C.L. Jurkiewicz, Editors, 
Handbook of workplace spirituality and organizational performance, M.E. Sharpe, New 
York pp. 123–137.  
Post, J. E., Preston, L. E., & Sachs, S.: 2002, Redefining the corporation: Stakeholder 
management and organizational wealth. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
Pratt, M.G. & Ashforth, B. E.: 2003, Fostering Meaningfulness in Working and at Work.  
In K. S. Cameron, J. E. Dutton, and R. E. Quinn (Eds.), Positive organizational scholarship. 
San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler. 309-328.   
Ray, M., and Rinzler, A. (Eds.): 1993, The new paradigm in business. New York: 
Tarcher.  
Ray, M.: 1992, The emerging new paradigm in business’", in Renesch, J. (Eds), New 
Traditions in Business, Berrett-Koehler, San Francisco, CA, pp.25-38.  
Reave, L. : 2005, Spiritual values and practices related to leadership effectiveness. The 
Leadership Quarterly. Vol. 16 (5), 655-687. 
Renesch, J.:  1995,  The New Leaders. Bonus Issue. Spring, Sterling and Stone, San 
Francisco, CA.   
Rifkin, J.: 2004, The European Dream.  New York: Tarcher/Penguin.   
Schor, J.: 1991,  The Overworked American: The Unexpected Decline of Leisure.  New 
York: Basic Books.   
Schroth, R. J. & Elliot, L. : 2002, How companies lie: Why Enron is just the tip of the 
iceberg. Crown Business, New York, NY.  
Scott, R. W. : 1994, Institutions and Organizations. Foundations for Organizational 
Science: A Sage Publications Series: London. 
Shaw, R. B.: 1997, Trust in the Balance, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA.

----- Page 43 (native) -----
43 
Sparrow, P. R. and Cooper, C. L. : 2003, The Employment Relationship: Key Challenges 
for HR.  Elsevier.   
Stiles M.K.: 1994, The shining stranger: application of the phenomenological method in 
the investigation of the nurse-family spiritual relationship. Cancer Nursing 17(1): 18-26 
Thompson, W.D.: 2000, “Can you train people to be spiritual?”, Training and 
Development, Vol. 54 No. 12, pp. 18-19. 
Tischler, L. : 1999, The growing interest in spirituality in business: A long-term socio-
economic explanation.  Journal of Organizational Change Management. Vol. 12 (4), p. 273 - 
280 
Toffler, A. : 1980, The Third Wave, Morrow, New York, NY. 
Turner, J. :1999, “Spirituality in the workplace”, caMagazine, Vol. 132 No. 10, pp. 41-2. 
Waddock, S. : 2006, Leadership Integrity in a Fractured Knowledge World. Boston 
College. Carroll School of Management. Available at  
http://www.iajbs.org/images/AEImages/brazil/Paper%20Sandra%20Waddock.doc. 
Wagner-Marsh, F., and Conley, J.:1999, The fourth wave: The spiritually-based firm. 
Journal of Organizational Change Management, 12(4), 292-301. 
Walsh, J. P.; Weber, K.; Margolis, J. D.: 2003,  Social Issues and Management: Our Lost 
Cause Found.  University of Michigan Business School 
Weiss, J., Skelly, M. F., Hall, D., Haughey, J.S.J.: 2001,  Calling, New Careers and 
Spirituality: A Reflective Perspective for Organizational Leaders and Professionals. in 
Delbecq,  A. L. Editor, Bridging the Gap Between Spirituality and Religion: Proceedings 
from the Santa Clara Conference,  March 9-11, 2001 pp. 81 – 110. 
Wheatley, M. :1992, Leadership and the new science: Learning about organization from 
an orderly universe. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler. 
Whyte, D.: 1994,  The Heart Aroused: Poetry and Preservation of the Soul in Corporate 
America.  New York: Currency Doubleday 
Wong, P. T. P.: 2003,  Spirituality and Meaning at Work.  President’s Column, 
September 2003.  International Network on Personal Meaning, Coquitlam, B.C., Canada. 
http://www.meaning.ca/archives/presidents_columns/pres_col_sep_2003_meaning-at-
work.htm  
Wrzesniewski, A.: 2003, Finding Positive Meaning in Work.  In K. S. Cameron, J. E. 
Dutton, and R. E. Quinn (Eds.), Positive organizational scholarship. San Francisco: Berrett-
Koehler. 296-309.