

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Quality-of-life measures in chronic
diseases of childhood
C Eiser
R Morse
HTA
Health Technology Assessment 
NHS R&D HTA Programme
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
Methodology

----- Page 2 (native) -----
How to obtain copies of this and other HTA Programme reports.
An electronic version of this publication, in Adobe Acrobat format, is available for downloading free of
charge for personal use from the HTA website (http://www.hta.ac.uk). A fully searchable CD-ROM is
also available (see below). 
Printed copies of HTA monographs cost £20 each (post and packing free in the UK) to both public and
private sector purchasers from our Despatch Agents.
Non-UK purchasers will have to pay a small fee for post and packing. For European countries the cost is
£2 per monograph and for the rest of the world £3 per monograph.
You can order HTA monographs from our Despatch Agents:
– fax (with credit card or official purchase order) 
– post (with credit card or official purchase order or cheque)
– phone during office hours (credit card only).
Additionally the HTA website allows you either to pay securely by credit card or to print out your
order and then post or fax it.
Contact details are as follows:
HTA Despatch
Email: orders@hta.ac.uk
c/o Direct Mail Works Ltd
Tel: 02392 492 000
4 Oakwood Business Centre
Fax: 02392 478 555
Downley, HAVANT PO9 2NP, UK
Fax from outside the UK: +44 2392 478 555
NHS libraries can subscribe free of charge. Public libraries can subscribe at a very reduced cost of 
£100 for each volume (normally comprising 30–40 titles). The commercial subscription rate is £300 
per volume. Please see our website for details. Subscriptions can only be purchased for the current or
forthcoming volume.
Payment methods
Paying by cheque
If you pay by cheque, the cheque must be in pounds sterling, made payable to Direct Mail Works Ltd
and drawn on a bank with a UK address.
Paying by credit card
The following cards are accepted by phone, fax, post or via the website ordering pages: Delta, Eurocard,
Mastercard, Solo, Switch and Visa. We advise against sending credit card details in a plain email.
Paying by official purchase order
You can post or fax these, but they must be from public bodies (i.e. NHS or universities) within the UK.
We cannot at present accept purchase orders from commercial companies or from outside the UK.
How do I get a copy of HTA on CD?
Please use the form on the HTA website (www.hta.ac.uk/htacd.htm). Or contact Direct Mail Works (see
contact details above) by email, post, fax or phone. HTA on CD is currently free of charge worldwide.
The website also provides information about the HTA Programme and lists the membership of the various
committees.
HTA

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Quality-of-life measures in chronic
diseases of childhood
C Eiser*
R Morse
Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK
* Corresponding author
Competing interests: none declared
Published February 2001
This report should be referenced as follows:
Eiser C, Morse R. Quality-of-life measures in chronic diseases of childhood. Health Technol 
Assess 2001;5(4).
Health Technology Assessment is indexed in Index Medicus/MEDLINE and Excerpta Medica/EMBASE.
Copies of the Executive Summaries are available from the NCCHTA website (see opposite).

----- Page 4 (native) -----
NHS R&D HTA Programme
T
he NHS R&D Health Technology Assessment (HTA) Programme was set up in 1993 to ensure 
that high-quality research information on the costs, effectiveness and broader impact of health
technologies is produced in the most efficient way for those who use, manage and provide care 
in the NHS.
Initially, six HTA panels (pharmaceuticals, acute sector, primary and community care, diagnostics
and imaging, population screening, methodology) helped to set the research priorities for the HTA
Programme. However, during the past few years there have been a number of changes in and around
NHS R&D, such as the establishment of the National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE) and
the creation of three new research programmes: Service Delivery and Organisation (SDO); New and
Emerging Applications of Technology (NEAT); and the Methodology Programme.
Although the National Coordinating Centre for Health Technology Assessment (NCCHTA)
commissions research on behalf of the Methodology Programme, it is the Methodology Group 
that now considers and advises the Methodology Programme Director on the best research 
projects to pursue.
The research reported in this monograph was funded as project number 96/48/02.
The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
Methodology Programme, HTA Programme or the Department of Health. The editors wish to
emphasise that funding and publication of this research by the NHS should not be taken as implicit
support for any recommendations made by the authors.
Criteria for inclusion in the HTA monograph series
Reports are published in the HTA monograph series if (1) they have resulted from work
commissioned for the HTA Programme, and (2) they are of a sufficiently high scientific quality as
assessed by the referees and editors.
Reviews in Health Technology Assessment are termed ‘systematic’ when the account of the search,
appraisal and synthesis methods (to minimise biases and random errors) would, in theory, permit
the replication of the review by others.
Methodology Programme Director: Professor Richard Lilford
HTA Programme Director: 
Professor Kent Woods
Series Editors: 
Professor Andrew Stevens, Dr Ken Stein, Professor John Gabbay
and Dr Ruairidh Milne
Monograph Editorial Manager: 
Melanie Corris
The editors and publisher have tried to ensure the accuracy of this report but do not accept liability
for damages or losses arising from material published in this report. They would like to thank the
referees for their constructive comments on the draft document.
ISSN 1366-5278
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2001
This monograph may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising.
Applications for commercial reproduction should be addressed to HMSO,The Copyright Unit, St Clements House, 2–16 Colegate,
Norwich, NR3 1BQ.
Published by Core Research, Alton, on behalf of the NCCHTA.
Printed on acid-free paper in the UK by The Basingstoke Press, Basingstoke.
M

----- Page 5 (native) -----
List of abbreviations .........................................
i
Executive summary...........................................
iii
1
The history and scope of quality-of-life
measurement for children .........................
1
Aims and scope ..............................................
1
Conceptual approaches to 
understanding QoL .......................................
1
A brief history of child QoL ..........................
2
The rationale for measuring 
QoL in children .............................................
4
Summary ........................................................
7
2
Issues in measuring QoL in children ........
9
Aims and scope ..............................................
9
Determining inclusion and exclusion 
criteria for the review ....................................
9
Distinctions between QoL and 
related concepts .............................................
9
Disease-specific and generic measures ........
12
Defining the qualities or ‘performance
characteristics’ of measures ..........................
13
Reliability ........................................................
14
Validity ............................................................
15
Purpose of measures ......................................
17
Respondent issues ..........................................
18
Additional criteria .........................................
19
Summary ........................................................
19
3
Review methodology ...................................
21
Aims and scope ..............................................
21
Method............................................................
21
Results .............................................................
22
Summary .........................................................
24
4
To what extent are adult measures 
used in the evaluation of healthcare
interventions in children?............................
33
Aims and scope ..............................................
33
Background ....................................................
33
Results .............................................................
33
Adult measures involving no 
or minor changes ...........................................
33
Adult measures that have undergone
more substantial changes
............................
34
Response burden ...........................................
35
Quality of measures .......................................
35
Summary .........................................................
38
5
How appropriate are adult measures 
for use with children? ..................................
45
Aims and scope ..............................................
45
Background ....................................................
45
Differences in aetiology and 
management of physical disease 
between children and adults .........................
45
Developmental considerations ......................
45
Appropriateness of domains and items ........
47
Potential additional domains ........................
48
Developmental level: are questionnaire 
measures appropriate given children’s 
cognitive skills? ...............................................
49
Innovations to improve child-centredness......
52
Summary .........................................................
52
6
To what extent to child self-reports
correspond with the assessment 
made by parents and carers? .....................
55
Aims and scope ..............................................
55
Background ....................................................
55
Results .............................................................
56
Is concordance greater for some 
domains than others?.....................................
56
Do parents over- or underestimate 
their child’s QoL? ..........................................
58
How is degree of concordance affected 
by child age, gender and illness status? ........
58
Discussion .......................................................
60
Implications for using proxy raters ..............
61
Summary .........................................................
62
7
How feasible and reliable are proxy
measures of QoL in different 
disease contexts? .........................................
69
Aims and scope ..............................................
69
Background ....................................................
69
Results .............................................................
69
Discussion ......................................................
71
Summary ........................................................
73
8
The use of QoL measures in 
different contexts .........................................
81
Aims and scope ..............................................
81
QoL measurement in practice ....................
81
Barriers to adoption of QoL measures ........
84
Summary .........................................................
85
9
Measuring QoL in children – 
the state of the art ......................................
87
Aims and scope ..............................................
87
Implications of the review for the 
four key questions ..........................................
88
The future development and integration of
QoL measures into research and practice....
90
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
Contents

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Contents
Limitations of the review ...............................
92
Choices in measuring child QoL ..................
92
Conclusions and final recommendations ....
95
Acknowledgements .....................................
97
References .....................................................
99
Appendix 1  Terms used in the search 
of electronic databases .................................. 111
Appendix 2  Data extraction form .............. 113
Appendix 3  Excluded studies ..................... 119
Appendix 4  Summary of generic 
QoL measures identified for use 
with children .................................................. 127
Appendix 5  Disease-specific measures
of QoL .................................................................. 137
Health Technology Assessment reports
published to date.......................................... 149
Methodology Group..................................... 155
HTA Commissioning Board ....................... 156

----- Page 7 (native) -----
ACTG
AIDS Controlled Trial Group*
A-FILE
Family Inventory of Life Events and
Changes for Adolescents*
AMA
About My Asthma
BASES
Behavioral, Affective, and Somatic
Experiences Scale
CAQ
Childhood Asthma Questionnaire*
CBCL
Child Behaviour Checklist 
CCTR
Cochrane Controlled Trials Register
CDI
Child Depression Inventory
CDLQI
Children’s Dermatology Life 
Quality Index
CES-D
Centre for Epidemiological 
Studies Scale
CHQ
Child Health Questionnaire
CHIP-AE Child Health and Illness Profile –
Adolescent Edition*
COOP
Co-operative Information Project
CF
cystic fibrosis
CQOL
Child Quality of Life Questionnaire*
DQOL
Diabetes Quality of Life
EHRQL Exeter Health Related Quality of 
Life Measure*
FILE
Family Inventory of Life Events and
Changes for Parents
FSIIR
Functional Status (II) Revised*
GHQ
General Health Questionnaire
HAY
How Are You?*
HRQoL Health-Related Quality of Life
HTA
Health Technology Assessment
HUI
Health Utility Index
ICC
intraclass correlation
ICD-10
International Classification of Disease-10
IQ
intelligence quotient
LSIA
Life Satisfaction Index for Adolescents*
OM-6
Quality of Life for Children with 
Otitis Media
PAQLQ
Pediatric Asthma Quality of 
Life Questionnaire
n.s.
not significant*
PCQL
Pediatric Cancer Quality of Life*
PedsQL
Paediatric Quality of Life Questionnaire
PGI
Patient Generated Index
PIE
Perceived Illness Experience*
PRQLQ Paediatric Rhino-conjunctivitis Quality
of Life Questionnaire*
QALY
quality-adjusted life-year
QLH-Y
Quality of Life Headache in Youth*
QLSD
Quality of Life Profile for 
Spine Deformities*
QoL
quality of life
QOLIE
Quality of Life In Epilepsy
QWB
Quality of Well-Being Scale
SF-36
Short Form 36
SIP
Sickness Impact Profile
TACQOLTNO-AZL 
(Netherlands Organisation for Applied
Scientific Research) Children’s Quality
of Life*
VAS
visual analogue scale*
WISC-R
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for
Children-Revised*
* Used only in tables
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
i
List of abbreviations

----- Page 8 (ocr) -----


----- Page 9 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
iii
Scope of the report
This report is concerned with the evaluation of
measures broadly designed to measure quality of
life (QoL) in children and adolescents, either by
self-report or proxy raters. Four research questions
were identified.
• To what extent are adult measures used in 
the evaluation of healthcare interventions 
in children?
• How appropriate are adult measures for use with
children?
• To what extent do child self-reports correspond
with assessments made by parents and carers?
• How feasible and reliable are proxy measures of
QoL in different disease contexts?
Objectives
• To review the state of the art with regard to
measurement of QoL for children.
• To make recommendations regarding the value
of currently available measures for different
purposes.
• To identify further research needs.
Method
Electronic databases were searched for the period
1980–July 1999 for articles relating to measures of
QoL, health status or well-being in children (under
18 years) with chronic disease. Handsearching of
relevant journals and cross-referencing with
reference lists in identified articles was also carried
out. Key workers in the field were contacted for
additional information, and the Internet was
searched for relevant websites. 
Results
Forty-three measures were identified (19 generic
and 24 disease-specific). Sixteen measures allowed
for completion by children and parent/caregiver;
seven only allowed for completion by a proxy, 
and the remainder (n = 17) allowed only for 
child completion.
The measures were described as QoL (n = 30), health
status, (n = 2), perception of illness (n = 1), life
satisfaction (n = 1) and quality of well-being(n = 1).
To what extent are adult measures
used in the evaluation of healthcare
interventions in children?
Three studies were identified where adult
measures were used with very few changes made
for children. In 11 studies involving nine separate
measures of QoL, adult measures were used as a
model for work with children.
How appropriate are adult measures
for use with children?
Adult measures may fail to tap the specific aspects
of QoL that are important to the child. Measures
based on adult work impose considerable response
burden for children, in terms of length, reading
skills and response scale. Wording and format of
adult measures may need to be modified to
account for children’s cognitive and language
skills. More basic research is needed to determine
the level of response burden that children of
different ages can manage. Assessments of
difficulty  (e.g. reading age) need to be routinely
included with information about new measures.
To what extent do child self-reports
correspond with assessments made by
parents and carers?
Fourteen studies were identified in which concor-
dance between child and parent was investigated,
often as part of the development of a new measure.
There was some evidence for greater concordance
between child and parent for physical functioning
compared with social and emotional domains, but
greater heterogeneity in the latter measures may
contribute to inconsistent results. There was no simple
relationship between concordance and moderating
variables such as age, gender and illness, but this
conclusion was addressed only very rarely. 
How feasible and reliable are proxy
measures of QoL in different disease
contexts?
Only five papers fulfilled the review criteria.
Evaluation is difficult because authors fail to justify
their choice of measures, and do not report critical
information such as completion rates or missing data.
Executive summary

----- Page 10 (native) -----
iv
Use of existing measures can potentially eliminate
the time and expense required to develop a
comprehensive measure of QoL, but a full battery
of standardised tests may be expensive in terms of
time for administration and scoring. In addition,
battery measures tend to be lengthy and therefore
demanding for sick patients. They are not
recommended for work with children.
Recommendations for research
Minimum criteria for new measures
A set of procedures needs to be established for the
development of new measures. These need to draw
on the experience gained in development of child
and adult measures to date. Basic research to enhance
understanding of how children interpret questions
in QoL measures is recommended. We need to
understand the differences in meaning of items
between children and adults, and between children
of different ages. Some attempt to develop measures
for children of 6 years or more have been reported,
and these should be further developed.
Development of new measures should:
• follow established procedures for the
development of measures
• take into account theoretical knowledge of
children’s understanding of illness, emotion,
and ability to complete rating scales
• include facility for child and proxy report
• include developmentally sensitive age-
appropriate sections
• include generic core and disease-specific modules.
Clinical appropriateness
There is a need to develop measures that are
appropriate for the kind of questions to be
answered in practice. Measures are frequently
justified in terms of the value in clinical trials,
comparing alternative treatments or assessing
interventions. In more everyday contexts, QoL
measures may potentially help health profes-
sionals and children’s families evaluate clinical
care. Outcome measures that are sensitive to
changes in the child’s QoL have considerable
value, particularly in children with long-
term illness.
To determine how far assessments of QoL can
contribute to improved care, we need to move
beyond the development of new measures. 
In order to encourage greater use in clinical
practice, it is recommended that:
• developers of new measures need to be clearer
about the procedures adopted for identifying
the item pool, and more extensive information
about their psychometric properties should 
be provided
• those developing new measures should 
work more closely with clinicians in order 
to ensure both the quality of the measures 
and their appropriateness in different 
clinical settings
• families should be encouraged to be more
involved in the development and application 
of measures, in order to improve the face
validity of measures, and to challenge 
criticisms that QoL measures impose an
unnecessary burden.
Executive summary

----- Page 11 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
1
Aims and scope
The evaluation of adult quality of life (QoL) is well
established, and measures of QoL are routinely
included in many clinical trials. QoL has been a
category in Index Medicus since 1966,1 but interest
in children’s QoL did not gain momentum until
the 1980s.
It is possible to identify a range of situations in
which QoL decisions are important. One of the
most critical catalysts in promoting measurement
of QoL in children is the changing epidemiology
of childhood disease. Where it is possible to
manage but not cure a disease, we must determine
how far treatment and disease compromise the
child’s QoL. In this way, informed judgements 
can be made about whether or not treatment is
appropriate, and critically, where there is a choice,
which might be the best option for the child.
These considerations might apply when thinking
about self-limiting illness (which still accounts for
most childhood morbidity), chronic illness, or
palliative care. Decisions of this kind make it
essential that QoL is an integral component in
clinical trials, or in any assessment of the outcomes
of new treatments. At one extreme, QoL measure-
ment may be useful in routine audit work or it 
may simply be useful to understand the child’s
perspective. At the other extreme, QoL may assist
decisions about the rationing of resources. There 
is also an assumption that QoL needs to be
considered when making ‘end of life’ decisions –
when it is appropriate to withhold treatment
because the anticipated QoL is so poor. QoL 
then is central to paediatric practice.
Our purpose in this chapter is to place the
assessment of child QoL in historical perspective
and identify the potential ways in which QoL
assessment may be useful. This lays the foundation
for the evaluation of QoL. In subsequent chapters,
we address the four questions defined by the
Health Technology Assessment (HTA) Programme.
• To what extent are adult measures used in 
the evaluation of healthcare interventions 
in children?
• How appropriate are adult measures for use 
with children?
• To what extent do child self-reports correspond
with the assessments made by parents and
carers?
• How feasible and reliable are proxy measures 
of QoL in different disease contexts?
Conceptual approaches to
understanding QoL
The scientific study of QoL is complicated by the
diverse ways in which the term is used in everyday
language. To many people, QoL is synonymous
with happiness. To others it is about material
wealth. For others, QoL is about relationships 
with family and friends. Notions of citizenship,
involvement in the community and contributions
to charity work, have also been implicated.2
Government Departments now acknowledge the
need to include a wide range of concepts in any
evaluation of the QoL of the nation. In a report 
in The Guardian,3 John Prescott suggested that
economic output alone was inadequate and 
more appropriate assessments of QoL need to
incorporate a wider range of QoL measures
including education, pollution and the number 
of birds in the countryside. 
QoL, however, is not purely the preserve of
politicians or environmentalists. Social historians
emphasise the way in which perceptions of QoL
differ over time and between cultures. In terms of
material wealth, QoL is, of course, significantly
better today compared with the turn of the last
century. However, in terms of more socially
orientated ideals, including perceptions of family
life, or incidence of drug taking in young people, 
it may seem that QoL now is significantly poorer
than in previous times. Thus, definitions and ideals
are dependent on the specific social, cultural,
spiritual and historical circumstances in which 
we find ourselves. In Western Europe, we take 
for granted running water, good housing and
adequate food. These are a basic part of our QoL.
With these fulfilled, we can think about our QoL in
terms of social and psychological factors. In other
Chapter 1
The history and scope of quality-of-life
measurement for children

----- Page 12 (native) -----
The history and scope of quality-of-life measurement for children
2
countries, however, QoL may be very dependent
on the availability of the basic supplies.
In practice, a number of formal approaches to
measuring QoL can be identified.4
The philosophical approach asks: ‘What is QoL?’
This question has attracted interest from ancient
times. Does a good QoL involve some degree of
conflict and challenge as Aristotle argued? His
views might be seen to be precursors of ideas 
that QoL is about rising to challenges and coping
with adversity. 
The economic approach reflects the traditional
concerns of Western European governments with
the emphasis on economic growth measured in
terms of gross national product. These measures
are thought to reflect QoL in terms of acquired
wealth. To some extent, this is an acceptable
approach. QoL is considerably improved when 
a family gains a fridge, for example; less time is
needed for shopping and there is less risk of food
poisoning from contaminated food. Other
perfectly defensible indicators that are also more
health orientated include infant mortality, life
expectancy and literacy rates. Social and health-
related variables such as infant mortality, life
expectancy and general literacy have been
included in the Physical QoL Index.5 To make the
index more appropriate for children, two other
variables have been included: the number of
children in the labour force and female literacy
rates.6 Similar variables are now included in reports
by UNICEF7 for example, and allow for comparison
between nations. Perhaps though we have become
disillusioned with the concept of material wealth.
Higher incomes are not necessarily synonymous
with a high QoL. Material wealth without
happiness is not QoL.
The sociological approach emphasises the social
and environmental aspects of QoL. According to
this tradition, QoL is less about material wealth
and more about the individual’s assessment of
their circumstances. QoL is bound up with our
relationships with others and our views about how
far we are loved by others. The sociological
approach emphasises the subjective nature of
individual experience, and the interdependence
between QoL and cultural experience. Underlying
this approach are questions about who will judge
QoL. What is the standard against which QoL
judgements are made?
The psychological approach emphasises the role of
individual appraisal in our conceptualisation of
QoL. According to this approach, an individual
with a good QoL has high self-esteem, is able to
make decisions, is active, happy and fulfilled. Such
an ideal is perhaps achieved by very few, but leads
to the assumption that the nearer we feel we are to
attaining our life goals the better our QoL. 
The medical approach emerged in response to
advances in medical care. As soon as we appreciate
that cure may not be possible, it becomes
important to establish that treatment really makes
patients feel better. Thus, quantity of survival is no
longer perceived to be the only end-point. How to
measure this ‘feel better’ factor, particularly with
children, remains a challenge. The concept of
health-related QoL draws on ideas from all of the
traditions described above and refers specifically to
the impact of health and illness on the individual’s
QoL. It is often distinguished from the more
general and popular meanings of the term.
In the following review, our discussions centre on
questions of health-related QoL, but for simplicity
the abbreviation QoL is adopted.
A brief history of child QoL
Early efforts to describe QoL in children were
invariably focused on functional problems, and
usually relied on assessments made by clinicians.
Some of the earliest attempts to assess QoL were
provided by Ditesheim and Templeton,8 Herndon
and co-workers,9 and Henning and co-workers.10
Ditesheim and Templeton8 assessed QoL in infants
following surgical repair of high imperforate anus.
Their assessment of QoL was based on question-
naire information concerning school attendance,
social relationships, and physical abilities. 
Herndon and co-workers9 reported a follow-up 
of 12 survivors treated for major burns. They
included assessments of physical functioning,
degree of scarring and psychological adjustment.
One-third of the children were very fearful,
showed regressive behaviour or neurotic symptoms.
However, many children showed “remarkable
energy in adapting to their disabilities”. Henning
and co-workers10 measured degree of function,
height and attitudes in children with end-stage
renal disease. Although average height was
‘normal’ most children were disappointed with
their height. 
The findings of these early studies paved the way
for modern QoL work in two ways. First, they
emphasised that children can adapt to their
situation following major stress or injury, and

----- Page 13 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
3
second that children’s views about their disability
(or height) are important. Thus, these early
authors might be credited with anticipating the
direction in which QoL measurement was to go
(even though their measurement of QoL was 
very simple.)
Much of the impetus for more formal measure-
ment of child QoL has come from work in
paediatric oncology and neonatal intensive care.
The first formal attempt to measure QoL is often
credited to Lansky and co-workers,11,12 and their
very simple clinician- or parent-completed measure
remains in use today (see chapter 4). (Parents are
asked to choose one of 11 descriptions of their
child’s play activity.) From these isolated and
simple studies has emerged the increasingly large
and sophisticated literature concerning child QoL. 
Two related but separate lines of work can be
identified. One approach involved efforts to
develop generic measures or ‘health scales’ for 
use in population surveys of children. Prior to
1990, a number of such instruments had been
developed,13,14 but as noted by Landgraf and 
co-workers15 the definition of health outcomes
employed in these approaches was rooted in
clinical outcomes of morbidity and mortality. 
It was relatively common practice to combine
children with different chronic diseases into 
a single cohort and compare them with 
‘healthy’ samples. 
A second approach involved disease-specific
assessment of children with chronic disease, or
those undergoing innovative treatments. These
early studies did not attempt to define QoL or
measure it in any systematic way. Often, QoL was
used interchangeably with ‘social and psychological
problems’ or was restricted to demographic or
clinical indicators. Studies that attempted to
evaluate the impact of a disease on ‘lifestyle’16 or
compare marriage rates and number of children
between groups differing in disease status17 might
be considered to be precursors of the contemporary
interest in QoL.
Increasing interest in QoL is clearly reflected in a
review of the literature reported by Bullinger and
Ravens-Sieberer.18 In attempting to review the state-
of-the-art with respect to child QoL, these authors
conducted a comprehensive literature search using
key electronic databases: MEDLINE, EMBASE,
Psyindex, PsycINFO, PsyCom, CANCERLIT,
AIDSLINE, BIOSETHICSLINE and Somed. They
identified over 20,000 publications related to 
QoL in medicine, of which 13% were relevant to
children. Of these, 320 (in German and English)
were concerned with QoL related to medical
aspects of disease, of which 136 involved empirical
work. Most were in oncology or transplantation
medicine. Other conditions that received attention
included asthma, epilepsy, diabetes and
rheumatism. The conditions most frequently
studied included those with high mortality rates
and diseases in which treatment requires high cost
and care. Other often more prevalent conditions
were included less frequently. In addition, they
noted that little attention had been given to any
effects of acute disease on QoL. Bullinger and
Ravens-Sieberer18 also noted that age differences
were considered in only 19% of studies. 
Three of their findings are of special relevance 
to this review. The first relates to respondent, or
the issue of who provides information about a
child’s QoL. Over 50% of studies used parents as
reporters of the child’s QoL and 40% used clinic
staff. Second, only 19% of studies addressed age
differences in QoL. QoL was more often assessed
for older children (between 13 and 18 years) 
than for those between 6 and 12 years. The third
involves the assessment of QoL. “A closer look 
at how QoL is assessed shows that a multitude 
of methods are available including interviews,
questionnaires, clinical and sociological indicators.
Very often, measures originally constructed to
assess other variables, such as mood or functions
are used.”18 Thus, “instruments that have been
developed for another research area are now used
to make statements about QoL without taking into
account the multidimensionality of the QoL
construct”.18 The authors concluded that despite
the increasing interest in QoL measurement, 
most published work may best be described as
‘opinion pieces’ or reports about the development
of new measures.18
More recently, a number of reviews of both
generic19,20 and disease-specific measures21,22,23
have been published. These reviews highlight the
lack of consensus regarding definition of QoL.
While some include general measures of cognitive
development, temperament, vulnerability or social
activities as indicators or proxy measures of QoL,
others adopt more strict criteria, limiting their
reviews to a finite sample of comprehensive
measures of QoL for which psychometric data 
are available. 
This current report is both more general and more
specific than previous reviews. It is more general 
to the extent that we attempt to consider not 
only issues of measurement of QoL but also the

----- Page 14 (native) -----
The history and scope of quality-of-life measurement for children
4
application of QoL in clinical context. It is more
specific in that we also attempt to answer the four
questions specified by the HTA, and consider both
the problems and merits involved in grounding the
study of child QoL in adult work.
The rationale for measuring 
QoL in children
In the broadest possible sense there are only two
outcomes that really matter to any paediatrician:
the quantity of a child’s life, and the quality of a
child’s life. All health outcomes are only of value
because they have an impact on the quality or
quantity of life or they are a proxy measure of 
such an outcome. The distinction is illustrated 
by four examples.
In the treatment of diabetes, measurement of
haemoglobin is of importance because it indicates
the tightness of control of blood glucose. The
tightness of control of blood glucose is important
for two main reasons. First, it is correlated with the
probability of having an acute crisis (keto-acidosis)
which reduces the QoL by necessitating hospital
admission and intervention, and increases the
chance of death – reducing the quantity of life.
Second, it is correlated with the premature
development of chronic complications such as
kidney and eye damage, which reduce both the
quality and quantity of life.
In the treatment of epilepsy, the use of more 
than one anticonvulsant treatment may reduce 
the frequency of night-time convulsions, but 
at the same time, prevents participation in after-
noon sport (because the school refuses to admin-
ister treatment and social services have enforced
supervised drug administration because of a
previous drug error). Any decision about treat-
ment must take account of all factors and not just
the achievement of minimum fit frequency. In
order to achieve the best overall QoL, treatment
decisions must be informed by fit frequency and
the child’s social and family life.
In the treatment of babies that have suffered
oxygen-starvation at birth, the use of anti-
convulsant treatments can reduce the number 
of fits in the first day or two. Anticonvulsant
treatments have been widely used on the
assumption that fewer fits means less brain 
damage (quality) or better survival (quantity).
Subsequent studies suggest that fewer babies 
may survive who have been given anticon-vulsants
even if treatment is randomly allocated to babies
who are identical in every other respect.24 Thus,
although the treatment achieves a measurable and
desirable outcome, any real value collapses if the
assumption that it improves life quality or quantity
is in error.
In the treatment of acute croup, most children 
are now treated with steroids. Steroids reduce 
the apparent severity of symptoms at 6 hours 
after treatment, and shorten slightly the length
of stay in hospital. These may or may not be
important improvements in QoL. The main 
reason that the treatment has become established
is that these improvements have been assumed 
to be a proxy indicator of potentially fatal
complications. We assume that if they are treated
they are less likely to become life-threateningly
unwell. In fact mortality, and even the need to
incubate and artificially ventilate such children 
are not influenced by the use of steroids at all.25
An unexpected downside may be a change 
in illness behaviour, with parents more likely 
to return with the child to hospital in 
similar circumstances.
These examples have implications for clinical
practice and research. In clinical practice
our aims must constantly be critically evaluated 
in the light of quality and quantity of life. 
Much of what we hope to achieve fails by this 
test. It is easy to focus on symptoms or behaviours
that are easily measured but do little or nothing 
to improve the quality or quantity of life. In
research we must take care to choose outcomes
that are readily reflected in improved quality of
quantity of life, or that are proven proxy measures
of the same.
In most instances the problem boils down to 
this: an advantage is demonstrated in terms of a
measurable short-term outcome, but when more
important long-term outcomes relating to the
quality or quantity of life are examined, dis-
advantages outweigh advantages. There are 
many established treatments whose use is now
controversial because they appear to fail by these
standards. Important examples include: human
albumin solution in shock, cisapride in gastric
reflux, and high frequency oscillation in 
premature babies.
Surely then QoL measures (along with mortality
measures) are the ‘gold standards’ against which
all other health outcomes must be assessed. Both
clinical decisions and the conduct of research can
only be assisted by the development of good
measures of the QoL in childhood.

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
5
Epidemiology of chronic disease
Advances in medical research have changed the
emphasis in healthcare from diagnosis and
management of infectious disease to prevention
and control of chronic conditions. Improvements
in medical care mean that survival rates for
children with a wide range of chronic conditions
have improved significantly.26,27 The most dramatic
improvements are frequently recognised in
paediatric oncology, where survival rates have
increased from less than 50% in the 1960s to over
70% in the 1990s,28 but survival rates have also
considerably improved for cystic fibrosis (CF),
heart disease and many other conditions. However,
while major improvements in medical and surgical
care have resulted in improved survival, this is
sometimes associated with disability, emotional
problems or learning difficulties for some children.29
While improvements in survival must be welcome,
this needs to be set against the apparent increased
incidence of some conditions. Examples of this
include asthma,30 obesity,31 Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder32 and diabetes.33 In 1960,
parents reported that 2% of their children had a
limitation in activity due to a chronic health
condition, but this had increased to 6% by 1995.29
It is not always clear that these figures reflect 
a true increase, and undoubtedly some may be
attributable to more sophisticated diagnostic
techniques. In addition, there may have been some
change on the part of paediatricians and parents
to report symptoms or behaviour problems.
These changes in the epidemiology of childhood
disease have led to a call for new outcome
measures that reflect a more holistic approach 
to management and recognise the undesirable
side-effects associated with many treatments. 
The demand for such measures also reflect
contemporary views about the relationship
between mind and body, and acknowledge the
critical link between physical and psychological
health.34 Outcome measures are needed which
reflect the fact that mortality is no longer an
appropriate end-point when considering the
efficacy of medical intervention. 
It is critical that treatment should not only increase
life expectancy but also improve QoL. While
survival statistics have long been considered the
gold standard as far as paediatric medicine is
concerned, it has to be acknowledged that many
children who survive disease or injury as a result 
of ‘heroic’ medicine subsequently experience
considerable morbidity. Treatments for chronic
disease affect children’s QoL directly to the extent
that they need to attend hospital appointments
and undergo painful procedures. Where lengthy
hospitalisation is necessary, opportunities to
participate in normal activities can be very limited.
In addition, there are indirect effects. Physical
appearance and body image can be affected by the
disease or its treatment. Many conditions including
CF, cancer and renal disease can affect growth.
Treatments may be associated with long-term
complications; survivors of cancer are vulnerable 
to cardiac, endocrine, and fertility problems
among others.35 Treatment may also make the child
feel listless and tired, aggressive, and learning may
be compromised.36 Children may experience
limited physical skills and consequently be unable
to take part in everyday social and physical
activities. The way in which children respond to
such adversity is difficult to predict. For every child
with cancer who refuses to go outside the house
until her hair has regrown, another impresses
everyone with her determination to carry on as usual. 
Comparing outcomes in clinical trials
The changing epidemiology of childhood illness
resulting from both improved living conditions
and innovations in management and treatment of
disease have led to improvements in the survival
for children with a wide range of diseases. 
As survival rates have improved, particularly in
oncology, it has been recognised that simple
survival statistics are no longer adequate. More
sensitive and comprehensive measures of outcome
are needed. The question is whether a child on
one treatment has a better QoL than a child
undergoing a different treatment. We might want
to know about any differences in physical activities,
and whether families find it easier to integrate one
treatment into family life more than another.
Comprehensive measures of QoL that might allow
us to distinguish between different treatments,
where there are no implications for survival, are
potentially of real value.
Evaluating interventions
QoL measures may also be of value in the
community setting, where they have been used, 
for example, to evaluate the impact of nurse-led
interventions.37 This emphasis on the child’s
perspective, may give a broader picture compared
with relying on more traditional indicators such 
as school absence. For children with significant
learning or behavioural difficulties, intervention
programmes may focus on improvement in
intelligence quotient (IQ) or academic attain-
ments. Even where this cannot be achieved, it 
may be possible to improve the child’s QoL by
increasing self-esteem or confidence to deal with

----- Page 16 (native) -----
The history and scope of quality-of-life measurement for children
6
social situations. For patients with neurological
conditions (e.g. epilepsy, brain tumours), families
may feel that improvements in emotional status
and social functioning are as critical as measures of
physical or cognitive functioning. 
Assessing the outcomes of 
new treatments
Intensive care medicine has made important
contributions to the survival of critically ill patients,
but requires expensive equipment and a large staff.
There are important quality assurance issues that
have to be resolved involving equity of access to
care in different regions, how the distance to a
Paediatric Intensive Care Unit may affect referral
patterns, and the social and financial impact on
families who have to travel long distances to receive
services. As regards neonatal intensive care, there
is a need for further longitudinal work to look at
the outcome beyond the age of 2 years and well
into childhood if the more subtle consequences 
of being born too soon are to be understood.
Changes to services are frequently introduced with
no attempt to determine how far these changes
improve QoL for the individual concerned. Cochlea
implantation is a case in point. The benefits of 
this treatment need to be distinguished from the
confounding effects of the intensive rehabilitation
programme that accompanies surgery. The
dissemination of relevant QoL research in this 
field would help to re-align existing service
provision to accommodate such innovations 
in practice.
Palliative care
There are times when the distinction between
active and palliative care becomes blurred. If QoL
is important during treatment, it follows that QoL
must also be important during palliative care. The
most immediate concern may be about symptom
control, but both achievement of symptom control
and the means by which this is achieved, have
implications for QoL. For adolescents, some
degree of control over pain may contribute to
QoL. There are other QoL issues, however: what
do children understand? how fearful are they
about the future? Perhaps more than in any other
situation, the need is for a holistic concept of QoL,
which includes symptom control, but also
recognises the social and emotional needs of the
child and family. 
QoL as a reflection of the 
child’s perspective
Recent Government reports emphasise the
importance of involving children in their own
healthcare and taking their views into account.38
We have identified a range of situations where it
may be important to measure the child’s QoL. 
The justification for including assessment of QoL
when evaluating new treatments is clear, but we
demand more than this of QoL measures. We
require also that they reflect the child’s view, that
they allow us insight into the child’s experiences.
Previous recommendations that research with
children cannot be justified unless it offers direct
benefit have been moderated.39 Research that
emphasises children’s perceptions may be justified
in itself. Clinicians, and perhaps to a lesser extent
parents, may recognise late effects such as
infertility, cataracts or growth impairment as an
undesirable but almost inevitable consequence 
of cancer care, but these may be less acceptable 
to children. For them, the benefits (extended
survival) may not be seen to justify the costs, in
terms of compromised fertility or vision. In any
assessment of the value or efficacy of medical care,
it has to be recognised that traditional indicators 
of medical functioning do not necessarily reflect
patient’s reports about their own health. Thus, 
the impact of modern medicine is not limited to
change on a finite number of physical parameters,
but must be considered in relation to the child’s
overall QoL. 
For many children with a chronic condition,
medical follow-up is routinely encouraged even
though there are no real expectations of any
significant change in the child’s health. Thus, it is
recommended that survivors of childhood cancer
attend annual check-ups. Expectations about the
reasons for these appointments may differ between
patients and clinicians. From the clinicians’ point
of view, follow-up may be justified on more
psychological grounds. It is important to help
survivors adjust to the consequences of surviving a
life-threatening condition, as well as inform them
about their past disease and the possible future
consequences. Clinicians may see the focus of
these follow-ups on health promotion, rather than
conventional disease detection. Epidemiologists
may see the rationale in terms of justifying change
in design of subsequent protocols, by linking
specific late-effects with different treatment
protocols. From the patient’s point of view, the
purpose of follow-ups may not be clear, or
understood only vaguely in terms of detecting
relapse. Indeed, for patients themselves, it may be
unclear that any tangible benefits are associated
with the visit. There may even be some costs. For
example, evidence about the potential toxicity
associated with chemotherapy resulted in some
survivors of childhood cancer being asked to

----- Page 17 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
7
undergo cardiac function tests to determine any
impact of previous treatments on cardiac function.
Such tests, even when negative, may compromise
QoL by raising questions about current and future
health status, while offering little if any practical
advice. Similarly, parents of multiply handicapped
children may routinely keep appointments with the
paediatrician, but leave with little practical help,
apart perhaps from some reassurance that the
child is not deteriorating. In the current climate of
healthcare costs, it is important to ask how far such
visits are justified. Even if the paediatrician is
unable to suggest any new treatment, does the visit
benefit child or family QoL at all? A strictly cost-
orientated Health Service may need to provide
such justification for follow-up of this kind. If it is
not possible to cure a condition, exactly what is
achieved from the consultation? 
In all these situations, it is reasonable to also ask
how the child feels about treatment. This very
psychological orientation enhances the value of
QoL in paediatric medicine, but adds significantly
to its complexity. Attention to arguments of this
kind have resulted in a ‘paradigm shift’ in criteria
to evaluate outcomes.18 Changing attitudes in 
the Health Service and the increasing power 
of support groups have both been influential 
in forcing a sea change in how information is
communicated and shared with patients. 
While most of this activity has been conducted 
with adults, there is a vocal and powerful lobby
making similar demands for child patients. A very
limited body of work suggests that children want
information about their disease40 and surgical
treatment.41,42 Research with healthy children
suggests that from approximately 9 years of age
they are able to consider the consequences of
medical treatment and give valid consent.43
Accurate measures that reflect the impact of
disease and treatment from the child’s perspective
are urgently needed and could become a useful
additional measure of outcome of individual
randomised studies. Critically, if such measures 
are advocated, the aim must be to take this
information into account when planning future
randomised studies. The measurement of child
QoL must not be seen to be a limited academic
exercise, but one that has ‘real-life’ implications.
In the review that follows, it may be important to
bear in mind the range and diversity of situations
in which QoL is used at a popular and more
academic level. There is a need to consider QoL 
in conjunction with clinical measures and survival
statistics, in order to make comprehensive
decisions about treatment options. However, there
are many other contexts where QoL considerations
are crucial. Increasingly it is argued that QoL is a
relevant outcome in itself. In evaluating this review,
the reader is asked to consider how far it is
possible for any single concept to fulfil all that is
asked of QoL measures.
Summary
• From a historical perspective, the measurement
of children’s QoL has received less attention
than that given to adult QoL. 
• The concept of QoL is discussed loosely in the
popular press, but also has been considered by
different professional groups. The concept of
health-related QoL draws on ideas from
philosophy, economics, sociology and
psychology, as well as medicine.
• Two approaches to measuring child QoL can 
be identified; one subsequently associated 
with generic and the other with disease-
specific measures.
• A number of reasons can be identified to account
for the emergence of QoL as an important out-
come measure in Health Services work. These
include increased survival rates, particularly in
chronic and life-threatening conditions and
following traumatic injury; recognition that
treatment should not only increase life expectancy
but also improve QoL; limited correlation
between morbidity and patient satisfaction; 
and demands for patients to be more involved 
in decision-making and self-care. 
• QoL measures may be of potential value in
comparing outcomes in clinical trials, evaluating
interventions, commissioning programmes of
care, assessing the outcomes of new treatments,
and simply to aid understanding of the child’s
point of view.
• It may prove difficult to identify any single way
of measuring QoL that is appropriate for all of
these situations.

----- Page 18 (ocr) -----


----- Page 19 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
9
Aims and scope
A number of decisions needed to be made before
beginning the review. As discussed in the previous
chapter, a critical question involved our definition
of QoL. The literature suggested some overlap
between QoL and related concepts, including
health status or well-being. Our first task therefore
was to distinguish between these related concepts,
with a view to making decisions regarding inclusion
in the review. Second, having established the
relationship between QoL and related concepts, we
consider the relative merits of generic and disease-
specific measures. Third, as outlined in chapter 1,
there are different ways in which QoL measures
may be used. We argue for the need for measures
to discriminate (in clinical trials), to evaluate
(different treatments) and to predict (outcomes
for survivors). In evaluating QoL measures, we
need to take into account the different purposes
for which they were developed. Fourth, these
qualities are not the only standards against which 
a measure can be judged. We draw on the work of
a number of authors who consider the qualities, or
performance characteristics of different measures.
As a result, we are able to define a set of inclusion
and exclusion criteria to guide the literature
searches for this review.
Determining inclusion and
exclusion criteria for the review
Drawing on the research literature concerned with
definition and measurement of adult QoL, we
identified some key themes that need to be consid-
ered before conducting the review. These include:
• the distinctions between QoL and related concepts
• differences between generic and disease-
specific measures 
• defining the qualities or performance
characteristics of measures 
• clarifying the purpose of measures. 
These distinctions have been discussed extensively
in the past,44 but for current purposes we adopted
the framework outlined by Feeny and co-workers45
because these were more sympathetic to the issues
as they relate to measurement of children’s QoL.
These themes are also reviewed in order to identify
the inclusion and exclusion criteria to be adopted
for the review.
Distinctions between QoL and
related concepts
The terms health-related QoL, health status and
functional status are often used interchangeably.46,47
To the extent that QoL is in part a reflection of
functional status (inability to take part in daily
activities will be associated with poor QoL),
measures of functional status, ability to perform
activities of daily living, and health status are all
related to QoL. 
Functional status
Functional status has been defined as an indivi-
dual’s ability to perform normal daily activities that
are essential in order to meet basic needs, fulfil
usual roles, and maintain health and well-being.48
An individual’s functional status may include two
concepts of related interest: functional capacity
and functional performance. Functional capacity
represents an individual’s maximum capacity to
perform daily activities in the physical, psycho-
logical and social domains of life, whereas
functional performance refers to the activities
people actually do during the course of their daily
lives.49 Both functional capacity and performance
can be influenced by biological or physiological
impairment, symptoms, mood and other factors,48
as well as by health perceptions. For example,
individuals who are well but who view themselves 
as ill may have a low level of functional perfor-
mance in relation to capacity.49 Critically, measures
of functional status focus on functional ability and
overt behaviour, as opposed to subjective experi-
ence; they assess what individuals can actually do,
rather than what they feel able to do.
Health status 
Health status is a broader concept, reflecting an
individual’s relative level of wellness and illness,
taking into account the presence of biological 
or physiological dysfunction, symptoms, and
functional impairment. Most measures include
some key dimensions such as physical function,
sensation (e.g. vision, hearing, taste), self-care 
Chapter 2
Issues in measuring QoL in children

----- Page 20 (native) -----
Issues in measuring QoL in children
10
and dexterity, cognition, pain and discomfort, and
emotional and psychological well-being. These
dimensions have been defined as ‘narrow, within
the skin’, as the focus is on health status and the
capacity for living accorded to the individual as a
consequence.50 Others have objected to this narrow,
‘within the skin’ approach, arguing that health
status measures should also include assessment of
social interaction, resilience and vulnerability.48,51,52
Health status measures can potentially be used to:
• characterise the health of communities and allow
comparisons in terms of how well healthcare
systems meet the needs of the population
• compare major subgroups of the population in
order to detect systematic differences in health
• monitor the impact of health systems on the
health of the population
• assess the adequacy of interventions designed to
improve health, and
• serve as a screening tool to detect otherwise
unrecognised pathology in individuals, and
monitor changes associated with health service
interventions.
Many of these goals might also be fulfilled by QoL
measures. However, in addition to these goals, 
QoL measures have the potential to allow
assessment of the patient’s perspective of the
disease or treatment. Thus, QoL measures add 
a dimension of personal judgement, which is not
an integral part of health status measurement.
Well-being
Functional and health status measures tend to
focus on assessment of negative health states. 
As a consequence, patients may not have the
opportunity to report the ‘good’ things in their
lives, and conclusions may therefore fail to 
account for the complete spectrum of behaviour.
In recent years, there have been attempts to
develop more comprehensive measures, which
allow for description of patients’ coping resources
and positive well-being. Proponents of these
approaches emphasise that measures of ‘well-
being’ that focus on positive aspects of health 
are needed. Many of these draw on psychological
theories of personality, social learning, happiness
and optimism.53
QoL
Several key ideas define the concept of QoL. First
is the idea that individuals have their own unique
perspective on QoL, which depends on present
lifestyle, past experience, hopes for the future,
dreams and ambition. Second, when used in a
medical context, QoL is generally conceptualised
as a multidimensional construct encompassing
several domains.13, 54–56 This follows from the widely
accepted definition of health put forward by the
WHO as the state of complete physical, mental 
and social well-being and not merely the absence
of disease or infirmity.57 The Group goes on to
describe QoL as the individual’s perception of
their position in life, in the context of culture and
value systems in which they live, and in relation to
their goals, expectations, standards and concerns.58
Third, QoL can include both objective and
subjective perspectives in each domain.59 The
objective assessment of QoL focuses on what the
individual can do, and is important in defining 
the degree of health. The subjective assessment 
of QoL includes the meaning to the individual;
essentially it involves the translation or appraisal 
of the more objective measurement of health 
status into the experience of QoL. Differences in
appraisal account for the fact that individuals with
the same objective health status can report very
different subjective QoL: “The patient’s percep-
tions of, and attributions about the dysfunction 
are as important as their existence.”60
To the extent that individuals with significant
health impairment may report as good QoL as
those with no health problem, inclusion of this
subjective component adds a dimension of
individual difference to QoL. Great caution 
needs to be adopted in applying this idea of the
uniqueness of individual QoL, because it is
inappropriate to define QoL differently for some
groups in society: “It is imperative that all
definitions of QoL be referenced to the general
population both in their conception and
operational measures”.61
At the other extreme, there is considerable
literature which challenges the view that if an
individual is unable to perform a normative task,
QoL is inevitably compromised: “To imply that
physically disabled or elderly persons have a poorer
QoL than younger or able-bodied individuals is 
a reinforcement of stereotypes that underlie
discriminatory practices”.62
A good QoL can be said to be present when the
hopes of an individual are matched and fulfilled 
by experience. The opposite is also true: a poor
QoL occurs when the hopes do not meet with 
the experience.63
These themes have also been taken up by Bergner1
who states that: “QoL is enhanced when the

----- Page 21 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
11
distance between the individual’s attained and
desired goals is less”. It is clear that an individual’s
goals must be realistic and that the gap can be
realistically narrowed. From a therapeutic point 
of view, it is as possible to improve QoL by helping
a patient give up some dreams and accept reality
(and restrictions) or to work with another patient
to achieve more realistically set goals. A major
limitation of this approach may be in the failure 
to specify when goals are realistic and achievable
compared with those that are dreams or lacking 
in substance. Hayry64 is particularly critical to the
extent that such an approach to QoL may not only
be used in rehabilitation but also form the basis 
of QoL decision-making.
Gill and Feinstein65 distinguish three ways in 
which QoL may be assessed in the health context.
These include:
• more objective measures, such as clinical
indices, that patients would not themselves use
or necessarily be aware (such as blood sugar or
peak flow)
• functional performance (the ability to perform
daily activities about which patients are aware,
for example climbing stairs)
• patients’ own evaluation of the subjective
experience of being able to complete a 
given activity. 
This latter subjective rating of health status is 
now frequently considered to be the defining
characteristic of QoL, in contrast to concepts 
such as functional or health status.
Questions about the uniqueness of
health status and QoL measures
While the absence of a unique definition has been
criticised,1,65 the value of the construct of QoL is
not necessarily diminished. While a clinician may
assess the efficacy of treatment in physiological
terms (e.g. are blood sugar levels within
population norms?), patients may place greater
weight on how they feel. Thus, traditional
indicators of success following growth hormone
therapy may be increased height, but for children
and their families, the success may be as much
related to increased self-esteem or opportunities
for work from which the child might otherwise
have been excluded. Thus, the issue may be less
about how many centimetres have been gained
and more about whether children can keep up
with daily activities and enjoy life. QoL is difficult
to define precisely because the way in which a
child or family evaluate the success of the
treatment will be unique to their own special
circumstances. Height can be measured so easily;
changes in a child’s self-esteem much less so. Thus,
QoL and its measurement can seem nebulous or
unscientific compared with traditional end-points.
One of the goals of this review is to determine how
far measurement of QoL meets the standards, and
can be expected to reach the standards, that would
be demanded from more traditional measures.
Although there has been considerable debate
about the distinction between QoL and health
status measures, there has been very little in the
way of empirical work. An exception is a study
reported by Smith and co-workers66 who under-
took a meta-analysis of the relationships between
QoL and health status. This was determined in
relation to three domains (mental, physical and
social functioning). The analysis was based on 
12 previously published studies (seven of which
were conducted by the authors and their
colleagues). All studies involved adults. These
articles were identified from searching four key
journals (Quality of Life Research, Medical Care,
Journal of Clinical Epidemiology and Social Science 
and Medicine). 
The meta-analysis indicated that, from patients’
perspectives, QoL and health status are distinct
concepts. When rating their QoL, patients place
greater emphasis on mental, compared with
physical functioning. However, when rating their
health status, patients place greater weight on
physical functioning. Neither QoL nor health
status were affected by social functioning. 
The authors conclude that at least from patients’
perspectives, QoL and health status are different
concepts. The results raise important issues for
evaluations of medical treatments based on QoL 
or health status measures, to the extent that 
results will differ depending on the specific
measure employed. Comparable analyses based 
on studies involving children would be useful 
to confirm these findings.
Inclusion criteria
The concepts of health status, functional status 
and QoL are closely related, but have not so far
been distinguished conceptually. From adult work,
there is some suggestion that patients use health
status and QoL measures differently, suggesting
that choice of measure is critical. However, given
the lack of work aimed at distinguishing between
these overlapping measures in paediatric work, 
we decided to include in this review studies
involving any measures of health status, 
functional status or QoL.

----- Page 22 (native) -----
Issues in measuring QoL in children
12
Disease-specific and 
generic measures
In considering the measurement of QoL, a question
arises with respect to the standards against which
comparisons are made. Comparisons may be
needed within a group of children with the same
disease. Thus, we may wish to assess the efficacy of
an intervention to improve QoL among children
with CF. In these cases, disease-specific measures
may be appropriate. In other instances, the issue
may be about comparisons across different con-
ditions, when generic measures may be preferable.
Disease-specific measures
Disease-specific measures include domains that 
are designed to be valid only for a specified
condition.67 Therefore they maximise content
validity and provide for greater sensitivity and
specificity. Deyo and Patrick68 argue that disease-
specific measures have greater salience for
clinicians, better focus on functional areas of
particular concern, and may possess greater
responsiveness to disease-specific interventions.
However, disease-specific measures are not appro-
priate in a number of situations. They cannot be
used to compare QoL in children with different
conditions. In addition, because of their specificity
they may lack sensitivity for the specific condition.69
Disease-specific measures may have additional
limitations. Children may have more than one
condition. In these cases, it may be necessary to 
ask them to complete multiple disease-specific
measures. This would be time-consuming, and
inevitably result in some duplication in that
disease-specific measures tend to include some
standard or core-type information. In addition,
disease-specific measures are inappropriate for
children with rare conditions, for which no disease-
specific measure is available. It is not a solution to
advocate development of new measures for every
condition that can be defined. This would be
impractical. Apart from anything else, relatively
large numbers of children are necessary in order
to establish the psychometric properties of any 
new measure, and for the rarest conditions, this
would simply not be feasible.
Generic measures
If we want to know the QoL of a child compared
with the normal healthy population of similar-aged
children, generic measures are preferable. This
type of comparison is likely to be more acceptable
to parents, who do not wish to know how the QoL
of their child with asthma compares with that of a
child with epilepsy. They want to know how their
child’s QoL compares with that of the child next
door, who has no health problems. Generic
measures are designed to be broadly applicable
across conditions regardless of severity or
treatments.70
At least in the adult context, generic measures
tend to have been through a more rigorous
process of development including item selection,
reliability and validity testing.71 Generic measures
permit comparisons across interventions and
diagnostic conditions, potentially of relevance
when making decisions about resource allocation.
They may also have the advantage of offering
population norms for comparison across disease
states. They also allow dysfunction to be quantified
for an individual experiencing several disease
conditions.72 Generic measures may be further
categorised into health profiles, or preference
based measures.
Health profiles
Health profiles include multiple items, which are
grouped into different domains of functioning and
can be used for most populations. The domains of
health and functioning represented in the profiles
may or may not allow for aggregation into single
summary scores. Examples of profile measures for
adults include the Sickness Impact Profile (SIP),73
the Nottingham Health Profile74 and the Short
Form-36 (SF-36).75
Preference-based measures 
Preference-based measures may involve:
• direct assessment of preferences for health states
• use of multi-attribute health status 
classification systems.
The direct assessment of preferences for health 
is advocated for specific applications, allowing the
analyst to incorporate, as with specific instruments,
items of particular importance or relevance in that
setting. Health economists have concentrated on
developing single-score scales of QoL. This is
known as the utility approach. It was developed
from theories of decision-making76 to explain 
how a rational individual makes decisions under
conditions of uncertainty. In addition, the
conceptual foundations of utility assessment are
consistent with the theoretical foundations of
cost–benefit analysis in economics.77 Basic to this
approach is the idea that outcomes of healthcare
can be expressed in terms of quality-adjusted life-
years, or QALYs. QALYs integrate mortality and
morbidity data to express health status in terms of
equivalents of well years of life. A year of complete

----- Page 23 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
13
wellness is assigned a weight of 1.0 and weights
between 0 and 1.0 are assigned to years in which
life quality is reduced. There are a number of
methods of assigning these weights (e.g. time
trade-off, standard gamble). QALYs are not pure
measures of QoL but measures of units of benefit
from a medical intervention, combining life
expectancy with an index of, for example, disability
and distress.54 The value of QALYs in paediatric as
compared with adult medicine is not established.
The use of multi-attribute health status classifi-
cation systems focuses on the patient’s level of
satisfaction with their health in various domains.
This approach differs importantly from traditional
multidimensional systems by integrating morbidity
and mortality.50 For example, Feeny and co-
workers78 developed the Multi-Attribute Health
Status Classification System, which covers seven
attributes: sensation, mobility, emotion, cognition,
self-care, pain and fertility. This approach yields a
score of the child’s QoL for each health state, and
is based on judgements of a general population
sample of children and their parents’ ratings of the
relative importance of each of these attributes to
children’s QoL.79
Disadvantages of generic measures
Given their comprehensiveness, generic measures
may not be responsive to small changes in children’s
conditions and clinically relevant aspects of
children’s lives related to a specific disease condition
may be overlooked.80, 81 In addition, in that generic
measures can be longer than disease-specific
measures, they may place increased burden on
patient time, and may therefore be less acceptable.
In QoL work, generic measures are assumed
important in the context of decision-making. 
They are considered preferable to disease-specific
measures where decisions are made involving
allocation of resources in a public health context.
In contrast, disease-specific measures are needed 
to provide greater sensitivity and are of value in
comparisons of clinical trials or alternative
treatments. In practice, there have been few
attempts to compare the efficacy of generic 
versus disease-specific measures in adult work, 
and less for children.
Battery measures
Measures of related concepts could be used as
substitutes for QoL. Indeed, there are currently
measures that could be used to assess physical
function (e.g. physical symptoms and pain),
psychological function (e.g. anxiety, depression or
body image), and social function (e.g. employment,
social relations or marital status). In the absence 
of more comprehensive measures, it is therefore
possible that a combination of previously validated
measures may be considered preferable to a single
measure of QoL, particularly where few psycho-
metric data are available. This battery or modular
approach refers to collections of specific measures
that are scored independently and reported as
individual scores.82
Inclusion criteria
The relative advantages and disadvantages of
generic and disease-specific measures depend
primarily on the specific objectives of measure-
ment in clinical research, practice, or policy
analysis. Although it has been assumed that 
generic and disease-specific measures are
preferable in different contexts, there has been 
no empirical work with children in support of 
this. In recognition of the potential value of 
both generic and disease-specific measures
depending on the specific goals of the study, 
both generic and disease-specific measures are
included in this review. In the absence of com-
prehensive measures of QoL, some workers use
batteries of related measures. In recognition of
this, and in order to answer our fourth question,
we also decided to include any study involving a
battery approach to measurement.
Defining the qualities or
‘performance characteristics’ 
of measures
Paediatricians have traditionally been interested 
in the QoL of their patients. This is reflected in
standard enquiries about general health, which
often open doctor–patient consultations. In fact,
the ubiquitous greeting ‘How are you?’ is the
quintessential QoL measure! Specifically in
paediatrics, consultations will include questions
about general functioning such as the child’s
activities in and outside school. These informal
questions have their limitations, because
differences in how the questions are asked may
result in slightly different responses. ‘Is school
OK?’ is likely to result in a fairly uninformative
‘Yes’ or ‘No’ response, whereas ‘How have things
been at school lately?’ should only be asked if
more time is available, or if the questioner is 
really interested in the child’s answer! 
It is therefore necessary to adopt more standard-
ised approaches particularly if we want to understand
changes in the child’s QoL over time. In these
situations, where we want to be able to understand

----- Page 24 (native) -----
Issues in measuring QoL in children
14
changes over time, compare patients with the 
same disease, or those with different conditions, 
we need to adopt a more standardised approach to
measurement. In considering the inclusion criteria
for this review, it was necessary to consider the
performance characteristics or requirements for 
a good measure of QoL. We want to be able to
distinguish between informal and more formal
measures of QoL in order to include only those
which might be expected to fulfil some of these
criteria of reliability and reproducibility. 
The issue of reliability has been addressed by 
a number of authors. There is considerable
consensus regarding some requirements; for
example, measures should be reliable and valid,
brief and include facilities for proxy ratings. 
Other requirements are less frequently cited. 
A summary of the performance characteristics
identified is shown in Table 1. In this section, 
we consider in some detail the most frequently
cited requirements necessary for considering the
quality of a measure of QoL.
Reliability and validity are the most frequently
cited requirements of an acceptable measure of
QoL (Table 1). In the most simple terms, it is
important to know that a measure is reliable (i.e.
that children will respond similarly on different
occasions), and valid (i.e. that we are measuring
QoL rather than some other concept). 
Reliability
Reliability may be assessed in three ways: internal
consistency, test–retest reliability and inter-rater
reliability. Single-item measures (e.g. ‘How are
you?’) may not be satisfactory to the extent that
individuals can respond generally (e.g. ‘I’m OK’)
without giving details about different aspects of
their lives that are far from OK. Therefore it is
TABLE 1  Performance characteristics for child QoL measures identified by previous authors
Performance characteristic
Source
Reliable and valid for the groups of patients for 
Bradlyn et al., 1996;83 Eiser, 1997;84 Jenney et al., 1995;86
whom it is used
Koot (in press);23 Mulhern et al., 1989;85 Spieth & Harris, 199620
Employ self-report whenever possible
Bradlyn et al.,1996;83 Eiser, 1997;84 Koot (in press);23
Mulhern et al.,1989;85 WHO, 199387
Allow completions by proxy
Bradlyn et al., 1996;83 Eiser, 1997;84 Jenney et al., 1995;86
Koot (in press);23 Mulhern et al., 198985
Brief, easy to administer
Eiser, 1997;84 Jenney et al., 1995;86 Mulhern et al.,1989;85
Spieth & Harris, 199620
Child-centred and developmentally appropriate
Bradlyn et al., 1996;83 Eiser, 1997;84 Mulhern et al., 1989;85
WHO, 199387
The usability of the instrument must be considered 
Bradlyn et al.,199683
(e.g. the language, reading level, and burden to staff);
parents and families should be consistent with the 
stated objectives of the study
Age-corrected, general population norms
Koot (in press);23 Mulhern et al., 1989;85 Spieth & Harris, 199620
Reflect the agreed upon definition of QoL
Bradlyn et al., 1996;83 Koot (in press)23
Cover the full spectrum of behaviours thought to 
Eiser, 1997;84 Koot (in press);23 Mulhern et al., 198985
contribute to Qol (e.g. psychological, physical,
social functioning)
Include both objective and subjective assessment
Koot (in press);23 WHO, 199387
Include a generic core and disease-specific items
Jenney et al., 1995;86 WHO, 199387
Allow for supranormal performance
Mulhern et al., 198985
Cross-culturally compatible
WHO, 199387
Emphasise health-enhancing aspects of QoL
WHO, 199387

----- Page 25 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
15
hoped that greater reliability can be achieved by
using multiple items to measure the same concept.
For example, we might ask children how things 
are in school, with their friends, and in their
relationships with their families. The question 
then arises as to how far these multiple items 
really reflect the same underlying concept.
Internal consistency refers to the extent to which
the items of a domain or scale assess the same
dimension, and is normally measured using
Cronbach’s alpha. This is a statistical assessment 
of the correlation between items within a
dimension,88 and tests whether items within a 
scale correlate positively (i.e. measure the same
thing). An internal consistency of 0.70 has been
recommended for measures used to detect
between-group differences in clinical trials or
outcomes research, and greater than 0.90 for
interpreting individual scores.89 In practice, 
values greater than 0.50 may be considered
acceptable.88 Internal reliabilities for QoL
measures included in this review are shown in
appendix 4 and 5 and clearly frequently fall 
short of recommended ideals.
Test–retest reliability is established where
individuals complete a measure on two separate
occasions, and the two sets of scores are positively
correlated. In practice a measure can have high
test–retest reliability even when the scores of
individuals change over time, provided that
individuals broadly retain their relative positions
within the group. However, the assumption behind
assessing reliability in this way is that individuals
have not been differentially affected by anything
that has happened to them between the two 
testing occasions. Measures of test–retest reliability
in a clinical trial would provide reassuring evidence
that changes in scores in the treatment group 
are reliable and not due to the chance result 
of an unstable measure that produces fluctuating
scores under unchanging conditions. Low
test–retest reliability may reflect actual change
among some individuals and not necessarily
indicate that a measure has poor reliability.90
It has been argued that the importance of
test–retest reliability is often exaggerated and 
given greater emphasis compared with sensitivity 
to change.91
Inter-rater reliability is an assessment of the con-
sistency of an instrument when it is administered 
by different interviewers, and normally measured
using the kappa statistic.92 The time between
interviews is usually relatively short to minimise 
the probability of a real change. 
Validity
There is a very significant difficulty in establishing
the validity of QoL measures. Typically, when a 
new measure is developed, validity is established 
in relation to a previously accepted measure of 
the same concept. Thus, any new measure of IQ
has typically been validated against traditional
measures. (This assumes that traditional measures
really measure IQ, but this is a separate problem.)
With a ‘new’ concept such as QoL, the absence of
traditional measures or gold standards against
which new measures can be compared, is a limiting
factor in establishing validity in a conventional sense.
Construct validity or the extent to which an instru-
ment is a good representation of the construct 
is central in the evaluation of any measure, and
represents the key distinction between behavioural
measurement as a science from non-scientific
approaches. Cronbach and Meehl93 argued that
establishing the construct validity of a measure
involves at least three steps:
• articulating a set of theoretical concepts and
their interpretations
• developing ways to measure the hypothetical
constructs proposed by the theory
• testing the hypothesised relations among
constructs and their observable manifestations.
Some argue that factor analysis is the ideal 
method for establishing construct validity.94
Multitrait-multimethod modelling, factor analysis
and confirmatory factor analysis are sophisticated
statistical techniques, which are yet to be exploited
fully in the measurement of QoL. In many cases,
given small sample sizes, factor analysis is not
possible and decisions about the organisation 
of items into domains are made on a more 
ad hoc basis.
There are a number of disadvantages to using
factor analysis. There may be many possible ways 
of subdividing the covariance matrix to produce
groups of highly inter-correlated items, and thus 
to produce alternative, very different factorisations.
In practice factors may be difficult to interpret
and/or inconsistent across studies. There is a need
to have a second, confirmatory sample in which to
validate the model suggested by the factor analysis.
Confirmatory factor analysis places emphasis upon
the prior specification of a model.
Fayers and co-workers95 argue that less emphasis
should be placed on using factor analysis as a way
of deriving construct validity. They argue that to a

----- Page 26 (native) -----
Issues in measuring QoL in children
16
large extent construct validation may be explored
using a combination of less-numerical approaches
including patient debriefing questionnaires and
consensus interviews with patients and health-
care professionals.
Criterion validity can be viewed as a special case of
construct validity in which stronger hypotheses are
made possible by the availability of a criterion or
gold standard measure.96
Concurrent validity is the independent corrobo-
ration that the instrument is measuring what it is
supposed to measure (e.g. the corroboration of a
physical functioning scale with observable criteria).
Criterion validity is usually explored using a gold
standard, and correlations must be high (0.75 is 
a minimum). Thus, new measures of IQ are
routinely validated against established measures
such as the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for
Children.97 In the case of IQ, such an approach is
possible, but there are difficulties for establishing
concurrent validity for measures of QoL, given 
the lack of previous measures. Thus, concurrent
validity is only useful where good criteria exist.
Where criterion measures are not available,
concurrent validity studies are best regarded as
aspects of construct validity.98
The issue of determining validity in the absence 
of a gold standard requires a different approach.
Face validity refers to subjective assessments of 
the presentation and relevance of the measure.
Determination of content validity is more systematic
than for face validity. It refers to judgements
(usually made by a panel) about the extent to
which the content of the instrument appears
logically to examine and comprehensively include
a full assessment of the characteristics or domains
it is intended to measure. Qualitative methods can
be particularly valuable in discovering the set of
relevant dimensions or in assessing the content
validity of a measure.
In order to demonstrate construct validity, it is
necessary to show not only that a measure correlates
highly with other variables with which it should
correlate theoretically, but also that it does not
correlate with variables from which it should
differ.99 Discriminant validity involves testing
whether the data correlate with results from
unrelated measures. 
Item discriminant validity is demonstrated when
each item on a hypothesised scale is substantially
linearly related to the underlying concept being
measured. An item-scale correlation, corrected for
an overlap of more than 0.40, has been
recommended.99 The item discriminant validity
does not directly support the overall ability of 
a measure to distinguish or discriminate across
conditions; rather it provides evidence of the
conceptual logic for placing an item within a
particular scale relative to other scales within 
a measure.
Responsiveness is operationalised as the “change 
in QoL score due to a minimal clinical inter-
vention divided by the fluctuation in QoL score
due to error of measurement”.100 Hays and
Hadorn100 argue that responsiveness is an aspect 
of validity rather than a separate entity. If an
instrument is responsive to a clinical intervention,
this fact provides some support for the validity of
the instrument.100 A measure can be reliable, but
unresponsive.47,100 Common methods for evaluating
responsiveness include comparing scale scores
before and after an intervention, or comparing
changes in scale scores with changes in other
related measures that would be expected to move
in the same direction as the target measure.
Assessment of responsiveness often involves
estimation of effect size or magnitude of change 
in QoL. Effect size translates the before-and-after
changes into a standard unit of measurement.
The more detailed or specifically relevant the
measure is to the particular intervention being
evaluated, the more sensitive to change it is likely
to be. While sensitivity to change is a valued
characteristic of QoL measures, it is also important
that the measure can produce stable results when
there is no reason to expect change. Adequate
variability of scores is necessary in order to ensure
the sensitivity to differences between respondents.
The responsiveness of evaluative instruments 
may be compromised by ceiling effects in which
patients with the best score may have substantial
impairment in their QoL or floor effects in 
which patients with the worst score may 
deteriorate further.47
Inclusion criteria
The requirements for a satisfactory measure
include reliability, validity and responsiveness.
There is no single way to establish any of these
properties particularly in the absence of a gold
standard, as is the case with QoL measures. 
The criteria for inclusion in this review there-
fore included evidence that in developing a
measure attempts were made to establish some 
of these properties of reliability, validity 
and responsiveness.

----- Page 27 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
17
Purpose of measures
The need to develop a set of standardised pro-
cedures to assess hypothetical constructs is not
unique to the field of QoL. The problem has 
long been recognised by researchers interested 
in measuring attitudes, personality or motivational
variables such as self-efficacy or self-esteem. 
“The basic notions of measurement are not 
hard to grasp, but they become more difficult to
achieve as we move from the natural sciences,
through the biological and medical sciences, 
to the behavioural and social sciences”.101
The result is delineation of a standard set of
procedures that are generally acknowledged 
to be appropriate.
The standard psychometric approach requires 
the individual to indicate the presence, frequency
or intensity of symptoms, behaviours and feelings,
usually on a series of Likert scales. Responses 
to individual questions are aggregated to create
homogeneous scales (e.g. physical function) 
or global summary scores.102 Results derived 
from psychometric measures are designed to
arrange persons along a continuum of function 
or well-being. The general purpose is to discrim-
inate levels of functioning between groups and 
to detect changes in function over time, the very
same requirements as defined for measurement 
of QoL. Measurement qualities include reliability
(i.e. the extent to which the measure produces
scores that are internally consistent and/or stable
over time), and validity, or how well it measures 
the construct under consideration. 
Guyatt and co-workers47 have proposed that QoL
measures can be used for three main purposes.
Measures can be used to discriminate between
individuals or groups with respect to an under-
lying dimension (discriminative index), to 
predict or classify individuals into a set of
predefined categories (predictive index), 
or to evaluate or assess the magnitude of
longitudinal change in an individual or 
group (evaluative index). 
To provide a more concrete example of direct
relevance to this review, we draw on a report
provided by Rosenbaum and Saigal.103 If we 
wanted to know how cerebral palsy (CP) affected
QoL, we might need to consider this in different
ways. The functional limitations of CP are well-
known, but individuals may vary in how far 
they are consequently restricted in terms of
everyday activities. Those with the same apparent
degree of functional limitation may differ in 
self-assessed QoL. We might therefore wish 
first to measure how far the QoL of the child 
with CP differed from other children. In this 
case, we would want to use QoL as a 
discriminative measure. 
Second, QoL measures can also be used to 
evaluate the impact of different treatments or
interventions with children with CP. It may be
unreasonable to expect that any intervention
would lead to changes in functional capacity 
for all children, but more realistically, an
intervention might lead to broader benefits 
such as increased self-confidence or ability to 
enjoy a wider range of activities. The hope 
might be that QoL measures could fulfil a 
need in evaluating programmes at such a 
broad-based level.
Third, it may be important to be able to predict
outcomes in order to provide appropriate
education and social opportunities for the child.
Given limited resources, there would be advantages
in being able to predict which children would
benefit from an intervention.
In more general terms, measures that reflect
discrimination are useful in cross-sectional 
studies where there may be a need to distinguish
the burden of morbidity between groups or
individuals. For these purposes, a QoL measure 
is needed not only to show that a measure
correlates highly with other variables with which 
it should correlate theoretically, but also that it
does not correlate with variables from which it
should differ.99
Different QoL measures may be required when 
the purpose is to predict the score on another
measure at the same point in time. These
measures, which are more suitable for prediction,
are valuable when determining the relationship
between a standard form of a measure and a 
new short form, or when developing simpler
measures involving less patient burden. Finally,
evaluation measures are needed for longitudinal 
or prospective studies involving clinical trials. 
Here it is essential that the measure can identify
change in QoL over time (either improvement 
or deterioration) where this occurs, but also 
shows little variation in the scores of individuals
whose condition remains stable over the period 
of study.
In addition to these main purposes, as argued in
chapter 1, QoL measures may be useful to enhance
understanding of the child’s experience.

----- Page 28 (native) -----
Issues in measuring QoL in children
18
Inclusion criteria
QoL measures can be used to discriminate between
individuals or groups, to predict outcomes, or to
evaluate the impact of a treatment or intervention.
These properties have most frequently been
determined as part of the process of developing a
measure. In deciding on the inclusion criteria for
this review, we therefore included any study where
attempts were made to determine discrimination,
evaluation or prediction of an established or
emerging measure of QoL or health status or 
to describe the child’s perspective.
Respondent issues
To the extent that QoL is subjective, there are
strong arguments in favour of eliciting data 
directly from children wherever possible. It is 
not possible for anyone else to have insight into
the child’s unique experiences, and there are
circumstances (in school for example) where
neither parents nor clinicians have the infor-
mation that is necessary (see Box 1). From 
quite an early age, children may learn that certain
topics upset their parents and are better not
discussed at home. Some of the very earliest
reports about how children cope with cancer
suggested that they learned pretty quickly that it
was better not to discuss this with their parents.104
For any child, part of the normal growing-up
experience involves establishing their own friends
and values independently of their parents.
Comprehensive evaluation of QoL is therefore
dependent on developing methods that allow for
self-completion whenever a child is old enough 
or well enough.
Although the individual is the ‘best’ reporter of
their own QoL, it may not always be possible to
elicit QoL information directly from children as
they may lack the cognitive and linguistic skills
necessary to complete measures (see chapter 5). 
In these cases, it may be necessary to seek
information from ‘proxies’ usually clinicians,
parents or teachers. While parents’ views about 
the child’s QoL may be useful, interesting and
indeed valid, there are no reasons to suppose 
that they can be used as substitutes for the 
child’s own views. Parents’ views will be based 
on different information, different expectations
and reflect different experiences. They will 
also be affected by their own mental and 
physical health. Despite these obvious 
differences that must exist between children 
and their parents, validation of new QoL 
measures have often been reported in terms 
of positive correlations between parents and
children’s reports.
Inclusion criteria
Although QoL information should ideally be
provided by the individual, it has often been
assumed that children are unreliable informants
and therefore adults, usually mothers, are asked 
to provide information for their child. There are
also circumstances where children are too young
or too ill to provide information themselves. While
it may be necessary to rely on parents for inform-
ation, there are no reasons to suppose that QoL
data provided by parents and children will be the
same. Even so, in developing new measures of
QoL, attempts are often made to establish
comparability between parents and children. 
It was therefore decided to include any study 
which reported QoL information provided by 
child or proxy respondent or both. This decision
was also necessary in order to answer the third
question of the review: To what extent do child
self-reports correspond with the assessments made
by parents and carers?
BOX 1 A case study of Jo
Jo (16 years) was recovering from surgery to
remove a bone tumour in her lower leg. The
tumour had been successfully removed and the
diseased bone replaced with a metal prosthesis. 
Six months later, according to Jo, she was making
an excellent recovery. She was having difficulty
running, but otherwise she was riding her bike,
going out with friends and doing everything she
wanted to do.
Her mother told a different story. Jo was often 
sick and had not returned to school full-time. She
could ride the stable bike in the Physiotherapy
Centre, but would be unable to ride a normal bike
on a road. Yes, she was seeing her friends, but only
when her father drove her around. The family 
had re-organised the house so that Jo could 
sleep downstairs and therefore not have to 
climb upstairs. 
The dilemma created here is between the picture
painted by Jo of someone coping well and ‘back to
normal’ and that painted by her mother. Such
discrepancies are not unusual but remain difficult
to explain. How do we decide exactly who is telling
‘the truth?’ Jo who wants to convey the impression
that she is fine, or her mother who emphasises the
difficulties her daughter is experiencing? Part of
the mother’s concerns stem from her anxieties
about the future and these may (or may not) 
be unfounded.

----- Page 29 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
19
Additional criteria
Given the scope of our review, it was necessary to
make further decisions regarding the definition of
chronic disease and childhood. In the event, we
adopted the traditional definition of chronic
disease as one lasting for 3 months or more and for
which there is no cure.105 While recognising inter-
relationships between disease, handicap and disability,
we attempted to adhere to the requirements of the
review, and focus on issues of QoL in physical disease.
Thus, the review does not attempt to consider QoL
issues in relation to disability or handicap. 
Legal definitions of childhood may differ from that
adopted in clinical practice. Even here, definitions
may differ and be more flexible for children with
long-standing or chronic conditions.106 For simp-
licity, we adopted the legal definition, including
research involving children of 18 years or less.
Summary
On the basis of the literature reviewed in this chapter,
the following inclusion criteria were adopted. 
• Health status, functional status and QoL
Measures of health status, functional status and
QoL were included on the grounds that some
measures called QoL are in reality health status,
and to some extent the reverse is also true. To
the extent that no empirical work has been
conducted to date that allows for satisfactory
distinctions to be made between these concepts,
any study claiming to involve assessment of
health status, functional status or QoL was
considered for inclusion. However, studies were
excluded where QoL was used purely as an
indicator of physiological function (such as
blood sugar level). (See appendix 3 for 
other examples.)
• Generic and disease-specific measures In
recognition of the potential value of both
generic and disease-specific measures, the
decision was taken to include both generic and
disease-specific measures. We also included
studies involving battery measures in order to
answer our fourth question: How feasible and
reliable are proxy measures of QoL in different
disease contexts?
• Psychometric properties The requirements for
a satisfactory measure include reliability, validity
and responsiveness. There is no single way to
establish any of these properties particularly in
the absence of a gold standard, as is the case
with QoL measures. The criteria for inclusion in
this review therefore included evidence that in
developing a measure attempts were made to
establish these properties of reliability, validity
and responsiveness. In addition, in recognising
that QoL can be useful in enabling us to
understand the child’s perspective, we included
any study where this was the goal.
• Respondent issues It was decided to include any
study that reported QoL information provided
by child or proxy respondent or both. This
decision was also necessary in order to answer
the third question of the review: To what extent
do child self-reports correspond with
assessments made by parents and carers?
• Chronic illness Criteria for inclusion were based
on the International Classification of Disease
class 10 (ICD-10) diagnoses. Following standard
recommendations, a chronic disease is defined
as one that lasts or is expected to last for at least
3 months in any given year, and for which there
is no cure. In addition, survivors of illness
diagnosed earlier in childhood (e.g. malignant
disease, neonatal intensive care, end-stage renal
disease) are included. This approach means that
studies of long-term survivors of chronic disease
are included. 
• Age of children assessed Studies were included
if the children assessed were aged 18 years or
younger. Studies that include both children and
adults without analysing data from children
separately were excluded.

----- Page 30 (ocr) -----


----- Page 31 (native) -----
Aims and scope
Based on the literature reviewed in chapter 2, we
defined the inclusion and exclusion criteria for the
current work. A search strategy was then devised
with the aim to identify a broad range of papers
potentially of relevance to the issues. The papers
were coded for relevance to the key questions. 
The search strategy was developed to provide a
comprehensive list of publications, both published
and unpublished, which have employed measures of
QoL or proxy measures of QoL for children. Our
initial overview of the history of measurement of
QoL for children indicated that the first generally
acknowledged measure of QoL for children was
reported by Lansky and co-workers.11 To cover the
possibility of earlier work the starting date for
retrieval was set at 1980. A general search strategy
was employed, in order to identify any papers that
were relevant to the definition, measurement or
application of QoL measures in children. 
It was not possible to review the papers identified
in the conventional sense of applying an established
methodology as used by the Cochrane groups. This
was due to the heterogeneity of the studies identified,
and the broad focus of the review questions. This is
intended to be a comprehensive review, and one
that presents an accurate balance of opinion, but
inevitably includes our own judgements and opinions.
Method
Search procedure
Search strategies were devised using the appropriate
keywords and combination of keywords (see
appendix 1). These were applied in combination
using the logical operators specified by each
database. In order to ensure a comprehensive
recall across a range of measures, the terms health
status, well-being and functional status were included.
For the same reason, we specified individual chronic
conditions in addition to general terms such as
chronic disease and illness. Adoption of these very
broad concepts resulted in good sensitivity but
poor specificity. The subject headings ‘quality of
life’ and ‘children’ were used when searching the
Cochrane Controlled Trials Register (CCTR).
Searches were restricted to English language
papers as to do otherwise would greatly increase
the costs of the review. However, papers published
in English but which originated from non-English
speaking countries were included. In these cases,
English versions of the QoL measures were
available, but the published data were usually
based on the original version. 
Electronic databases
The following databases were searched from 1980
to July 1999:
• MEDLINE via WebSPIRS
• BIDS ISI Science Citation Index 
• BIDS ISI Social Science Citation Index
• PsycLIT via WebSPIRS
• CCTR
• meta Register of Controlled Trials 
(URL: http://www.controlled-trials.com). 
Handsearches
The electronic databases were supplemented 
by handsearching relevant journals and cross-
referencing with reference lists in identified
articles. In addition, information was requested
from key workers in the field (see Acknowledge-
ments). This identified work in progress and
papers that had been submitted for publication.
In recognising that issues of QoL have been of
interest to clinicians and behavioural scientists, 
the following key journals in British and American
paediatrics, as well as journals focusing on psycho-
logical issues of chronic childhood disease and
QoL were identified. As a result, the following
journals were handsearched:
• Archives of Disease in Childhood
[Jan 1990 – July 1999]
• Child: Care Health and Development 
[Jan 1990 – July 1999]
• Journal of Pediatrics 
[Jan 1990 – July 1999]
• Journal of Pediatric Psychology 
[Jan 1986 – July 1999]
• Pediatrics 
[Jan 1990 – July 1999]
• Quality of Life Research 
[1992 – July 1999].
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
21
Chapter 3
Review methodology

----- Page 32 (native) -----
Review methodology
22
Internet search engines were used to identify 
links to QoL research by entering key words.
The following websites were identified:
• Clinician’s Computer Assisted Guide to the
Choice of Instruments for Quality of Life
Assessment in Medicine 
(URL: http://www.qlmed.org/index.html) 
• International Society for Quality of Life
Research (URL: http://www.isoqol.org) 
• Measurement of Health Related Quality of Life
(URL: http://www.fhs.mcmaster.ca/hrqol/
qolintro.htm)
• American Thoracic Society: Quality of Life
Resource (URL: http://www.atsqol.org/
frmain.html)
• Health related Quality of Life: Mapi Research
Institute (URL: http//www.mapi-research-
inst.com/research/data2.htm).
Summary of inclusion and 
exclusion criteria
As a result of the literature review described in
chapter 2, the inclusion and exclusion criteria
adopted for the review are as follows.
Inclusion criteria
• Measures of QoL, health status or well-being
• Measures that possessed minimum psychometric
properties (i.e. some reliability and/or validity
data) or assess the child’s point of view
• Single (generic or disease-specific) or proxy
measures (batteries) 
• Measures that include facility for completion by
child or proxy or both
• The presence of an ICD-10 diagnosis of a
chronic disease or condition
• Children aged 18 years or younger.
Exclusion criteria
• QoL measured only by clinical indicators 
(e.g. haemoglobin level)
• QoL restricted to demographic or environ-
mental indicators 
• Review articles or comments about the measure-
ment of QoL in children or adolescents.
Data extraction and synthesis
Where possible, abstracts were screened in order to
assess the relevance of articles. Papers that clearly
met the exclusion criteria were rejected at this
stage. Where abstracts were ambiguous the article
was obtained. References that appeared relevant
were downloaded into Reference Manager
(Reference Information Systems, version 8) and
the full article was obtained. Primary research
papers that fulfilled the inclusion criteria were
coded using a data extraction form, which was
designed to preserve as much of the original
information as possible (see appendix 2). Codings
were made by two independent researchers who
later cross-checked for errors and omissions.
Primary research papers
As a result of the initial screening the abstracts of
255 potentially relevant studies were identified,
and these were downloaded into Reference
Manager (Figure 1). An additional 14 references
were obtained from other sources (requests for
articles in press and identifying articles in
references of obtained articles). Background 
and review papers that were identified during 
the screening process were obtained in order to
inform the writing of the review. 
The application of the inclusion criteria defined
above resulted in a total of 137 papers being
retained for the review. (Information on the
excluded papers is given in appendix 3). 
Results
Of the 137 papers included in the review, 
43 involved the development of a new measure, 
79 reported further development and application,
and 15 assessed QoL based on a battery approach.
Identification of measures of QoL 
Forty-three measures of QoL, health status or well-
being were identified that met the inclusion criteria.
Descriptive characteristics of these measures are
provided in Tables 2 and 3. Further information in
terms of their structure, format, and psychometric
properties is given in appendices 4 and 5, as well 
as references for any publications associated 
with each of the measures (whether as part of
development or the application of the measure.)
Generic and disease-specific measures
Of the measures retrieved 19 were generic and 24
were disease-specific (Figure 2). Multiple measures
are available for some chronic conditions: asthma
(n = 4), cancer (n = 5), and epilepsy (n = 4).
Measures were also identified for arthritis (n = 1),
Crohn’s disease (n = 1), diabetes (n = 1), headache
(n = 1), neuromuscular disorders (n = 1), otitis
media (n = 1), rhinoconjunctivitis (n = 1), skin
disorders (n = 1), spina bifida (n = 1), short 
stature (n = 1) and spine deformities (n = 1).
Proxy ratings
The number of measures are summarised in 
Figure 2 in terms of whether they are generic or

----- Page 33 (native) -----
FIGURE 1  Results of the search showing number of papers abstracted (included papers shown in brackets)
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
23
disease-specific, and whether they allow for completion
by both child and proxy, proxy alone or child
alone. There were 15 measures that allowed for
completion by children and parent/caregiver. In
some cases, these included parallel forms for both
respondents. In other cases, wider changes were
made in order to make the separate versions more
suitable for completion by children. 
Domains
The number of domains assessed ranged between
111,12 and 17,110 with the number of domains being
comparable for generic (mean, 6.8) and disease-
specific measures (mean, 5.7).
Length of scale
The total number of items ranged between 111,12
and 153.110
Country of origin
Measures were identified that were developed in
the USA (n = 18), the UK (n = 8); Canada (n = 8),
and The Netherlands (n = 2). Single measures
were developed in Germany, Israel, Spain, Sweden,
Norway and Finland. 
Classification of measures
The measures were described by their authors as
QoL (n = 30), health status (n = 8), functional
status (n = 2), perception of illness (n = 1), life
satisfaction (n = 1), and quality of well-being (n = 1).
Age
Measures were categorised according to the
chronological age of the child targeted. Among
generic measures, one was targeted at children
between 0–5 years, six at children across a broad
age range, two at children in middle childhood
(about 6–11 years), four at adolescents and four 
at children from 8 years to late adolescence. In
addition, two measures were based on adult
measures. Comparable figures for disease-specific
measures were 0, 8, 1, 6 and 8, with one measure
based on an adult measure.
Identification of papers that address 
the four review questions
The 137 papers included in the review were coded
according to which, if any, of the review questions
they addressed. Some papers addressed more than
one of the review questions.
MEDLINE
190
[107]
PsycLIT
47
[10]
BIDS SCI/SSCI
12
[4]
Total papers
269
[137]
CCTR
6
[2]
Other
14
[14]
EMBASE was not used in the original search as access was not available. However, this search has subsequently been carried out
and did not reveal any additional studies
FIGURE 2  Breakdown of the number of measures retrieved, classified as generic or disease-specific and by respondent
Child/proxy
9
Proxy only
2
Child only
8
Child/proxy
7
Proxy only
5
Generic
19
Disease-specific
24
Child only
12
Measures
43

----- Page 34 (native) -----
Review methodology
24
• The extent to which adult measures are applied
in the evaluation of healthcare interventions was
addressed in 14 papers, of which 11 involved
modification of an adult measure. 
• The extent to which child self-reports
correspond with assessments made by parents
and carers was addressed in 11 papers.
• Fifteen papers were identified which addressed
the feasibility and reliability of proxy measures
of various aspects of QoL.
The remaining review question, relating to the
appropriateness of adult measures for use with
children, was addressed non-systematically in a
number of review and empirical papers. In
considering this question therefore, we drew on
review and background papers, as well as related
literature identified from reference lists. These 
are included in the general references.
Summary
• A search strategy was devised from surveys of
previous reviews, with the aim of identifying as
broad a spectrum of papers as possible of
potential relevance to the key questions.
• The search strategy was developed based on key
words and combinations of key words using the
logical operators specified by each database.
Adoption of broad concepts resulted in good
sensitivity but poor specificity. Computerised
searches were supplemented by handsearches 
of key journals.
• As a result of the initial screening, hand-
searches and requests to authors for papers in
press, 269 articles were identified. Application 
of the inclusion and exclusion criteria resulted
in 137 papers being included in the review.
• Of the 137 papers, 43 were primarily concerned
with the development of a new measure of QoL,
79 reported subsequent development of these
same measures, and 15 used a battery approach
to measure QoL.
• Fourteen papers were identified concerning 
the extent to which adult measures are applied
in the evaluation of healthcare interventions, 
of which 11 involved modification of an 
adult measure.
• Eleven papers were identified concerning the
extent to which child self-reports correspond
with assessments made by parents and carers.
• Fifteen papers were identified concerning the
feasibility and reliability of proxy measures of
various aspects of QoL.
• The remaining review question, relating to 
the appropriateness of adult measures for 
use with children, was addressed non-
systematically in a number of review and
empirical papers.

----- Page 35 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
25
TABLE 2  Summary of the generic QoL measures identified
Measure and
Respondent Age range
No. of
No. of
Name of domains
Reliability
Validity
Origin
study
(years)
items
domains
continued
Child Health and Illness
Profile (CHIP-AE)
Riley et al., 1998;107,108
Starfield et al., 1993,109
1995,110 1996111
Self
11–17
153
6
Achievement, comfort, disorders,
resilience, risks, satisfaction
Test–retest
Internal consistency
Criterion
Convergent
USA
Child Health
Questionnaire (CHQ)
Landgraf et al., 1997,19
1998112
Self
Parent
10–19
4–19
87
98, 50, 28
12
Physical functioning, role/social functioning
(physical), general health perceptions,
bodily pain, discomfort, general behaviour,
mental health, self-esteem, role/social
functioning (emotional), parental impact
(emotional), parental impact (time), family
activities, family cohesion
Global item: change in health
Internal consistency
Concurrent
USA
Child Quality of Life
Questionnaire (CQOL)
Graham et al., 1997113
Self
Parent
9–15
15
15
Getting about and using hands, school,
out-of-school activities, friends, family
relationships, discomfort due to bodily
symptoms, worries, depression, seeing,
communication, eating, sleep, appearance
Test–retest
Convergent
UK
Dartmouth COOP
Functional Health
Assessment Charts 
COOP adolescents:
Wasson et al.. 1994,114
1995115
Adolescent
Adolescent
6
6
Physical fitness, emotional feelings, school
work, social support, family
communication, health habits
Test–retest
Construct
USA
Exeter Health-Related
Quality Life Measure
(EHRQL)
Eiser et al., 2000,116 1999117
Self
7–12
16
–
Dimensions yet to be proposed
Internal consistency
Clinical
UK
Functional Status (II) R
(FSIIR)
Stein & Jessop, 199014
Parent
0–16
43
14
8
Communication, mobility, mood, energy,
play, sleep, eating, toileting
Internal consistency
Construct
USA

----- Page 36 (native) -----
Review methodology
26
TABLE 2 contd  Summary of the generic QoL measures identified
Measure and
Respondent Age range
No. of
No. of
Name of domains
Reliability
Validity
Origin
study
(years)
items
domains
continued
Generic Health
Questionnaire
Collier, 1997118
Self
6–16
25
5
General affect, peer relationships,
attainments, relationships with parents,
general satisfaction
Internal consistency
Test–retest
Concurrent
UK
How Are You? (HAY)
Bruil, 1999119
Self
Parent
7–13
80
5
Physical functioning, cognitive functioning,
social functioning, physical complaints, and
happiness
Internal consistency
Construct
The
Nether-
lands
KINDL
Ravens-Sieberer et al.,
1999120
Self
8–16
40
4
Psychological well-being, social
relationships, physical functioning, every-
day life activities
Internal consistency
Test–retest
Convergent
Clinical
Concurrent
Germany
Nordic Quality of Life
Questionnaire for
Children
Lindstrom & Koehler,
1991,4 Lindstrom &
Eriksson, 1993,121
Lindstrom, 1994122
Parent 
Self
2–18
12–18
74
4
Global, external, inter-personal, personal
Under evaluation
Under evaluation
Sweden
Pediatric Quality of Life
Questionnaire (PedsQL)
Varni et al., 1999,123
submitted124
Self 
Parent
5–18
2–18
30
5
Physical functioning, psychological
functioning, social functioning, school
functioning, well-being
Internal consistency
Construct
Clinical
USA
Perceived Illness
Experience (PIE)
Eiser et al., 1999,125
1995126
Self
Adolescent
34
8
Perceived impact on physical appearance,
interference with activity, disclosure,
integration in school, peer rejection,
parental behaviour, manipulation,
preoccupation with illness
Test–retest
Internal consistency
Construct
UK
Quality of Life Profile –
Adolescent Version
Raphael et al.,1996127
Self
14–20
54
3
Being (physical, psychological, spiritual);
belonging (physical, social, community);
becoming (practical, leisure, growth)
Internal consistency
Construct
Canada

----- Page 37 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
27
TABLE 2 contd  Summary of the generic QoL measures identified
Measure and
Respondent Age range
No. of
No. of
Name of domains
Reliability
Validity
Origin
study
(years)
items
domains
Preference-based measures
continued
Sickness Impact Profile
(SIP) (Adult measure
used by Iorio et al.,
1997128)
Self
Parent
3–14
135
136
(adult
version)
12
Ambulation, mobility, body care and
movement, communication, alertness,
emotional behaviour, social interaction,
sleep and rest, eating, work, home
management, recreation and pastimes
Reported for adults
not children
USA
TACQOL
Theunissen et al.,
1998,129 Vogels et al.,
1998130
Self
Parent
8–11
108
7
Pain and symptoms, social functioning,
motor functioning, autonomy, cognitive
functioning, negative global emotional
functioning, positive global emotional
functioning
Internal consistency
Convergent
Clinical
The
Nether-
lands
The Warwick Child and
Morbidity Profile
Spencer & Coe, 1996131
Parent
0–5
16
10
General health status, acute minor illness
status, behavioural status, accident status,
acute significant illness status, hospital
admission status, immunisation status,
chronic illness status, functional health
status, quality of life
Test–retest
Inter-rater
Construct
UK
Health Utilities Index
(HUI) – Mark 2
Feeny et al., 199278
Self
Parent
X
6+
7 
7
7 
7
Sensation, mobility, emotion, cognition,
self-care, pain, fertility
Test–retest
Internal consistency
Clinical
Canada
Health Utilities Index
(HUI) – Mark 3
Boyle et al., 1995132
Parent
8
8
Vision, hearing, speech, ambulation,
dexterity, emotion, cognition,
pain/discomfort
Test–retest
Clinical
Canada

----- Page 38 (native) -----
Review methodology
28
TABLE 2 contd  Summary of the generic QoL measures identified
Measure and
Respondent Age range
No. of
No. of
Name of domains
Reliability
Validity
Origin
study
(years)
items
domains
16D
Apajassalo et al., 1996133
17D
Apajassalo et al., 1996134
Self
Self
12–15
8–11
16
17
16
17
Mobility, vision, hearing, breathing,
sleeping, eating, elimination, speech, mental
function, discomfort and symptoms,
school and hobbies, friends, physical
appearance, depression, distress, vitality
Mobility, vision, hearing, speech, breathing,
sleeping, eating, elimination, discomfort
and symptoms, school and hobbies,
friends, physical appearance, depression,
anxiety, vitality, ability to concentrate,
learning ability and memory
Test–retest
Test–retest
Clinical
Clinical
Finland
Quality of Well-Being
(QWB) Scale
Bradlyn et al., 1993135
Parent
Self
0–18
Adolescent
3 scales
and 23
symptoms
3
Mobility scale, physical activity scale, social
activity scale
Internal consistency
USA

----- Page 39 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
29
TABLE 3  Summary of the disease-specific QoL measures identified
Measure and
Respondent Age range
No. of
No. of
Name of domains
Reliability
Validity
Origin
study
(years)
items
domains
Asthma
Cancer
continued 
About my Asthma
(AMA)
Mishoe et al., 1998136
Self
6–12
44
–
Unitary scale not grouped into domains
Test–retest
Construct
USA
Asthma Quality of Life
Gibson et al., 1995137
Self
Adolescents
30
4
Asthma symptoms, activities limited by
asthma, environmental triggers, emotions
Adult based
Australia
Childhood Asthma
Questionnaires (CAQ)
Christie et al., 1993,138
French et al.,1994139
Self
4–7 
8–11 
12–16 
CAQA:
14
CAQB:
22
CAQC:
31
1
2
5
A (distress)
B (active QoL, passive QoL)
C (active QoL, teenage QoL, distress,
severity, reactivity)
Internal consistency
Test–retest
Clinical
UK
Pediatric Asthma Quality
of Life Questionnaire
(PAQLQ)
Juniper et al., 1996140
Self
7–17
23
3
Activity limitations, symptoms, function
Internal consistency
Concurrent
Canada
Behavioral,Affective and
Somatic Experiences
Scale (BASES)
Phipps et al., 1994,141
1999142
Parent
Self
Nurse
5–17
38
14
38
5
Somatic distress, compliance, mood
disturbance, quality of interactions, activity
Internal consistency
Inter-rater
Clinical
USA
The Miami Pediatric
Quality of Life
Questionnaire
(MPQOLQ)
Armstrong et al., 199994
Parent
1–18
56
3
Social competence, emotional stability, self
competence
Internal consistency
Test–retest
Clinical
USA

----- Page 40 (native) -----
Review methodology
30
TABLE 3 contd  Summary of the disease-specific QoL measures identified
Measure and
Respondent Age range
No. of
No. of
Name of domains
Reliability
Validity
Origin
study
(years)
items
domains
Asthma
Epilepsy
continued 
Pediatric Cancer Quality
of Life Inventory
(PCQL)
Varni et al., 1998143,144
Self
Parent
8–12
13–18
32
5
Disease- and treatment-related
symptoms, physical functioning,
psychological functioning, social
functioning, cognitive functioning
Internal consistency
Construct
Clinical
USA
Pediatric Oncology
Quality of Life Scale
(POQOLS)
Goodwin et al., 1994,145
Parent
Pre-school –
adolescence
21
3
Physical functioning, emotional distress,
externalising behaviour
Internal consistency
Inter-rater
Concurrent
Clinical
USA
Play Performance Scale
for Children (PPSC)
Lansky et al., 1985,11
198712
Parent
6 months –
16 years
1
1
Play
Inter-rater
Construct
Clinical
USA
Impact of Child Illness
Scales (ICIS)
Hoare & Russell, 1995146
Parent
6–17
30
5
Treatment, impact on child, impact on
parents, impact on family, cumulative
impact
Internal consistency
Test–retest
Construct
UK
Quality of Life in
Epilepsy Scale (adapted
from QOLIE-89)
Wildrick et al., 1996147
Self
8–18
25
5
Self concept, home life, school life, social
activities, medicines
Face
USA
Quality of Life in
Epilepsy (QOLIE-31)
Keene et al., 1997148
Parent or
self
Not clear
31
7
Emotional well-being, social functioning,
energy level, cognitive functioning, seizure
worry, medication effects, overall quality
of life
Adult measure
Canada

----- Page 41 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
31
TABLE 3 contd  Summary of the disease-specific QoL measures identified
Measure and
Respondent Age range
No. of
No. of
Name of domains
Reliability
Validity
Origin
study
(years)
items
domains
Other
continued 
Quality of Life in
Epilepsy (QOLIE-AD-48)
Cramer et al., 1999149
Adolescent
11–17
48
7
Impact, memory/ concentration, attitude
to epilepsy, physical functioning, stigma,
social support, school behaviour, health
perceptions
Adult measure
USA
Juvenile Arthritis Quality
of Life Questionnaire
Duffy & Duffy, 1997150
Self
Parent
1.66–18.33
(self-rated in
children aged
9 and above)
74
4
Gross motor function, fine motor
function, psychosocial function, general
symptoms
Test–retest
Canada
Quality of Life in
Children with Crohn’s
Disease
Rabbett et al., 1996151
Self
Parent
8–17
88
6
Disease and its treatment, social,
emotional, family, education, future aspects
Internal consistency
Test–retest
USA
Children’s Dermatology
Life Quality Index
(CDLQI) 
Lewis-Jones & Finlay,
1995152
Self (with
help from
parents if
needed)
3–16
10
6
Symptoms and feelings, leisure, school
holidays, personal relationships, sleep
treatment
Internal 
Test–retest
Concurrent
UK
Diabetes Quality of Life
(DQOL)
Ingersoll & Marrero,
1991153
Adolescent
11–18
52
3
Disease impact, disease-related worries,
satisfaction with life
Concurrent
USA
Quality of Life Headache
in Youth (QLH)
Langeveld et al., 1997,154
1999155
QLH-Y
(youths)
QLY-P
(parents)
12–18
12–18
71
14
Stress, harmony, fatigue, strength/vitality,
depression, cheerful mood, optimism,
impact on leisure activities, functioning at
home and school, social interaction with
siblings, social interaction with peers,
general satisfaction
Internal consistency
Construct
Norway

----- Page 42 (native) -----
TABLE 3 contd  Summary of the disease-specific QoL measures identified
Measure and
Respondent Age range
No. of
No. of
Name of domains
Reliability
Validity
Origin
study
(years)
items
domains
Review methodology
32
Life Satisfaction Index
for Adolescents with
neuromuscular disorders
(LSIA)
Reid & Renwick, 1994156
Adolescent
12–19
35
5
General well-being, interpersonal
relationships, personal development,
personal fulfilment, leisure and recreation
Internal
Test–retest
Clinical
Canada
Quality of Life for
children with Otitis
Media (OM-6)
Rosenfeld et al., 1997157
Parent
6 months –
12 years
6
6
Physical suffering, hearing loss, speech
impairment, emotional distress, activity
limitations, caregiver concerns
Construct
Responsiveness
USA
Paediatric Rhino-
conjunctivitis Quality of
Life Questionnaire
(PRQLQ)
Juniper et al., 1994158
Self
6–12
12–17
23
25
5
6
Nose symptoms, eye symptoms, practical
problems, other symptoms, activity
limitations
Practical problems, non-hay fever
symptoms, nose symptoms, eye symptoms,
patient-specific activities, emotions
Internal
Test–retest
Construct
Sensitivity
Canada
Quality of Life and Short
Stature
Pilpel et al., 1995159
Self
8–16
45
5
Academic achievement level, leisure
activities, physical self-esteem, emotional
self-esteem, relationships with peers and
family members
Not reported
Israel
Quality of Life in Spina
Bifida Questionnaire
Parkin et al., 1997160
Parent
Self
5–12
13–20
44
47
10
10
Social, emotional, intellectual, financial,
medical, independence, environmental,
physical, recreational, vocational
Test–retest
Construct
Canada
Quality of Life Profile
for Spine Deformities
(QLSD)
Climent et al., 1995161
Adolescent
10–20
21
5
Psychosocial functioning, sleep
disturbance, back pain, body image, back
flexibility
Internal
Test–retest
Construct
Spain

----- Page 43 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
33
Aims and scope
In this chapter, we report the results of our searches
relevant to the issue of whether adult measures of
QoL have been used with children. In addition, we
consider the extent to which changes were made to
account for developmental differences between child-
ren and adults in language and cognitive skills.
Background
There has been a much longer and more focused
history of work concerned with adult compared
with child QoL. This is reflected in the review
reported by Bullinger and Ravens-Sieberer18 in
which they concluded that 87% of published
articles were concerned with adults. Given this
extensive literature concerned with adult measures,
it is essential to consider how far this literature 
can inform developing work in child QoL. This
approach, drawing on the experience of those
working on issues related to adult QoL, might 
be justified on a number of grounds.
First, there are cost considerations. Development
and validation of measures is expensive, both
financially and in research time. Adaptation of an
adult measure could potentially reduce costs.
Second, those involved in assessing child QoL may
be able to benefit from lessons learned in the
development of adult measures. The standards
against which the quality of an instrument are
judged including basic psychometric criteria of
reliability, validity and sensitivity, need to be
satisfied whether the focus is on a child or adult
measure. Third, there may be direct competition
for the allocation of scarce healthcare resources
between providers of care for adults and those who
care for children. If these provider groups use
completely different measures of outcome, it is not
possible to compare their contributions directly.162
Results
Three studies were identified where adult measures
were employed in the evaluation of healthcare of
children with chronic illness, with little or no
modification (Table 4). A further 11 studies were
identified where measures for children were
developed by modifying previous measures for
adults (Table 5). These 11 studies drew on nine
separate adult measures of QoL.
Adult measures involving no or
minor changes
Three adult measures were identified that were
used with children. These were the QWB Scale,178
the SIP167 and the QOLIE Scale-31.175 These
measures are summarised below.
QWB Scale
The QWB scale is a standardised interviewer-
administered QoL measure. It includes three
function scales that assess mobility, physical 
activity and social activity and a list of 27 symptoms
or ‘problem complexes’ that assess symptoms 
on a specific day (e.g. general tiredness, weakness 
or weight loss, need for eyeglasses or contact
lenses).178–180 The QWB has been used in three
studies to assess QoL in young people with CF.163–165
In addition, Bradlyn and co-workers135 used 
the QWB Scale with children (4–18 years) 
with cancer. 
In the above studies, few changes were made to
account for specific QoL issues relating to children
compared with adults. In part this is justified on
the grounds that the measure was developed to be
interviewer-administered. Therefore issues about
suitability in terms of length or reading age are 
less critical than where a measure is developed for
self-completion. 
However, there are a number of questions that
need to be asked about the appropriateness of 
the measure for work with children. The first
relates to the issue of preference weights. There 
is no evidence to date that the preference weights
derived from an adult community sample are
relevant for a group of younger children with a
chronic disease (see chapter 2). Second, there 
are ceiling effects suggesting the measure lacks
Chapter 4
To what extent are adult measures used in the
evaluation of healthcare interventions in children?

----- Page 44 (native) -----
To what extent are adult measures used in the evaluation of healthcare interventions in children?
34
sensitivity at least for children who are relatively
‘well’. This was identified as problematic for children
with CF.164 Third, there are poor correlations
between child and parent ratings (see chapter 6).
Finally, there is little evidence of concurrent
validity, to the extent that there are low or non-
significant correlations between QWB scores and
clinical indicators or treatment toxicity. Thus, no
correlation was found between QoL and forced
expiratory volume-1 for children with CF,164,165 or
between QWB and treatment toxicity for children
with cancer.135
SIP
The SIP167,168,181 is a 136-item behaviourally-based
health status measure, developed for healthcare
evaluation across a wide range of health problems
and diseases, and designed to measure sickness-
related dysfunction rather than disease. Scores can
be calculated to yield a profile of dysfunction in 
12 areas of everyday living, as well as a summary 
of overall dysfunction.73, 182 It may be self- or inter-
viewer-administered. It has demonstrated excellent
reliability and validity in a number of populations,183–186
although no data have been reported for children.
The developers acknowledge that the length of the
measure may compromise patient acceptability.168
Iorio and co-workers128 used the SIP to determine
the side-effects of alpha-interferon in 94 children
(aged 3–14 years) affected by chronic viral hepatitis.
Treatment schedules ranged from 3 to 12 months.
The SIP was modified by omitting the ‘home
management’ item because it was thought not
applicable to children, and replacing ‘work’ with
‘school’. Children and their parents completed 
the measure. Given the age range of the sample,
many of the children must have required help to
complete the measure, but this was not discussed.
The SIP was reported to be an appropriate measure,
in that it was sufficiently sensitive to detect changes
in QoL during the first month of interferon therapy,
and during post-therapy follow-up.
The limited use of the SIP as a measure of QoL 
in children can be attributed to its length, and the
fact that, as described, it is a behaviourally-based
health status measure. The SIP is not really a
measure of adult QoL, and consequently fails to 
be an assessment of child QoL as well.
QOLIE-31 Scale
The QOLIE Scale187 assesses seven domains
(emotional well-being, social functioning, 
energy level, cognitive functioning, seizure worry,
medication effects and overall QoL). The QOLIE-
31 includes a number of items from the SF-36.75
In that the SF-36 was developed for adult samples,
it is important to question how far it is appropriate
to use the items without change for work involving
children below 16 years of age.
Keene and co-workers148 did not consider any of
these issues but employed the QOLIE-31 to assess
QoL in 64 patients under 18 years of age with
medically refractory epilepsy who had previously
undergone either primary (n = 48) or repeat
operative procedures (n = 16). No changes to the
adult QOLIE-31 were reported. The QOLIE-31 
was administered as part of a structured phone
interview to patients or caregivers. No information
was given about whether responses were obtained
from the children or caregivers. Responses from
children and caregivers were combined for the
purposes of analyses. Thus, no account was taken
of any differences between children and caregivers
in their views about QoL, or their ability to complete
the scale. 
Adult measures that have under-
gone more substantial changes
Eleven studies involving five generic and six
disease-specific measures: (asthma, cancer,
dermatology, diabetes, epilepsy, hay fever) were
identified where the main aim was the develop-
ment of a child and/or adolescent QoL measure
from an adult version. These 11 studies were based
on nine separate adult measures of QoL. This
approach contrasts with the studies reviewed
above, as attempts were made to ensure appro-
priateness of the measure for children. 
The usual practice here was that a group reported
the development of a measure for adults, and then
went on to develop a parallel measure for children.
Similar procedures in terms of selection of items,
choice of response scales are utilised. Given the
overlap in philosophy and definition of QoL, 
and adoption of similar procedures, it is hardly
surprising that the resulting measures tend to
mimic the adult versions in characteristics such 
as format, response scale, and number of domains
(see Table 5). 
In evaluating the suitability of this approach,
consideration needs to be given to the response
burden imposed on children in completing an
adult-style measure. This includes the overall
length of the scale, as well as the length of
individual subscales, the number of domains and
items, wording, and the demands inherent in
completing the rating scale. Consideration also

----- Page 45 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
35
needs to be given to the quality of the final scale,
particularly whether attempts were made to establish
the psychometric properties separately for children
rather than assume comparability with the adult
measure. Critically consideration needs to be given
to the question of how items and domains were
developed. Specifically, were items from adult
measures assumed to be appropriate for children,
or were attempts made to determine develop-
mental appropriateness?
Response burden
It might be expected that those involved in developing
measures for children would pay special attention
to questions of suitability, in terms of matching 
the demands of the questionnaire, in terms of its
length, complexity, and so on, to the skills of the
children. Sadly, developers often make only 
passing reference to these practical issues. It is
worth drawing together, then, some suggestions
regarding the ‘child-friendliness’ of measures.
Length
Several authors report a reduction in the length or
specifically in number of domains or items following
modification for children. In two cases11,152 the
final length of the measure for children is the
same as the adult measure. Marginally longer
measures for children and adolescents compared
with adults are reported by Apajasalo and co-
workers133,134 and for the CHQ compared with the
adult SF-36 by Landgraf and co-workers15 and for
the COOP charts.114 In their diabetes-specific
measure, Ingersoll and Marrero153 reduced the
number of domains from four to three, effectively
combining the two separate general worries and
diabetes-specific worries for adults into one worries
scale for children. Others reduced the number of
items and domains. This applies to the measure for
epilepsy developed by Wildrick and co-workers,147
for asthma by Juniper and co-workers,140 and for
hay fever by Juniper and co-workers.177
Lengthy scales can be a burden for adults and
children. We must expect more missing data with
increasing scale length.188 Despite this, there has been
little consistent attempt to reduce length for children.
Even for those measures where length was reduced,
the overall reduction tended to be quite small. 
Changes to the response scale
Most authors use the same length of response scale
for children as they do with adults. Thus, items on
the Children’s Dermatology Life Quality Index
(CDLQI) were rated on the same four-point scale
as used with adults. However, children were not
given the opportunity to select the ‘not relevant’
option. A five-point Likert scale is used in most
other measures, with the notable exception of the
measures developed by Juniper and co-workers.
Justifying this on the basis of greater sensitivity to
change, Juniper has used a seven-point Likert scale
throughout her QoL work. 
Juniper and co-workers reported that children 
as young as 7 years had no difficulty in selecting
response options based on these scales.
Exceptionally, Juniper and co-workers80 give
instructions about how to administer the test with
younger children. In these cases, the measures 
can be interviewer-administered rather than self-
completed, with the proviso that the questions
should not be paraphrased or explained. If a 
child appeared to have difficulty with a question 
it should be repeated verbatim.80
Few authors comment on how well children are
able to use response scales. Some problems were
reported by Apajasalo and co-workers,134 who 
noted that children below 8 years had difficulties
understanding some of the alternatives, or
difficulties choosing between the five alternative
responses. In addition, children were not always
able to justify their choices. Further consideration
of this issue is given in chapter 5.
Time scale
In two of the measures133,153 no time scale was
provided for either the adult or child version.
Others favour 6 days or a week,140,152,177,178 2 weeks140
or 4 weeks.15,114 In adult work, there has been some
discussion about the most appropriate time scale to
use and suggestions that more accurate responses
can be achieved where the time scale is defined
and relatively recent.71 A comparable discussion
would be helpful in order to make recommend-
ations about the most suitable time scales for work
with children. An exception is work by Juniper 
and co-workers,140 who reported that children 
had some difficulty remembering more than 
a 1–2-week period.
Quality of measures
Reliability, validity and acceptability
Making any changes to the structure of scales and
subscales alters the psychometric properties. Thus,
a scale developed to measure adult QoL may have
good psychometric properties, but these cannot be
assumed to be transferable to other populations
including children. For this reason, most authors

----- Page 46 (native) -----
To what extent are adult measures used in the evaluation of healthcare interventions in children?
36
make some efforts to determine some aspects of
reliability and validity.
Authors typically report internal reliabilities for the
total scale score or any subscales (see appendix 3).
Test–retest reliability is less-frequently reported.114,152
The importance of test–retest reliability needs to
be balanced against the need for scales that are
responsive to changes in health or well-being
during the course of treatment. This has been
stressed by Juniper and co-workers in all their
work. These workers have included information
about responsiveness in their measures for work
with children with asthma or hay fever. 
Determination of clinical validity, or the extent to
which a measure differentiates between children in
different health states, is frequently reported.
Lewis-Jones and Finlay152 reported evidence of
clinical validity to the extent that it was possible to
distinguish between children with different skin
conditions. Evidence regarding the clinical validity
of the diabetes QoL scale (DQOL) is mixed.
Ingersoll and Marrero153 were unable to demon-
strate clinical validity in that the scale did not
distinguish between young people in ‘good’ or
‘poor’ diabetic control (e.g. blood sugar levels).
However, Guttmann-Bauman and co-workers189
found that QoL scores correlated with mean
haemoglobin, suggesting perhaps that the measure
reflected differences in physiological indicators.
Wasson and co-workers,114 using the COOP charts
reported limited clinical validity to the extent that
one of the six domains (health habits) distinguished
between those ‘at risk’ on the basis of drug abuse
or antisocial behaviour and normal children. 
Expert versus patient-centered
approaches
In determining the content of scales, different
procedures were adopted. These related to the
extent to which the items were taken directly from
adult QoL measures, were based on the views of
experts or derived from more child- or family-
centered perspectives. Lansky and co-workers,11
Juniper and co-workers,140 and Cramer and co-
workers,149 especially argue that children are not
little adults and that consideration needs to be
given to their unique ways of viewing the world 
and the impact of disease. 
Use of professional judges
A number of authors relied solely on professionals
to review the items in adult scales and judge their
suitability for work with children. In recognising
the need for a measure of functioning appropriate
for work with children with cancer, Lansky and co-
workers,11,12 modified the Karnofsky Performance
Scale.172 The resulting Play Performance Scale was
developed to be suitable for completion by parents
of children aged between 1 and 16 years. Like the
adult measure, it was developed to be a graduated
scale and is rated in deciles (0 to 100). Underlying
the rationale for the scale is the assumption that
children’s ability to engage in age-appropriate play
influences peer contacts, skill acquisition, and
more general feelings of self-esteem. 
The 16D instrument for adolescents aged between
12–15 years133 and the 17D instrument for pre-
adolescents aged 8–11 years134 are both modifi-
cations of the 15D for adults.170 The adult question-
naire includes 15 dimensions each being divided
into five levels. Utility weights (see chapter 2) were
elicited from responses from the general public
through a three-stage procedure based on Multi-
Attribute Utility Theory. 
In adapting the measure for adolescents the 
views of experts in paediatrics, child psychiatry,
neurology and health economics were sought. 
For the 16D, one of the questions in the adult
measure was deleted (sexual functioning), some
added (physical appearance, friends) and others
reworded to be age-appropriate (usual activities
became school and hobbies). The 17D (for pre-
adolescents) was derived from the adolescent 16D.
One of the questions on the adolescent measure
was dropped (distress) for the 17D, others were
added (ability to concentrate, learning ability and
memory, anxiety) and others reformulated (vision,
vitality, depression).
To obtain the dimension importance weights, parents
(n = 115) of the children participating in the study
were instructed to indicate the relative position of
each of the 16,133 or 17134 dimensions on an impor-
tance scale (0–100) by placing the dimension
considered most important at the top of the scale.
For the 16D, similar procedures were used with
children (n = 213) aged between 12 and 15 years.
Thus, in the development of the 16D and 17D changes
were made to some of the dimensions assessed,
and to the wording of the response scales. Cartoon
line drawings were used to illustrate the 17D as an
aid for younger children. In addition, the 17D is
completed with the help of an interviewer. 
Ingersoll and Marrero153 reported that items in 
the DQOL for adults190 were first reviewed by a
paediatrician with an interest in diabetes, a nurse
practitioner, a social worker and an educational

----- Page 47 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
37
psychologist. Items that were thought to be of
limited value for children were dropped (e.g. ‘How
often do you worry about whether you will be
denied insurance?’) and items related to school
and peers were included. This revised measure was
pilot-tested with 15 young people, aged 11–18
years. Views of children and adolescents were not
sought in the development of items for this
measure. Further work is therefore necessary to
establish how far the measure reflects issues of
concern for children rather than issues assumed 
to be of concern by adults.
Professional and child resources
Consultations with professionals and children 
were used in determining the items used in a
number of measures. Both the Asthma QoL140
and the Rhinoconjunctivitis QoL measures158 are
based on a methodological approach developed 
by the group at McMaster University in Toronto. 
In both cases, initial discussions with patients,
parents and health professionals were conducted,
which sought to identify possible functional impair-
ments in childhood asthma or hay fever. From
these discussions, appropriate items were selected
and 100 children were asked to identify which
applied to them. These items were then rated on 
a scale (1 = ‘Does not matter much to me’ to 
5 = ‘Bothers me very much’). Items that were most
frequently identified as bothersome were selected
for inclusion. Changes were also made to the list of
activities that might be affected by disease. For
example, vacuuming and gardening were replaced
by skipping and roller-blading, respectively. 
Previous literature was reviewed and consultations
made with professionals and adolescents in the
development of the COOP charts for adolescents.114
Unusually, these authors also asked adolescents
their views about ease of responding and
likelihood that they would give honest responses.
In the development of the CHQ, Landgraf and 
co-workers15 recognised the ‘seminal’ work in
development of adult measures (notably the 
SF-36), and argued that a similar ‘architectural
framework’ can be appropriately applied to the
development of paediatric measures. The authors
do not suggest that the conceptual model used to
develop adult measures is applicable for develop-
ment of a measure for children: “Rather the
architectural model is a useful platform upon
which to build a robust child assessment tool”.15
In fact, Landgraf and co-workers (1996) reported
extensive work involving both professionals and
families in developing their measure.
Involvement of children
The CDLQI152 was developed along similar lines 
as described for the adult measure. However, 
the initial stages did involve contributions from
children. Children aged between 3 and 16 years 
(n = 169) were first asked to write down, with help
from parents if needed, how their skin disease
affected their lives. Subsequently ten questions
were derived to reflect the most common
responses. This draft questionnaire was piloted
with 40 children and minor modifications were
made. The resulting questionnaire resembles the
adult version. There are ten items (e.g. ‘Over the
last week, how much have you changed or worn
different or special clothes/shoes because of your
skin?’). Ratings are again made on four-point
scales (‘very much’ to ‘not at all’), but unlike the
adult counterpart the children’s scale does not
include a ‘not relevant’ option. 
There are five questions that reflect the same 
QoL considerations as in the adult measure
(itching, scratching, embarrassment or self-
consciousness, choice of clothes, impact of
treatment). For the children questions about 
the impact of the condition on ‘shopping’ or
‘looking after the home/gardening’ were 
changed to ‘friendships’, ‘social or leisure
activities’ to ‘going out, playing’, ‘sport’ to
‘swimming or other sports’, ‘sexual difficulties’ 
to ‘sleep’, and ‘problems with your partner’ 
to ‘being called names, teasing’. A question 
for adults concerned with the impact of the
condition on work or studying is split into two
parts for children; one concerned with the 
impact on school and the other appropriate 
for school holidays.
The authors seem to acknowledge the importance
of involving children, and used data from children
about the impact of their skin condition on their
QoL. The information gained during the
development phase was used both to change the
specific language used and identify activities of
greater importance to children. Given their
commitment to involving children, it is perhaps
surprising that the final measure so closely mirrors
the format of that used for adults. 
Cramer and co-workers,149 reported the development
of the QoL in Epilepsy-Adolescent version following
publication of the QOLIE-89 for adults.175 Items
were adapted from generic instruments, including
the SF-36 health survey75 and the views of seven
experts. Cramer and co-workers,149 conducted
some focus groups with adolescents, but essentially
relied on items derived from adult measures

----- Page 48 (native) -----
To what extent are adult measures used in the evaluation of healthcare interventions in children?
38
(e.g. SF-36), and consultation with ‘experts’. Age-
appropriate adaptations were achieved by changing
phrases to reflect adolescent activities. 
Reliance on professionals as informants about the
suitability of items for use in children’s measures
may be limited, in that clinicians may have no way
of knowing exactly how illness affects a child.
Approaches that at least rely on some input from
children are more defensible. However, where inter-
views or focus groups are conducted with children,
they tend to be poorly described and little detail is
given about how the content of interviews or focus
groups is transformed into questionnaire items.
This procedure needs to be formalised in order to
ensure that information from children is not
selectively retrieved to fit with a model of the
measure defined previously for adults.
Simple extrapolation of adult measures is unlikely
to be adequate for several reasons. Children are
not just little adults. They have a unique perspective
on the world, and do not necessarily share adult
views about the meaning or implications of illness.191
At a practical level, measures for adults may simply
be too difficult for children to complete. They tend
to be very lengthy. They may involve language beyond
the child’s comprehension, making it difficult for
the child to understand the question and the response
scale. Most importantly, there are no reasons to
assume that the dimensions of QoL relevant for
adults are the same for children (see chapter 5 for
extended discussion of this). In practice, some
modifications need to be made to adult measures
for work with a child population. Disagreement
exists as to how extensive these changes need to
be. Some favour making minimal changes to adult
measures.178 Others argue that satisfactory measures
can only be achieved by making more radical
changes to take into account the child’s percep-
tions and understanding of the situation.22 In the
following chapter, we attempt to document the kind
of considerations that need to be made in order to
develop a ‘child-friendly’ measure. We are then in
a better position to judge the appropriateness of
an approach based on modification of adult work.
Summary
• Three studies were identified where adult
measures were used with very little or no
modification. In these papers, there was little 
if any discussion about the appropriateness 
of an adult measure for work with children.
Changes to adult measures were not made 
or were extremely few. Where changes were
made, they involved very minor and non-
systematic changes to improve face validity. 
• A further 11 studies (based on nine measures)
were identified in which modifications were
made to an adult measure. In all cases, the 
final measure paralleled the original adult
measure in format, response scale and
dimensions of QoL assessed. This approach 
can be found in a range of measures 
from simple screening tools114 to more 
lengthy measures.15
• The appropriateness of measures based on adult
work were considered in relation to response
burden. By this we mean the extent to which
issues of scale length, or type of response need
to be adapted to account for children’s language
and cognitive skills. 
• The extent to which measures took into 
account children’s views varied widely. In some
cases, no changes at all were made to the
content of adult measures, in others infor-
mation was obtained from the research
literature, professionals and children themselves.
Where information was elicited from children,
little information was given about how the 
data were analysed in order to determine
specific item content. Although qualitative
techniques (focus groups) may be useful in
determining the changes needed to be made 
to make adult measures suitable for children,
the way in which qualitative data are analysed 
is rarely specified. 
• Insufficient information tends to be given about
the age when children can complete a measure
unaided, and responses from children and
caretakers are often combined for the purpose
of analyses.

----- Page 49 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
39
TABLE 4  Studies using adult measures for assessment of QoL of children and/or adolescents
Study using
Domains assessed
Sample
Results
Comments
adult measure
continued 
Quality of Well-Being
(QWB) Scale
Bradlyn et al., 1993135
Mobility, physical, social
List of 27
symptom–problem
complexes
30 children aged 4–18 years who were
currently being treated or who were
within 2 years of having completed
treatment for cancer
Interviewer administered to parents in
the presence of the child
Internal consistency: Cronbach’s alpha 
≥0.92 for each subscale and the total
score
No relationship between age and QWB
No modifications to QWB reported
Some reliability data reported for this
sample
Quality of Well-Being
(QWB) Scale 
Munzenberger et al.,
1999163
As above
20 children aged 9–20 years with CF,
admitted to hospital for treatment of
acute pulmonary disease exacerbation
Interviewer administered to parents of
patients younger than 10 years, and in
presence of the children over 10 years
Responsiveness was indicated by
significant changes in QWB score,
physical, social and symptom–problem
complexes domains, and all pulmonary
function tests from before to after
treatment
No modifications to QWB reported
Reliability of the QWB with this
population not investigated
Re-administered 7/8 days after hospital
discharge.When possible follow-up
scores were obtained at 6 months and
12 months after discharge
Quality of Well-Being
(QWB) Scale 
Czyzewski et al., 1998164
As above
191 caregiver–child dyads
Patients were 1–18 years of age 
with CF
The QWB characterised almost 80% of
the sample as having few functional
limitations and described no increases
in limitations in the older patients
groups
No modifications to QWB reported
Reliability not reported for this population
The study compared  the QWB scale
with a battery of measures of QoL
Quality of Well-Being
(QWB) Scale
Czyzewski et al., 1994165
As above
199 patients with CF
Adolescents ≥12 years were
interviewed separately from their
caregivers
Low-to-moderate correlations between
parent and adolescent reports on the
QWB over 5 days
Showed no relationships that would
allow one to argue for the clinical and
practical utility of the QWB over more
specific health and psychosocial
measures within the child and
adolescent CF population

----- Page 50 (native) -----
To what extent are adult measures used in the evaluation of healthcare interventions in children?
40
TABLE 4 contd  Studies using adult measures for assessment of QoL of children and/or adolescents
Study using
Domains assessed
Sample
Results
Comments
adult measure
Quality of Life in
Epilepsy-31 (QOLIE-31)
Keene et al., 1997148
Seizure worry,
emotional well-being,
energy, cognitive
function, medication
effects, social function,
overall QoL
64 patients < 18 years of age with
medical refractory epilepsy
QOLIE-31 was administered to the
patient or a caregiver over the phone
No significant differences in QoL data
between the various types of surgical
procedure
Significant differences were found
between those who were seizure-free
and those who were not seizure-free
for each QoL of domain
In addition, QoL was higher in those
with a successful outcome than those
with a poor outcome
No modifications were reported to
have been made to the QOLIE-31 for
its use with children
Reliability of QOLIE-31 with this
population not reported
Sickness Impact Profile
(Modified) (SIP)
Iorio et al., 1997128
Physical, psychosocial
94 children aged 3–14 years with
chronic viral hepatitis
Mean total SIP scores before interferon
therapy were comparable with those
found in adults
Minor medications were made to the SIP
The home management item was
omitted, and ‘work’ was replaced by
‘school’
Reliability with this population not
reported

----- Page 51 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
41
TABLE 5  Summary of adult QoL measures and their child counterparts
Measure
Characteristics
Adult version
Child version
Other child version
Quality of
Study
Kaplan & Anderson, 1988166
Bradlyn et al., 1993135
No other versions
well-Being 
Czyzewski et al., 1994165
(QWB)
Czyzewski et al., 1998164
Munzenberger et al., 1999163
Domains
Mobility, physical, social activity
Mobility, physical, social activity
No. of domains
3
3
No. of items
3
3
27 symptom complexes
27 symptom complexes
Response scale
3–5 levels of function
3–5 levels of function
Time frame
Past 6 days
Past 6 days
Age
Birth onwards
Birth onwards
Child involvement
None
None
Comments
Population-based measure
Application with children 
reported in 4 studies
Sickness 
Study
Deyo et al., 1982,167 1983168
Iorio et al., 1997128
No other versions
Impact 
Domains
Physical: ambulation, mobility,
Physical: ambulation, mobility,
Profile (SIP)
body care and movement
body care and movement
Psychosocial: communication,
Psychosocial: communication,
alertness, emotional behaviour,
alertness, emotional behaviour,
social interaction
social interaction
Independent categories: sleep 
Independent categories: sleep
and rest, eating, work, home 
and rest, eating, school,
management, recreation 
recreation and pastimes
and pastimes
No. of domains
12
11
No. of items
136
135
Response scale
Tick if item applies
Not specified
Time frame
Not reported
Not reported
Age
3–14 years
Child involvement
None
Comments
No home management domain
One item removed 
One item modified
Dartmouth 
Study
Nelson et al., 1996169
Wasson et al., 1994114
No other versions
COOP charts Domains
Physical fitness, daily activities,
Physical fitness, emotional 
feelings, social activities, change feelings, school work, social
in health, overall health, social 
support, family communication,
support, QoL, pain
health habits
No. of domains
9
6
No. of items
9
6
Response scale
5 levels of functioning
5 levels of functioning
Time frame
Past 4 weeks
During the past month
Age
Adult (age not specified)
Adolescents
Child involvement
None
At all stages
Comments
Illustrated with pictures
Items derived from the Child 
Health and Illness Profile
Similar format to adult COOP
Illustrated with pictures
continued

----- Page 52 (native) -----
To what extent are adult measures used in the evaluation of healthcare interventions in children?
42
TABLE 5 contd  Summary of adult QoL measures and their child counterparts
Measure
Characteristics
Adult version
Child version
Other child version
SF-36/Child 
Study
Ware & Sherbourne, 199275
Landgraf et al., 199615
No other versions
Health 
Domains
Physical function, role limitation 
Physical functioning, role/
Question-
– physical, role limitation
social-physical, general health
naire (CHQ)
– emotional, social functioning,
perceptions, bodily pain, parental
mental health, energy/vitality,
impact – emotional, role/social
pain, general health perception,
emotional, role/social behav-
change in health
ioural, self-esteem, mental health,
general behaviour, family 
activities, family cohesion,
changes in health
No. of domains
9
14
No. of items
36
98 (parent forms)
50
28
87 (child form)
Response scale
2-, 3-, 4-, 5- or 6-point 
4-, 5- or 6-point
Likert scales
Likert scale
Time frame
4 weeks
4 weeks
Age
16 years and above
Child 10–18 years
Parent 5–18 years
Child involvement
None
Comments
The CHQ adopts a similar 
framework to the SF-36,
however, the resulting question-
naire is child-centred
15D
Study
Sintononen & Pekurinen, 1993170
Apajasalo et al., 1996133
Apajasalo et al., 1996134
Adult version
Adolescent version
Child version
Domains
15D:
16D:
17D:
Breathing, mental function,
Breathing, mental function,
Breathing, speech, vision,
speech, vision, mobility, usual 
speech, vision, mobility, school mobility, school and hobbies,
activities, vitality, hearing, eating, and hobbies, vitality, hearing,
vitality, hearing, eating,
elimination, sleeping, distress,
eating, elimination, sleeping,
elimination, sleeping,
discomfort and symptoms,
distress, discomfort and 
anxiety, discomfort and
sexual activity, depression
symptoms, friends, depression, symptoms, friends,
physical appearance
depression, physical
appearance, ability to
concentrate, learning
ability and memory
No. of domains
15
16 
17 
No. of items
15
16
17
Response scale
5 levels
5 levels
5 levels
Time frame
Not specified
Not specified
Not specified
Age
Adult (age not specified)
12–15 years
8–11 years
Child involvement
Adolescent/adult version:
Modifications based on 
adult views
Preference weights obtained 
from adolescents
Comments
Final version similar to adult 
Line drawings
version
included
continued

----- Page 53 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
43
TABLE 5 contd  Summary of adult QoL measures and their child counterparts
Measure
Characteristics
Adult version
Child version
Other child
version
Asthma 
Study
Juniper et al., 1993171
Juniper et al., 1996140
Gibson et al., 1995137
Quality 
Adult version
Child version
of Life
Domains
Activities, symptoms, emotions,
Symptoms, activities,
Symptoms, activities,
environment, overall QoL
emotions, overall QoL
environment, emotions
No. of domains
5
4
4
No. of items
32
23
30
Response scale
7-point Likert
7-point Likert
7-point Likert
Time frame
2 weeks
1 week
Not reported
Age
7–17 years
Child involvement
At all stages
Comments
Performance Study
Karnofsky & Burchenal, 1949172 Lansky et al., 1985,11 198712
No other versions
Status Scale:
Name of domains
Work
Play
cancer
No. of domains
1
1
No. of items
1
1
Response scale
Deciles from 0 = dead to 100 
Deciles from 0 = unresponsive
= normal; no complaint;
to 100 = fully active, normal
no evidence of disease
Time frame
Not defined
Not defined
Age
Adult (not specified)
10–16 years
Child involvement
None
None
Comments
Same format as adult version
Based on the Gessell Scales 
of Development
Parent completed
Dermatology Study
Finlay & Khan, 1994173
Lewis-Jones & Finlay, 1995152
No other versions
Domains
None
None
No. of domains
N/A
N/A
No. of items
10
10
Response scale
4-point-Likert
4-point Likert
Time frame
Last week
Last week
Age
3–16
Child involvement
At all stages
Comments
Diabetes 
Study
DCCT Research Group, 1988174 Ingersoll & Marrero, 1991153
No other versions
Quality of Life Domains
Satisfaction with life with 
Life satisfaction, disease 
(DQOL)
diabetes; impact of diabetes;
impact, disease-related 
worries related to social and 
worries
vocational issues; worries 
related to long-term sequelae
No. of domains
4
3
No. of items
46
42
Response scale
5-point Likert
5-point Likert
Time frame
No information
Age
10–21 years
Child involvement
Not involved in initial 
modification of adult items
Modified scale assessed by 
15 youth
Comments
continued

----- Page 54 (native) -----
To what extent are adult measures used in the evaluation of healthcare interventions in children?
44
TABLE 5 contd  Summary of adult QoL measures and their child counterparts
Measure
Characteristics
Adult version
Child version
Other child
version
Quality of 
Study
Devinsky et al., 1995175
Cramer et al., 1999149
Wildrick et al., 1996147
Life in 
Domains
Epilepsy, cognitive, mental 
Epilepsy impact, memory/
Self-concept, home life,
Epilepsy 
health, physical health
concentration, attitudes 
school life, social activities,
(QOLIE)
towards epilepsy, physical
medication issues
functioning, stigma, social 
support, school behaviour,
health perceptions,
total summary
No. of domains
4
9
5
No. of items
89
48
25
Response scale
4-, 5-, and 6-point Likert scales
5-point Likert scale
5-point Likert scale
Time frame
Past 4 weeks
Age
Adult
11–17 years
8–18 years
Child involvement
197 adolescents and parents 
None
involved in initial testing
Comments
Similar format to QOLIE-89
Very little relationship with
the QOLIE-89
Hay fever
Study
Juniper & Guyatt, 1991176
Juniper et al., 1994158
Juniper et al., 1998177
(rhino-
Adult version
Adolescent version
Child version
conjunc-
Domains
Sleep, non-hay fever symptoms,
Practical problems, non-hay 
Nasal symptoms, eye
tivitis)
practical problems, nasal
fever symptoms, nasal
symptoms, other symptoms,
symptoms, eye symptoms,
symptoms, eye symptoms,
practical problems,
activities, emotional
activities, emotional symptoms activity limitation
No. of domains
7
6 
5
No. of items
28
25 
23
Response scale
7-point Likert
7-point Likert
7-point Likert
Time frame
Past week
Past week
Past week
Age
12–17 years 
6–12 years
Child involvement
At all stages 
At all stages
Comments
General principles of scale 
development defined by group 
and adapted for all 3 measures
N/A, not applicable

----- Page 55 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
45
Aims and scope
In chapter 4, we identified at least two approaches
to measuring QoL in children. We can draw on
established expertise in adult work, or place greater
emphasis on methods developed more specifically
to take into account children’s perspectives. The
argument in favour of using adult QoL measures as
a basis for work with children is both rational and
persuasive. There has been a much longer history
of development of QoL measures for adults com-
pared with children. Thus it is reasonable to look
to adult work as a model for paediatric practice. 
It is financially attractive, on the assumption that
some stages in the development of a child measure
can be short-circuited.
In this chapter, we consider both the advantages
and disadvantages involved in drawing heavily 
on adult work. These include differences in the
nature and aetiology of diseases that affect adults
compared with children, as well as developmental
differences that limit children’s ability to use
measures developed for adults. In particular, 
we consider the appropriateness of different
domains used to assess QoL in adults, for work
with children. In addition to the content of adult
measures, we need to consider how well children
are able to respond to measures, in particular how
well they are able to read and understand the
items, and use the rating scale provided. Finally, 
we consider alternative approaches that might
result in more child-friendly measures.
Background
The question of how far adult measures can be
used for work with children is not restricted to
issues of QoL. For example, clinical depression 
in children was initially thought to be rare,192 but
closely related to adult depression.193 As the relation-
ship between child and adult depression became
better understood, the development of measures 
of depression in childhood benefited from the
knowledge gained from advances made in under-
standing adult depression. However, it was also
recognised that children, parents and teachers
differed in their perceptions of the child’s
depression. These findings mirror current
discussions particularly regarding differences
between children and adults in perceptions of 
the child’s QoL (see chapter 6).
Differences in aetiology and
management of physical disease
between children and adults
Despite the same nomenclature, conditions with
the same name may differ in their implications 
for children and adults. Children with diabetes
mellitus have the insulin-dependent form, while
much greater variability is found among adults.
Children with epilepsy may experience seizure
disorders,194 learning difficulties or have other
impairments.195,196 While this is also true for adults
with epilepsy, there are fewer implications for
education or self-care. Although asthma in
children and adults is related, the causes and
triggers may differ. Consideration of the aetiology
of asthma also illustrates that the nature of disease
changes with time. Other conditions, such as CF,
affect children. Given the nature of the disease,
survival in CF has only recently been such that a
significant number of children reach adult life. 
Parents have become increasingly responsible for
the delivery of treatment (e.g. chest physiotherapy
for children with CF or home dialysis monitoring
for renal patients) and thus a significant burden 
of daily care has been taken up by families.197 For
children, this imposes a degree of dependence 
on parents and may compromise the attainment 
of age-appropriate autonomy. These differences
between children and adults in the aetiology,
treatment and management of disease suggests
that adult measures may need to be modified 
or extended if they are to tap the domains of
importance in assessing QoL in children. 
Developmental considerations
Developmental change makes it difficult to apply
any single measure to all age groups from infancy
Chapter 5
How appropriate are adult measures for use 
with children?

----- Page 56 (native) -----
How appropriate are adult measures for use with children?
46
through adolescence. “Children are a moving
target for whom levels of function in various
dimensions – and even the dimensions themselves
– change with age and developmental stage”.198
Thus there are reasons to advocate that child QoL
measures should be developed within the context
of a developmental framework.
A child with a chronic illness faces the same
developmental tasks and challenges as a healthy
child. However, mastery of these tasks and successful
coping with the common stresses of childhood are
made more difficult by the continuing presence 
of a disease that can significantly alter the child’s
physical and mental functioning.199 It can be
difficult to predict the impact of a particular
course of treatment on an individual child, 
because problems associated with prognosis and
therapy may be a function of a number of
variables, including the child’s age at diagnosis,
and social and family relationships. At any age, 
the greatest impact of the disease may occur when
the demands of the disease or treatment prevent
the attainment of life goals.200
Preschool children may have problems in both the
short and long term. For example, a diagnosis of
cancer in the preschool period may have immediate
implications for the child’s eating habits and
nutritional status, and later implications for 
growth or learning. Changes to care arrangements
and family life may also significantly disrupt the
establishment of normal attachments during this
period. The physical consequences may also be
greater for the younger child. For example,
irradiation of the spinal column in children 
with cancer will result in shortening of growth 
by an average of 2–3 cm if given at age 10 years,
compared with 9–10 cm at 3 years.201 Treatments
that affect the CNS also appear to have greatest
impact during this period.
At all ages, the child’s understanding of illness 
may be an important determinant of their QoL.202
Systematic changes in children’s perceptions of
health and illness, understanding of the causes 
of illness, beliefs about how the body works and
impact of treatment have been extensively
documented.203 Preschool children can think that
their illness has a magical explanation, or is a
result of their behaviour, usually wrong-doing.204
Consequently treatment may be viewed as a form
of punishment. Preschool children have limited
abilities to understand the reasons for treatment.
While it was previously argued that children of 
this age could not provide reliable information
about their pain, this view is now challenged. 
With developmentally appropriate questions, even
3-year-olds can give descriptive information, while
older children can give rich descriptions of the
type and severity of pain.205
In terms of their understanding of illness, younger
children offer less complex explanations and 
rely less on internal bodily cues to indicate the
presence of illness. With age, children offer a 
more organised description of process and cause.
Although sick children often have a relatively
sophisticated understanding of their own
condition,206, 207 this does not generalise to their
understanding of illness. Thus, the challenge for
those working with children is to understand how
perceptions of illness change with maturity and
experience, and the implications for QoL.
Given the central role of school during middle
childhood, illness can have far-reaching con-
sequences for learning and achievement, as 
well as disrupting social relationships.22, 208
Long periods of illness, particularly when this is
associated with fatigue and loss of energy, can
reduce the child’s opportunities to participate in
sports activities and lead to weight gain, loss of
friends and compromised self-esteem.
During adolescence, illness represents a major
barrier to the attainment of autonomy and
independence. Illness can create a dependency 
on parents, just at a time when others are exerting
their independence. Thus, parent–adolescent
relationships can be particularly strained. For
adolescents there are the additional demands of
the national examination system and the practical
problems created when treatment interferes with
school work and exam schedules. Although older
children are more able to understand the reason
for treatment, this in itself may be distressing,
raising questions about disability and long-term
survival.22 Adolescents are more able to understand
the implications of a life-threatening disease
compared with younger children.
This developmental account suggests that the
appropriateness of adult measures needs to be
considered with respect to differences between
children and adults in terms of disease and
treatment, and consequently the implications for
domains of QoL. This will affect both the content
and organisation of the measure. With regard to
the measurement of QoL, there are specific
questions about the appropriateness of the
domains and items. Specifically, these refer to how
far domains defined for adults are appropriate for
work with children. Consideration needs to be

----- Page 57 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
47
given to any differences between QoL, and
perceptions of QoL in children compared with
adults. With regard to developmental level, it is
necessary to determine whether the child possesses
the cognitive and language skills that are necessary
for the completion of the measure.
Appropriateness of domains 
and items
As argued in chapter 2, QoL is frequently defined
as a multidimensional concept involving some
combination of physical, cognitive, emotional 
and social domains. Additional domains, to cover
‘spiritual’ or ‘environmental’ issues are advocated
by others.44 Typically, adult QoL instruments
include between five and 15 domains, derived 
from both informal or more philosophical
considerations.209 The process of measuring QoL
usually involves some attempt to aggregate items
into groups or ‘domains’ that reflect the chosen
dimensions of QoL. In fact the two terms,
‘domains’ and ‘dimensions’ are often used
synonymously and interchangeably.
At one extreme, Borthwick-Duffy210 argued that
similar domains should be used in the definition 
of QoL across the whole life-span, although
consideration would need to be given to the way 
in which the characteristics of a domain may be
expressed at different ages. In contrast, Rosenbaum
and co-workers,198 argue that “one cannot directly
apply to children measures developed for use in
adult populations. The dimensions of function,
and the levels therein, are simply too distinct and
different to be applicable”. In practice, the appro-
priateness of adult domains for children needs to
be considered in relation to the different contexts
in which children and adults live and work.
Children live in families, and responsibility for
their health is usually taken by adults. It is
generally adults who make decisions about the
child’s health. In addition, attention needs to 
be given to developmental differences in the
importance of domains. For example sexuality 
and body image may be a crucial part of QoL in
adolescence but may not be so important during
earlier childhood. (However, recent reports
suggest that children are becoming preoccupied
with issues of body image at younger ages.)
Although questions have been raised about
whether children would choose comparable
dimensions to describe their own QoL as adults,211
there is little empirical data of direct relevance.
The basic domains identified for adults by the
WHO57 have been assumed relevant for children.
How far this is justified for work with children
needs to be considered.
Physical functioning
Physical functioning represents a domain of 
QoL with which clinicians are likely to be most
comfortable. Physical functioning, at least in
theory, may relate more closely to objective
measures of disease progression (such as peak 
flow in asthma, or tumour response following
chemotherapy) than psychological functioning. 
In adult QoL scales, questions about physical
functioning tend to focus on the individual’s
employment and ability to perform self-care 
and domestic tasks, such as climbing stairs,75 or
vacuuming the house.171 Emphasis on similar
everyday tasks is also made in children’s measures.
For example, the physical functioning scale of the
CHQ19 includes questions about difficulties the
child experiences ‘walking one block or climbing
one flight of stairs’ or ‘taking care of self, that is,
eating, drinking, bathing or going to the toilet.’
The measure described by Varni and co-workers123
asks children about difficulties they have ‘doing
chores around the house’.
Thus, the emphasis is on the fulfilment of quite
mundane aspects of everyday activity. There is little
facility for parents or children to report better
than average functioning or excellence in sports.
For younger children, there is no mention of play,
usually considered vital to development. These
kind of questions also lack sensitivity to differences
in physical functioning that might be attributed to
age, gender or the physical environment in which
the child lives. ‘Feeling able to walk one block or
climb one flight of stairs’ may say less about the
QoL of a 4-year-old, while it says a great deal 
about the QoL of a 10-year-old.
Social functioning
That illness affects an individual’s social life is
beyond question, yet social functioning has less
frequently been considered to be a distinct domain
in adult QoL measures compared with other
domains such as physical functioning.60 Inevitably,
the implications of illness for social relationships
and social activities will be different for children
and adults. If illness restricts social activities, the
consequences may also be greater for adolescents
compared with younger children. Staying at home
may not be a problem for middle-aged adults in
stable relationships, but may have much greater
implications for a young adult or adolescent who
would, under other circumstances, go out on a
regular basis. Friends have a major influence on

----- Page 58 (native) -----
How appropriate are adult measures for use with children?
48
the social and emotional functioning of children 
in both the immediate and longer term.212 Younger
children (aged 9 years) make more new friends
during the course of a school year compared with
older children (16 years). This seems to be part 
of a shift to a smaller number of more intimate
friendships during adolescence compared with
childhood.213 Critically, poor social relationships
during childhood have been consistently linked
with negative consequences during adult life.214
Thus, measurement of QoL during childhood needs
to be considered as much for the implications for
adult QoL as for the immediate consequences.
Psychological functioning
Questions to assess mood, anxiety or depression are
included in most QoL measures. These questions
are not sufficient to make clinical diagnoses of
anxiety or depression but serve more as broad
indicators of overall psychological functioning. 
Age and gender changes in psychological
functioning may need to be considered when
interpreting these data. The incidence of
depressive symptoms increases during adolescence
and is particularly pronounced for girls.215 As was
emphasised in the discussion of the social domains
of QoL, consideration of normal development is
critical in determining the domains of QoL to be
assessed in children’s measures.
Potential additional domains
In addition to the domains initially attributed to
the WHO57 there are others that may contribute to
QoL in childhood. At the least, there is evidence
that domains to measure cognitive function,
autonomy and body image are critical, particularly
for work with adolescents.
Cognitive functioning
Cognitive functioning, or the ability to learn,
understand and remember may well be compro-
mised for children with chronic illness, although
the causes are necessarily multifactorial. School
absence, reduced motivation, changed expectations
from teachers and parents and a combination of
the illness and treatment have all been implicated.
For example, there is evidence that some children
with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia treated with
CNS radiotherapy have lower IQ scores than
children treated without CNS radiotherapy.216
More pronounced effects have been reported for
those treated when they are younger. Although
recommendations about the youngest age when
children are vulnerable have varied, a conservative
estimate would be 4 years of age (Mulhern, 1994).216
Age-related differences have also been reported for
children with diabetes. Children who experience
more frequent incidences of hypoglycaemia before
5 years of age have lower IQ than those who 
do not.217
The effects of theophylline, corticosteroids or 
beta-agonists and antihistamines on academic
performance of children with asthma have been
reviewed by Lemanek and Hood.218 Evidence of
subtle damage is apparent, though it appears that
children differ in their susceptibility.219 Effects of
steroids on mood and memory are likely to be 
dose-dependent. Again preschool children seem
more vulnerable.219 Cognitive impairment has been
identified in children with paediatric HIV infection,220
sickle cell disease,221 cardiac conditions222 and
seizure disorders.223
The implications of cognitive functioning for QoL
are considerably greater for children compared
with adults. Children will be aware of their poor
performance and attainments through daily school
activities and can also experience teasing or bullying.
In contrast, adults are more likely to find work of
an appropriate level. For all these reasons, we
would suggest that cognitive function constitutes 
a significant factor in QoL for children.
Autonomy
According to key theories of child development224
adolescence is characterised by attempts to establish
autonomy and independence, close personal
relationships with the opposite sex and the
definition of work goals. Attainment of these 
goals is believed to be critical to a successful
passage through adolescence. Illness potentially
compromises all of these achievements. The
adolescent with serious illness may require help in
administering treatment, or be dependent on
parents for transport to hospital. Treatment may
compromise the chance to live independently or
learn to drive. To the extent that illness can
compromise these achievements, it may be argued
that comprehensive assessments of QoL must
include items that measure the developing
autonomy of the young person and any compromise
to the establishment of close relationships and
work goals. These issues are unique to adolescence
and therefore will not be adequately assessed in
any QoL measure developed for adults.
Body image
Although less frequently included than other
domains in measures of either child or adult QoL,
strong arguments for inclusion of a body image
domain have been put forward by Hopwood225 for

----- Page 59 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
49
adults, and by Kopel and co-workers226 for children
and adolescents. Some conditions have a direct
impact on the child’s physical appearance. Those
with CF for example may well be small and
physically poorly developed compared with their
peers. In other cases, the treatment can have a
major impact on physical appearance. Typically,
children treated for cancer lose their hair and 
may put on a lot of weight. 
Among all adolescents, there is a huge concern
with body image and physical appearance. In
recognising this, Elkind227 introduced the concept
of ‘adolescent egocentrism’, to account for
adolescents’ preoccupation with their appearance
and assumption that they are the centre of
attention. With some exceptions, measures for
adults do not include more than passing reference
to issues of body image, or indeed sexuality.
Family relationships 
The family has considerable impact on the health
behaviour of the young. Children who smoke are
more likely to come from families where parents or
siblings smoke compared with those who do not
smoke.228 Illness behaviour may also be linked to
the behaviour of other family members. There is
some evidence that children with unexplained pain
come from families where adult members have
experienced long-term illness, the suggestion being
that children model their own behaviour on that of
adults in the family.229
Clinically, few would argue that the way in which
the child with chronic illness copes with the
condition is intimately related to the coping
strategies adopted by the family, and this is also
borne out by the research literature. Children’s
coping with pain and behaviour in clinic is linked
to specific parenting practices.230 Child adherence
to cancer treatment (measured in terms of
cooperation with care and appointment keeping)
was related to parental sensitivity and warmth.231
Thus, for both population-based samples and
children with chronic disease, there are indications
that variables linked with child QoL are closely
associated with family attitudes and coping styles.
Implications for the future 
The health of children is important not only 
for their immediate functioning but also for the
implications for future functioning.191 Thus, poor
nutrition and eating habits are associated with
poor child health, but are also of concern because
of the implications for adult health; overweight
children tend to become overweight adults.232 
In the same way, health promoting behaviours,
such as regular exercise seem to be laid down
during childhood; children who exercise become
adults who exercise.233 Children with poor social
skills tend to continue to have difficulties with
social relationships as adults.214 Similar arguments
can be made about QoL for children. QoL
implications are not limited to the present. Where
illness limits a child’s ability to participate in
everyday activities, social, physical or educational,
then the repercussions may be as much, if not
more, for their future. For this reason as much 
as any other, it is important to question how
appropriate it may be to draw too heavily on
methods, concepts and definitions developed 
in an adult context.
Developmental level: are question-
naire measures appropriate given
children’s cognitive skills?
Children’s ability to understand
questionnaires
Self-report questionnaires are the most widely used
and convenient method for assessing QoL in
adults. This does not necessarily mean that they
are also the ideal way to assess QoL for children.130
The ability to comprehend and respond approp-
riately to self-report questionnaires increases
throughout childhood and consequently, adap-
tations to test materials and administration
procedures will be necessary for young children.
The younger the child the more extensive these
adjustments need to be.234 Furthermore, as a
consequence of their disease children may have
physical or cognitive limitations that may compromise
their ability to make written or verbal responses.
In considering how far adult questionnaire measures
are appropriate, it is important to consider the basic
skills involved when children are asked to rate their
QoL. First, it is important that children can read
and understand the question. Second, children
need to decide how far the question applies to them
or not. They may be asked to indicate how much
they agree or disagree with the specific question.
Typically ratings are made on a forced choice or
continuous Likert scale, or less often as a multiple-
choice response. This raises questions about
children’s abilities to use rating scales and under-
stand the end-points. Third, it is generally recom-
mended by test developers that judgements be
made over a defined period of time (usually from 
1 week through to one month). This raises questions
about children’s ability to recall their behaviour
and emotions over these defined time periods.

----- Page 60 (native) -----
How appropriate are adult measures for use with children?
50
In summary, if standardised questionnaires are 
to be used, children need to be able to read and
understand the specific question, to make decisions
about their QoL on a continuous or multiple-choice
scale, self-report emotion or pain, and remember
what happened over a defined period of time. 
Can children read and understand 
the questions?
Most QoL questionnaires for adults require a
relatively advanced level of literacy, estimated
equivalent to the 13–14 year level.235 This may 
be difficult for many adults, and even more so 
for children.
Although the level of difficulty of a questionnaire
can be assessed by using readability formulas 
(e.g. Flesch, 1948236) reading age is rarely reported
by scale developers. For children who are unable
to read, a simple solution would be to design the
measure so that an interviewer can read the
question aloud to the child, in which case the
situation is more like a structured interview. 
Such an approach is open to criticism unless care
is taken not to introduce bias into the style of
question asking. Where children have limited
reading skills there may be strong arguments in
favour of developing measures that include
provision for completion by a proxy. This would
be the easy solution however. An alternative, but
equally persuasive argument, may be that where
children have limited reading skills, different 
types of QoL measures are necessary.
Can children use Likert or other 
rating scales?
Typically, measures require forced choice (e.g. yes/no)
responses or ratings on Likert scales. There is good
evidence that children as young as 4 years of age
can make forced choice responses. For example, 
4- and 5-year-olds correctly predicted vulnerability
to colds on the basis of proximity to an infected
other when asked simple yes/no questions.237
This contrasts with findings from interview studies
where children do not seem to understand the
concept of contagion until they are older.204
As might be expected, children can experience
difficulties completing QoL measures that use
Likert or visual analogue scales. They may fail to
use the full range of scale available, and notably
focus on the end-points, essentially reducing the
Likert scale to a yes/no fixed alternative.238 Despite
the frequency with which Likert scales are used 
in QoL measures, there is little empirical data
regarding how adept children of different ages 
are in using them.
There is also a need for systematic data concerned
with children’s ability to understand common
verbal anchors used in rating scales. Adjustments
to the verbal anchors that are used with adults are
frequently needed, to ensure that the language
and concepts involved can be understood by
children at specific stages of development.239
There have been few attempts to compare 
systematically children’s abilities to complete 
QoL measures differing in format. Juniper 
and co-workers80 asked a sample of 52 children
(aged 7–17 years) with asthma to complete the
Pediatric Asthma QoL Questionnaire (PAQLQ)140,
the HUI,50 the Feeling Thermometer240 and the
Standard Gamble.240
Both the PAQLQ140 and the HUI50 were 
completed as described in the original publications
(see appendices 4 and 5 for description of these
measures). The Feeling Thermometer looks like 
a thermometer with clearly defined end-points,
where 0 is the least preferred health state (death)
and 100 is the most preferred health state (perfect
health). Children were given three examples of
health states related to asthma (mild, moderate 
or severe) and were then asked to place a marker
on the thermometer representing how asthma 
had affected their own health state during the
previous week. Only this last rating was used in 
the analysis.
For the Standard Gamble, children were asked to
think about a health state and then decide whether
they would like to remain in that state or take a
chance with a new imaginary treatment. It is
explained that this new treatment may return them
to perfect health immediately with no side-effects
but may cause instant death. Initially, if they take
the treatment, the probability of perfect health is
set at 100%. All those who understood the concept
chose to take the new treatment. In theory, the
probability of perfect health is gradually decreased
until the child decides to remain in the current
health state rather than take the new treatment. 
In practice, the probability of perfect health and
death is varied until a point of indifference is
found. The indifference probability represents the
value that the patient places on health. In this
study, the Standard Gamble was used with each of
three hypothetical asthma states. These depicted
mild asthma (‘you have asthma but it hardly
bothers you at all. Occasionally you wheeze’);
moderate asthma (‘you have asthma and it bothers
you quite a bit. You wheeze quite often and get out
of breath’); and severe asthma (‘you have asthma
and it’s really bothersome. You feel wheezy and it’s

----- Page 61 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
51
difficult to breathe a lot of the time. You can’t join
in any sports. You have bad asthma attacks and
these are quite frightening’). Children also
completed a measure of reading vocabulary and
word recognition. Parents completed a measure 
of their own QoL,140 the Impact on Family Scale241
and a global rating of change.242 This latter
measure was used to determine any change 
in the child’s asthma between clinic visits.
In terms of understanding and ease of adminis-
tration, the authors reported few difficulties when
using the PAQLQ measure.140 Children from 
7 years of age were able to understand the
questions and response options, at least when the
measure was administered by an interviewer. As
required in this measure, children were able to
volunteer individualised activities and appeared
able to understand and use the seven-point rating
scale. The only problem noted was that some of
the younger children had difficulty with making
ratings with regard to their feelings ‘over the
previous week’. Most children completed the HUI
without assistance, although correlations with
clinical data suggested that validity was poor. The
youngest children had difficulty completing the
Feeling Thermometer, which appeared more
appropriate for children with grade 2 reading skills
(aged about 7 years). As might be expected, the
Standard Gamble task proved difficult for children
with reading skills below grade 6 (equivalent to 
12 years). It is possible that the task was made
easier by the use of asthma-specific scenarios, 
and that healthy children asked to consider
hypothetical states about which they had no
experience might find the task even harder. 
This study therefore provides some data regarding
the task demands involved in completing different
QoL instruments. The suggestion that children are
able to use seven-point Likert scales is potentially
valuable, and the observation that the youngest
children had difficulty using the time frame needs
to be taken into account in developing new
measures. Given the importance of the issue, the
study needs replication, and more detailed work
concerned with children’s use of rating scales and
understanding of verbal anchors is needed.
Can children self-report about
emotions, feelings or pain?
We need to question whether children are able 
to make the kind of judgements about emotions
(happy, sad), which form an integral part of QoL
assessment. The answer seems to be that they can,
although it does depend on the specific way in
which the questions are asked.
Children are able to answer simply worded questions
about emotional issues, particularly if the response
options are represented by pictures.239 Children as
young as 21 months can understand and produce
emotion-description adjectives.243 Ridgeway and 
co-workers243 demonstrated over 75% of 6-year-olds
use terms for feeling comfortable, excited, upset,
glad, unhappy, calm, embarrassed, hateful, 
nervous and cheerful. Thus it seems that preschool
children show substantial understanding of
emotions. However, children younger than 6 years
will typically assert that only one emotion can be
felt at one time, so individuals can feel happy or
sad, but not experience mixed feelings. Older
children are more likely to examine the situation
and its possible emotional consequences more
exhaustively, and so acknowledge the possibility 
of ambivalent emotions.244, 245
Similar findings can be reported with regard to
children’s experience of their own pain. With the
use of play and story-telling tasks, it has been shown
that children from 18 months of age are able to say
that a pain hurts, localise it and make efforts to
alleviate it.246 This literature involving assessment of
children’s pain, can almost be considered a model
for assessments of children’s QoL. From a situation
in which it was believed that children could not
reliably describe their pain, to one in which a number
of methods have been satisfactorily developed, the
message is that children can self-report, as long as
the method is appropriate. In assessing the QoL
literature for children, it is important that criteria
are identified that are sensitive to the strengths and
weaknesses of developing linguistic and cognitive
skills. From this perspective, we may gain consid-
erably from the experiences of those involved in
developing measures to assess other aspects of
children’s development (e.g. self-esteem247).
Can children remember over the
required time frames?
A wide variety of time frames, from a few days to
several weeks, have been used in QoL measures. 
In assessing QoL in adults, there has been some
discussion about the most appropriate time frame
to adopt. Recall is likely to be more accurate when
the time frame is as short as possible, although
there are disadvantages to short time frames in
that they may be affected by temporary fluctuations
in health. Attempting to remember how much
pain, anxiety or dizziness was experienced over the
preceding month is considerably more difficult to
recall than for the preceding 3 days.71 For children
and adolescents, time frames are not always
defined, but may vary between 1 and 4 weeks.15,140
An examination of children’s understanding of

----- Page 62 (native) -----
How appropriate are adult measures for use with children?
52
time is essential in designing tools that will elicit
meaningful responses from children.248 It has been
shown that 3- to 4-year-olds have some understanding
of the passage of time, and know about the usual
duration of everyday activities.249
Innovations to improve 
child-centredness
Much has been written about how to promote
rapport with the child in interview situations.250, 251
In the case of questionnaires, an attractive layout 
is important. The environment in which the data
are collected should help and not hinder the task.
Questionnaire length, simplicity of format,
comprehensibility of instructions, length and
wording of individual items all contribute to the
assessment burden. The time needed to complete
a measure may have important consequences for
whether children omit items and how appropriately
they respond. In addition, young children need
sufficient time to think about their response.
Response format
To sustain a child’s motivation particular care needs
to be taken in the choice of response format.239
Attempts to reduce difficulties experienced in
using rating scales have included the simplification
of Likert scales (e.g. reduction in number of
response categories), and the use of smiley faces.
Reducing the number of points on the Likert scale
(e.g. nine points to five points) may be at the
expense of sensitivity and seven-point scales are
specifically recommended for use in clinical trials.150
The use of smiley, neutral, and sad faces as simple
rating scales is in widespread use for the assessment
of pain in childhood, and these have been adopted
in measuring QoL in children with asthma.138
Pictorial support
Using pictures to support written text is a develop-
mentally appropriate approach for work with children
with limited reading skills. Advantages of the pictorial
format include engaging young children’s interest,
increasing understanding, sustaining attention, 
and all of these may contribute to more meaningful
responses.247 With the aid of pictorial support, 
the youngest age at which self-report data may 
be obtained with acceptable reliability is about 
4 years.247, 238 In QoL measures reviewed in chapter 4,
pictorial support was provided by Lewis-Jones and
Finlay152 and by Apajasalo and co-workers.134
Computer presentation
Given advances in technology and increased
availability of computers, presentation of visual
stimuli by means of portable computers is
becoming possible, and is often assumed to be 
a method of great attractiveness to children.
Measures identified in our search that used this
approach have been reported by Eiser and co-
workers,117 and Ravens-Sieberer and co-workers.120
Props
The use of props or puppets is also useful for work
with young children. Mize and Ladd252 found that
4- and 5-year-olds produced a greater number of
responses when using props compared with verbal
accounts alone. However, no studies were identified
that have used props in this way specifically to
assess child QoL.
Summary
• There are advantages to basing new measures 
of QoL for children on those previously
developed for adults. These include potential
value in longitudinal studies where there is 
a need to determine changes in QoL across 
the life-span, and the opportunities to draw 
on established expertise of those working in
adult QoL and economy. It costs less if some 
of the basic stages of item determination 
used in adult work can be assumed appropriate
for children.
• The disadvantages of this approach also need 
to be recognised. QoL is usually regarded as a
multidimensional concept, including physical,
social, and emotional domains related to the
early definitions of health proposed by the
WHO. In adapting adult QoL measures for
children, a central question relates to how well
the domains assessed in adult measures are
appropriate to assess QoL in children. 
• The traditional domains, including physical QoL
may not have the same meaning for children as
adults. In adult work, there is an emphasis on
attainment of everyday routine activities which
may not fully reflect the range of physical
activities typical of normal children.
• Adult measures may fail to tap the specific
aspects of QoL that are important to the child.
At the least, additional domains to tap autonomy,
body image, cognitive skills and relationships
with the family are needed. Failure to include
these domains may inherently limit under-
standing of the child in a social context and
therefore does not provide a robust framework
for the development of measures for children. 
• Response scales, wording and format of adult
measures may need modifying to account for
children’s cognitive and language skills.

----- Page 63 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
53
• A number of innovations were identified which
may facilitate scale completion by children.
These include the use of pictures or computers
rather than paper and pencil measures, and
modifications to rating scales to simplify the
child’s task.

----- Page 64 (ocr) -----


----- Page 65 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
55
Aims and scope
It is important to consider the role, or potential
use of proxy ratings. First, proxy ratings can be
used as substitutes for ratings made by children.
This is particularly important when children are
too young or too ill to provide their own ratings.
Second, proxy ratings can provide important
complementary information about children. 
In either case, we might ask how far ratings made by
children and proxies may be identical, or whether
systematic differences might occur. In developing
new measures of QoL, it is standard practice to
determine the concordance between child and proxy
rating. It follows that if the concordance between
child and proxy rating is poor, then the measure is in
some way inadequate. There are clear holes in this
argument; proxies, by whom we really mean mothers,
and their children may not agree about many issues.
The question ‘To what extent do child self-reports
correspond with the assessment made by parents and
carers? may therefore need some refining. In this
chapter, we attempt to clarify the circumstances in
which parents are able to make judgements about
their child’s QoL, and identify variables that effect
the degree of concordance between parent and
child ratings. Conversely, we attempt to clarify
circumstances in which proxies cannot answer for
children. The ultimate aim is to determine how far,
and in what circumstances, we can rely on parents
for information about the consequences of illness
and treatment for the child’s QoL. Three further
questions therefore seem critical.
• Is concordance greater for some domains 
(e.g. physical functioning) than others?
• Do parents rate their child’s QoL to be better 
or poorer than their child’s own ratings?
• How is degree of concordance effected by 
child age, gender and illness status?
Background
Advocates of measures that rely exclusively on
parents as informants argue that these may better
facilitate assessments of children across the age
range, compared with multiple measures designed
for child self-report at different age levels.145 Against
this, relying on one parent as informant may result
in incomplete assessment to the extent that the
child’s subjective experience and perceptions of
QoL may be overlooked. 
However desirable it may be to obtain information
from children, there are circumstances where such
direct assessments are not possible. Children may
be too young or too ill to answer questions or
complete questionnaires themselves. Ironically, it
may be in these particular situations that information
about the quality of the child’s life is most pertinent.
While a 9-year-old may well be able to voice anxieties
and concerns about treatment procedures, the 
3-year-old is less able to understand explanations
and may consequently experience greater distress.
In these circumstances, there may be no alternative
but to rely on proxy raters. These are usually
parents, but other relatives, medical staff and
teachers may also contribute valuable information. 
The need for proxy raters is not confined to work
with children, and there is a relatively extensive
literature concerned with the advantages, and
limitations of, proxy raters for work with elderly,
disabled or terminally ill adults. It may therefore
be useful to consider briefly what can be learned
from this adult literature.
In their review of this adult literature, Sprangers
and Aaronson253 emphasise the potential value of
proxy raters in both clinical and research settings.
Clinically, proxy raters are important in considering
the QoL of the elderly or terminally ill. In research,
proxy raters may be able to play a unique role in
resolving common methodological problems
experienced in longitudinal studies. Clinicians 
may be reluctant to involve patients in lengthy
assessments of QoL especially as their condition
deteriorates. Consequently, missing data is a major
problem in analysis of longitudinal work. Proxy
raters can potentially provide such missing data.
QoL data, in collaboration with clinical information,
may be useful when making medical decisions.
Chapter 6
To what extent do child self-reports correspond
with the assessment made by parents and carers?

----- Page 66 (native) -----
To what extent do child self-reports correspond with the assessment made by parents and carers?
56
Thus, the decision to withdraw a child from a clinical
trial may be made on the basis of information about
both prognosis and QoL. Where children are very
distressed by treatment, the decision to withdraw
them from a clinical trial may be taken earlier
compared with a child of similar clinical status 
but who does not seem to experience a similar
level of stress. Conversely, decisions to initiate
treatment may also be taken on the grounds of
QoL information. Short stature by itself may not 
be considered enough to warrant growth hormone
therapy, but if short stature is associated with
compromised QoL, either for the child’s current
or future functioning, then recommendations to
commence therapy are more likely to be made.
In the examples given above, satisfactory decision-
making is dependent on concordance between
clinician and patient perceptions of QoL. The
doctor needs to understand the child’s distress
about being very short. Adult work suggests that 
in practice, clinicians have limited skills with which
to assess patient QoL.253 Most typically, clinicians
underestimate pain intensity,254, 255 and both 
over- or underestimate levels of anxiety and
depression.256 Relatives, too, have limited skills.
Their bias is to underestimate both patient QoL
and their ability to perform different activities.257
In recognising the discrepancies that can occur
between patient and clinician ratings of QoL, 
or indeed between patients and their relatives,
efforts have been made to identify characteristics
of proxies who make more accurate ratings (where
accuracy is defined in terms of match between
patient and proxy). In general, accuracy increases
where proxies live in the same house as the patient
and tends to decrease as the patient’s health
deteriorate.258 However, accuracy does not seem 
to be related in any simple way to demographic
factors such as age or gender, socio-economic
status or educational level of proxy or patient.259
As far as children are concerned, it may be that the
accuracy of proxy ratings is dependent on the specific
domains of QoL being considered. Tangential
evidence for this comes from research involving
parental ability to rate children’s behaviour problems.
Achenbach and co-workers260 found that parents are
more able to judge a child’s externalising problems
(acting out, aggressiveness), but are much less accurate
when it come to judging the child’s internalising
problems (sadness, anxiety). This might suggest
that parents are more able to rate the child’s QoL
in relation to domains of physical functioning or
physical symptoms compared with less-visible
domains such as social or emotional functioning.
There is also evidence of some systematic bias in
parent’s judgements of the child’s functioning or
emotional response. Parents tend to report that an
illness has more negative consequences for their
children than children themselves.261 For example,
in the study by Ennett and co-workers,261 mothers
of children with juvenile arthritis consistently rated
their child’s competence to be more effected by
the disease than the children did themselves. 
In these cases, there are no answers to questions
about who is more right. Parents may exaggerate
the problem; children may deny it. Research has
simply identified the discrepancy and put forward
some post hoc hypotheses about the cause.
The ability of parents to rate the child’s functioning
may be dependent on demographic factors such as
the child’s age, gender or health status. Concordance
might be expected to increase with the child’s age,
particularly as greater verbal skills may facilitate
children’s abilities to describe their experiences and
emotions to parents. There is some evidence that
parents are more likely to discuss emotional issues
with daughters than with sons,262 which may suggest
that mother–daughter concordance would be greater
than that for mother–son. Finally, given the increased
dependence that can occur between parents and sick
children, we might expect parent–child concordance
to be greater for sick compared with healthy children.
Results
As a result of the searches described in chapter 3,
fourteen papers were identified which examined
concordance between child and proxy. These were
based on ten separate measures of QoL and are sum-
marised in Table 6 (generic measures) and Table 7
(disease-specific measures). In 11 of the 14 studies,
the reason for establishing child and parent
concordance was ostensibly to determine the validity
of the QoL measure. Exceptions include work by
Walker and Heflinger,263 Glaser and co-workers.264,265
In all the studies identified, concordance was
explored between child and parent. In addition,
concordance between child and clinician or nurse
was explored in three of these.142, 265, 266 Concor-
dance between child, parent and teacher ratings
was reported in two studies.264, 265
Is concordance greater for some
domains than others?
Parent–child concordance was rarely examined for
children below 7 years of age. However, Glaser and

----- Page 67 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
57
co-workers,264 included some children below 7 years
in their clinic (but not the home-based sample).
Good agreement (r > 0.50) was generally found
between child and parent for domains reflecting
physical activity, functioning and symptoms (see
Tables 6 and 7). Thus, good agreement was reported
for physical activities,119,123,144 physical symptoms,126
and somatic distress.142 Bruil119 reported good
parent–child concordance for physical complaints
for a sample of chronically ill children, but not 
for a comparable group of healthy children.
Poor agreement (r < 0.30) was reported for a
number of domains that reflected more social 
or emotional QoL issues. These were variously
described as ‘global functioning-(negative)’,
‘global functioning-(positive)’, and ‘autonomy’130
‘appearance’, and ‘communication with physician
or nurse’,123 ‘social functioning’,143 ‘cheerful
mood’, and ‘optimism about the future’.154 Phipps
and co-workers142 reported poor agreement for
compliance. Eiser and co-workers126 reported poor
agreement for ‘disclosure’ (willingness to talk
about the illness), and impact of treatment. 
Poor agreement was also reported for cognitive
functioning.123,130
Thus, in line with previous research, there is some
evidence for greater concordance between child
and parent ratings for observable behaviours such
as physical functioning, and less for non-observable
functioning such as emotional or social QoL. How-
ever, there are at least three exceptions. These are
provided by Czyzewski and co-workers,165 Theunissen
and co-workers,129 and Langeveld and co-workers.154
Czyzewski and co-workers165 used the QWB scale180
to compare ratings made by adolescents with CF
and their parents. Parents and their children
showed poor agreement in terms of symptom
scores. Only low-to-moderate correlations over a 
5-day period were reported. Even comparatively
objective sections of the QWB (‘dressed oneself’)
were only moderately correlated (30% common
variance). When parents and adolescents were asked
to identify ‘the most undesirable symptom’, only 5%
common variance was reported (but see chapter 4
for discussion of general problems with this scale).
In the measure reported by Theunissen and co-
workers,129 distinctions were made between health
status and QoL, where QoL was defined as the
affective evaluation of health status. Thus, to rate
health status, respondents first indicate the presence
of a problem by choosing one of three alternatives
(‘never’, ‘sometimes’, ‘often’). If a problem was
present respondents were then asked to assess the
child’s emotional reaction by choosing one of four
alternatives (‘very good’, ‘not so well’, ‘rather bad’,
‘bad’). In contrast to work described above, Theun-
nissen and co-workers129 found that children and
parents were least likely to agree about physical
complaints, for both the health status and QoL
scales, compared with any other domain.
Theunnissen and co-workers129 further argued 
that concordance would be greater for the more
observable health status items compared with QoL
items. Overall, significant correlations between
parent and child ratings were found. However,
QoL correlations were significantly lower than
those for health status, particularly for motor
functioning and autonomy. As a consequence,
Theunissen and co-workers (1998)129 concluded
that parents were less able to rate their child’s QoL
than they were to rate the more objective health
status items.
Langeveld and co-workers154 reported a large number
of parent–child correlations. Of note is the very
good correlation for social interaction with peers; 
a finding not predicted from other work.
This review therefore finds only limited support for
the widely held view that parents are more able to
judge the child’s QoL in terms of physical rather
than social or emotional domains. At least two
reservations can be identified. First, there were
three studies in which there was no evidence of
greater concordance for physical compared with
social functioning. These involved three different
measures of QoL and so findings cannot be
attributed to some problem with a specific scale.
Examination of the properties of these three
measures (see Table 3) suggests that two do tend to
be quite long and involved. The third (QWB) was
not developed for work with children. Second,
even where there is greater concordance for
physical compared with social functioning, it is
clear that there is much greater heterogeneity in
how social or clinical functioning is measured
compared with physical functioning. This can be
seen from the number of different terms used to
describe the social/emotional functioning
domains. Thus, the apparent relationship may be
an artefact of the way in which domains of physical
and social functioning are measured in QoL scales.
The general implication is that there is reason to
examine more carefully how much overlap there is
between scales purporting to measure the same
domain in different measures. This is a problem
for all domains, but may apply particularly to social
and emotional QoL.

----- Page 68 (native) -----
To what extent do child self-reports correspond with the assessment made by parents and carers?
58
Do parents over- or under-
estimate their child’s QoL?
This question was addressed in three papers.
Children reported lower QoL than their parents
for five of the seven scales assessed in the Dutch
QoL Scale (TACQOL; physical complaints, motor
functioning, autonomy, cognitive functioning and
positive emotions).129 Children’s scores suggested
lower health status for domains measuring physical
complaints, motor functioning and positive emotions.
Further analyses suggested that for both health
status and QoL scales, there was poor agreement
for physical complaints. For motor functioning and
autonomy, correlations were lower for health status
than QoL but there were no differences for physical
complaints, social and cognitive functioning. 
In developing the How Are You? instrument,
Bruil119 distinguished between ‘prevalence’ and
‘quality of performance’ as separate contributors
to overall QoL. Prevalence items were phrased in
terms of ‘Have you remembered what you learned
in school?’ ‘Have you done maths assignment?’ For
a group of children with a chronic illness, parents
reported significantly lower QoL than their child,
to the extent that they reported lower ‘prevalence’
of physical activities and cognitive tasks (parents
said the child took part in these activities less often
than the child reported or less often completed school-
based assignments). In addition, parents reported
a lower ‘quality of performance’ on cognitive tasks
and social activities than their children (‘How well
are you able to keep your attention on schoolwork?’;
‘How well are you able to play with other children
after school?’). In contrast, parents reported fewer
physical complaints than their child did. Similar
results were obtained for a healthy group, in that
these parents also reported fewer physical complaints
than their children. However, parents of healthy
children reported a better ‘quality of performance’
on cognitive tasks than their children.
Graham and co-workers113 also explored concordance
between parents and their children as part of the
development of the Children’s QoL scale. Although
QoL was investigated for four groups of children
(physical illness, psychiatric disorder, mental
retardation and healthy) it was only possible to
collect concordance data for the physically ill and
psychiatric disorder groups. Concordance was
assessed separately for the three indicators of QoL
defined by the Children’s QoL Scale: function,
upset and satisfaction. Correlations between
mother and child for ‘function’ varied between
–0.01 and +0.80 for the physically ill group and
between 0.15 and 0.79 for the psychiatric group.
Similar correlations were found for the ‘upset’ 
and ‘satisfaction’ scores. In subsequent analyses
repeated multivariate analyses of variance were
conducted between mother and child ratings. No
significant differences were reported for function,
or satisfaction. (Differences were found for ‘upset’
scores but are not surprising given that mothers
rate their own rather than the child’s upset.)
How is degree of concordance
affected by child age, gender and
illness status?
Age
Only two of the studies examined the effect of age
on parent–child agreement. However, the relation-
ship was not simple and the effects of age were
moderated by the child’s emotional state.
Theunissen and co-workers129 reported that the
child’s age was related to agreement on the
autonomy and positive emotions scales. Older
children (10–11 years) with low positive emotions
scores agreed less with their parents than the
younger children (8–9 years). Conversely, older
children with high positive emotions scores agreed
more with their parents.
Differences in concordance between children and
their parents compared with adolescents and their
parents were studied by Varni and co-workers143 For
children and parents, mean concordance was greater
for cognitive functioning, followed by psycho-
logical functioning, physical functioning, disease
and treatment symptoms and social functioning.
For adolescents and parents the agreement was
greatest for physical functioning, disease and
treatment symptoms, psychological functioning,
social functioning and cognitive functioning. 
Other studies focus on adolescents but do not
include comparisons with parent–child data.
However findings are contradictory. For example,
Eiser and co-workers126 reported relatively good
correlations between parents and adolescents with
cancer; Czyzewski and co-workers165 reported poor
correlations between parents and adolescents with
CF. Given differences in disease, treatment and
methods of data collection in these studies, it is 
not possible to draw any firm conclusions about
the extent of concordance between parents and
their adolescents.
Gender
Only one study129 included an assessment of the
role of gender in moderating parent–child concor-
dance. The results are difficult to interpret. Boys

----- Page 69 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
59
with low autonomy scores and their parents
showed poorer concordance than girls with low
autonomy and their parents. However, boys with
high autonomy scores had higher concordance
with their parents than girls with high autonomy
scores. No theoretical explanation for these
findings is offered.
Illness
Although parents’ ratings of the child’s QWB
scores correlated weakly with clinical indicators of
physical health, there were no similar correlations
between adolescent’s QWB ratings and clinical
indicators. Thus, parents’ perceptions of the
child’s QWB may reflect clinical status, but this 
is not necessarily so for the child.165
Many of the children (54%) in the survey reported
by Theunissen and co-workers129 were suffering
from minor temporary illness (e.g. influenza).
Parent–child agreement for health status (physical
complaints or social functioning scores) was
greater for children with a temporary illness
compared with those who were well. However,
agreement between child and parents was not
affected by chronic illness (19% of the sample),
life events, the position of the child in the family
or educational level of parents.
Walker and Heflinger263 reported concordance
between parent and child for somatic symptoms
and disability to be much lower for psychiatric and
well groups (somatic symptoms: –0.09 and +0.15,
respectively; functional disability: –0.08 and +0.12,
respectively) than for two groups with abdominal
pain (somatic symptoms: 0.47 and 0.48; functional
disability: 0.42 and 0.56, respectively). They suggest
that this lack of concordance may be due to the
fact that these were areas of less concern in the
former groups and thus there may have been 
less communication between parents and children
regarding the presence or absence of any symptoms
or disability.
This same theme, emphasising the importance 
of communication was reported by Bruil.119 For
healthy children, intraclass correlations (ICCs) 
were weaker for domains that were less accessible
to parent observation. As this was not found for
children with a chronic condition, it was suggested
that parents of sick children are more attentive
than parents of healthy children. For children 
with a chronic illness, parents were less positive
about their child’s functioning than their children.
The exception was for physical symptoms, 
where parents reported fewer symptoms than 
their children.
The results of the studies in this section provide
little consistent evidence regarding the relation-
ship between child and parent ratings as a function
of variables such as age, gender or illness status.
There is some evidence that parent–child concor-
dance is greater for dimensions of greater importance
to the parent–child dyad, particularly for sick
children and their parents.
Medical staff as proxy raters
Billson and Walker266 used the HUI (Feeney et al.;78
see chapter 4) to assess health status from the
perspective of doctors, parents and survivors of
childhood cancer (aged 2–17 years). Consultations
with the doctor were informally structured to
enable the doctor to assess the child’s health 
status for each of six attributes (senses, mobility,
emotion, cognition, self-care and pain). Some
modifications were made to the original measure
to ease comprehension for parents and children.
Parents completed the measure for children under
8 years of age, while parents and children aged 8
years and above completed the measure together.
Children over 14 years completed the measure
themselves, with help from their parents if needed.
A total of 48 assessment pairs (patient/parent and
doctor) were collected. No deficits on any of the
six attributes were identified for 16 patients (33%)
on the basis of their own assessments or those of
their parents and for 19 patients (40%) on the
basis of doctors’ assessments. Assessments by
doctors identified fewer deficits than those made
by parents or patients and this difference was most
pronounced for pain. In 17 cases, there was no
difference between assessment by the doctor and
patient or parent. Disagreements were found on
only one attribute for 15 patients and on two
attributes for ten patients. The degree of
correlation between patients/parents (range,
0.29–1.00) and patients/doctors (range, 0.31–1.00)
was not significantly different.
Phipps and co-workers142 used BASES to 
determine relationships between parent, nurse 
and child ratings during initial hospitalisation for
bone marrow transplant. There are three versions
of the BASES.141,142 The versions for completion 
by parent and nurse consist of 38 items; the child
version consists of 14 items. All versions examine
QoL in terms of five domains (somatic distress,
compliance, mood disturbance, quality of
interactions and activity). Correlations between
nurse and parent ratings on Day 0 were good 
(27 of 28 correlations were significant at the 
0.05 level). On day 14, 22 out of 27 correlations
were significant. Further correlations were conducted

----- Page 70 (native) -----
To what extent do child self-reports correspond with the assessment made by parents and carers?
60
between child, nurse and parent ratings. Most
correlations were in the low-to-moderate range, 
but parent–child correlations tended to be more
significant than nurse–child ratings. In line with
previous findings of greater concordance for
observable than non-observable behaviours,
agreement was higher for scales measuring 
somatic distress and activity compared with scales
measuring mood disturbance, compliance and
quality of interactions.
Teachers as proxy raters
Glaser and co-workers265 asked parents, teachers
and children (previously treated for a CNS
tumour) to complete a modified version of the
HUI (Billson and Walker, 1994).266 There was good
agreement between teacher and child for domains
measuring cognition, hearing, vision and pain.
Children reported their QoL in terms of domains
of ambulation, speech and emotion to be lower
than comparable ratings made by their teachers.
Discussion
As with all work in this area, the extent to which
findings can be explained by differences in study
design needs to be considered.253 A number of
problems recur in assessing the quality of these studies.
Definitions of QoL domains
Answers to the questions identified are complicated
because of variability in the content of domains.
This is a general criticism of QoL scales for
children, but contributes to difficulties in
answering specific questions about the value of
proxy raters. Most developers of scales adopt the
WHO-derived definition57 of QoL as a multi-
dimensional concept, and attempt to assess
domains including physical, social and emotional
QoL. However, the precise content of items
included in these domains varies considerably in
emphasis and generality. Thus, the physical domain
of QoL is variously measured in terms of physical
activities,119 physical symptoms,126 somatic distress119
or physical complaints.119,129 The emphasis may be
on physical symptoms, participation in physical
activities or distress caused by limitations in
physical activities. There is even greater variability
in nomenclature for social domains (see Tables 2
and 3). These reservations need to be borne in
mind when evaluating this literature.
Statistical issues
The question of concordance between parent and
child ratings has most frequently been considered
by determining the Pearson’s product–moment
correlations between child and proxy ratings.
These analyses lack the sophistication necessary to
answer questions about parent–child concordance.
Occasionally authors make a priori predictions
about the expected value of correlations. Thus,
Varni and co-workers143 predicted effect sizes to 
be larger for externalising compared with inter-
nalising problems, and Theunissen and co-
workers129 predicted greater agreement for 
ratings of health status compared with QoL. 
The practice of determining child–proxy agreement
on the basis of significance of Pearson’s product–
moment correlations may be insufficient. Although
strong correlations between parent and proxy data
demonstrate some validity, they do not assure that
patient and proxy ratings are interchangeable in
terms of mean values. (Parent and child ratings
may correlate but this can mask differences in
degree; i.e. whether parents rate the child’s QoL 
to be much worse than children). ICCs may
therefore be preferable. The intra-class correlation
is a measure of the proportion of overall variability
accounted for by the variability among individuals,
and is a combined score from the t-test and
product–moment correlation and ranges from 
0 to 1. High ICC suggests little variability in
measurement by either parent or child and
therefore that parent and child ratings are
interchangeable. Given that an ICC of 0.80 or
more indicates that a scale is highly reliable
between raters, the majority of domains fall short
of this, with most correlations in the small-to-
medium effect range. Relationships between the
magnitude of scores and amount of proxy
agreement could give scatter bias or random
fluctuation. To account for this, some authors have
advocated regression analyses where child reports
are regressed against parent reports. 
The multitrait-multimethod approach can be used
to examine the inter-relationships between assessed
items to determine the extent to which data obtained
from various sources (e.g. patient, parent, doctor)
reflect the same underlying constructs. However,
this approach was only employed in one study.129
Sneeuw and co-workers259 argue that to be
adequate a methodology requires the separate
determination of the reliability and validity of
patient and proxy ratings. In some instances,
limited reliability of the measurement scales may
be the reason why there appears to be poor
correlations at the individual level. If the reliability
of the measures is low, agreement between respon-
dents can never be high. There is therefore a need

----- Page 71 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
61
for direct comparisons of reliability estimates based
on both patient and proxy ratings.
Rather than focusing on concordance between
parent and child, some authors prefer to focus on
the degree of difference between raters. In these
cases, authors report a series of t-tests to determine
variability as a function of different domains, or
occasionally multivariate analyses have been used.113
Multivariate analyses have the advantage in that
account is taken of the number of analyses being
conducted.
Data collection methods
In many cases, researchers fail to specify the 
circumstances in which data were collected.
Questionnaires may be completed while children
and parents are waiting for clinic appointments123,125
or sent by post.119,129,154
The practice of sending questionnaires by post for
home completion may be justified in terms of
simplicity. Clinic time can be saved if patients bring
completed questionnaires with them. It might also
be argued that families are stressed during clinic
visits, and that more reliable data may be obtained
when families complete the measures in their own
homes. A disadvantage of home completion how-
ever is that it is not a controlled situation, and
children and parents may ‘help’ each other. 
For this reason, it might be expected that higher
concordance be found where measures are
completed at home and returned by post.
In attempting to clarify this issue, Glaser and co-
workers265 used the modified HUI with survivors 
of CNS tumours (aged 5–16 years) and compared
parent–child ratings in home and clinic settings.
Nineteen parent–child pairs completed the
measures at home, and 28 patient–parent pairs
completed the measure in the clinic. In both
situations, there was good agreement between
children and parents on all attributes except for
vision and pain. Parent–child agreement was
higher where questionnaires were completed at
home than in the clinic, suggesting that some
‘helping’ takes place at home.
Mothers or fathers as proxy raters
As shown in Table 6, many studies include both
mothers and fathers in their samples, although the
numbers of fathers tend to be small. There have
been no attempts to date to determine differences
between mothers and fathers in terms of their
abilities to act as accurate proxy for their child.
Choice of proxy rater needs to be considered
carefully, and differences between raters
acknowledged. Given that mothers tend to be
more involved in childcare, systematic differences
favouring mothers might be anticipated.15 The
potential value of other proxies has not been
considered, and may be particularly an issue when
working with ethnic groups. In some cultures,
grandparents may be more involved in childcare
and consequently make reliable proxy informants.
In other circumstances, particularly where children
come from very deprived backgrounds, it may be
difficult to identify any single ‘primary’ caregiver.
Implications for using 
proxy raters
Our conclusions need to be considered in the light
of two issues. First, how good are the data on which
the findings are based? Second, what degree of
concordance might we expect to find between
parent and child? 
With regard to quality, much that has been written
regarding child–proxy agreement has resulted
from developmental work involving new measures.
Thus, the question has been investigated from the
standpoint of establishing concurrent validity for 
a new measure. As test developers tend to predict
moderate agreement between parent and child,
moderate agreement is often reported as evidence
for the validity of a newly developed measure.113,123,129,153
With regard to the question of concordance, there are
many reasons why parent and child may not agree.
Children may wish to protect their parents and there-
fore hide their awareness of disease and its impli-
cations. They may want to present themselves in a
positive light and therefore minimise the extent of
their difficulties or they may simply be unaware of
the potential restrictions associated with their disease.
Proxy raters and patients do not share an identical
‘data pool’. They differ in their interpretations of
the questions, in their interpretations of the same
event and do not share the same expectations.253
In addition, parents may have different perceptions
of the consequences of disease; different from
children and medical staff. They are likely to be
more in tune with the child’s emotional or behav-
ioural functioning and more aware that the family
will only be eligible for professional help if they
report the child’s limitations. Parents’ views may be
informed by the burden of care-giving, and their
own mental health, well-being and concerns. 
Differences in agreement that might be attributable
to demographic factors such as age or gender, 
and parent–child relationships have rarely been

----- Page 72 (native) -----
To what extent do child self-reports correspond with the assessment made by parents and carers?
62
addressed. To the extent that parents are more
closely involved in the day-to-day lives of younger
children, it might be expected that concordance
would be greater than for older children or
adolescents. Against this, the greater ability of 
the older child and adolescent to verbalise their
experiences and feelings may mean that higher
concordance is found for older groups. The
current literature does not adequately address 
this question. Indeed, a different type of basic
research may be needed. 
The quality of the parent–child relationship 
may well be further modified by the presence 
of physical illness.113,119,263 Where illness changes
parent–child relationships, it may be necessary 
to conduct separate analyses for dyads involving
healthy and chronically ill samples. In all currently
available reports greater concordance for sick
children has been attributed to the greater need
for communication between parents and sick child
as a consequence of need for treatment. However,
such an explanation has never been seriously
investigated. There is a need to determine more
satisfactorily how far concordance is affected by 
the child’s health. Parent–child concordance is
likely to be affected by the extent to which parents
are responsible for giving treatment, the child’s
willingness or compliance with treatment and
whether or not a condition is perceived to be 
life-threatening.
It remains difficult to establish parent–child
concordance in those situations where the need for
a proxy is most urgent.259 Children who are very
young, and those with learning disabilities or
special educational needs may all be excluded from
studies unless special provision is made so that they
are able to provide information about their own
QoL. In these circumstances, proxy ratings may
provide the only means of assessment of the child’s
QoL. From adult work, questions regarding the
accuracy of proxy raters in different circumstances,
particularly when patients are terminally ill, have
been raised. For children too, the need for proxy
raters in these circumstances is critical. 
Discrepancies between child and parent ratings are
generally regarded as a nuisance factor, challenging
the validity of measures and questioning the value
of assessing QoL at all. In fact, discrepancies may
be useful clinically, in suggesting areas of family
conflict. Discrepancies may also reflect different
time perspectives. For example, although parents
and children may agree that short stature is not a
problem at the moment, differences between child
and parent ratings may reflect the parents’ greater
concern about possible future problems. Such
concerns may reflect parents’ wider experience.
Unfortunately there are currently no guidelines on
how to resolve discrepant information. Where
children report a QoL very different from that
reported by their proxy, there is no way of knowing
whether the views of child or proxy reflect the
‘truer’ picture. 
As a consequence, there are consistent recommen-
dations that until more conclusive evidence is
obtained indicating that one informant is more
reliable, information should be collected from
multiple informants.123,129 The parent report may
provide a substitute for children’s QoL at a group
level, but large differences can exist in proxy
agreement at the individual child–parent level.129
There is a need to re-frame the question about
proxy reporting away from ‘Who is right?’ to ‘What
does each rater contribute to the understanding of
the child’s QOL?’.267
Summary
• The question of adult–child concordance was
considered in relation to three questions: 
– Is concordance greater for some domains
than others?
–  Do parents over- or underestimate their
child’s QoL?
– How is degree of concordance affected by
child age, gender and illness status?
• We found limited evidence for the assumption
of greater concordance between child and
parent ratings for observable behaviours such as
physical functioning, and less for non-observable
functioning such as emotion or social QoL.
Contrary data were reported in three studies.129,154,165
There is also much greater heterogeneity in
measures of social and emotional, compared
with physical functioning and this may
contribute to inconsistent results.
• The question of whether parents over- or under-
estimate their child’s QoL was explored in three
studies. These studies were based on different
measures of QoL and involved different
domains of QoL. No clear conclusions can 
be drawn given differences in measures and
critically domains of QoL.
• There was also little literature considering how
far concordance is affected by age, gender or
illness status. Where it has been studied, concor-
dance is greater for parent–child agreement for
groups of chronically sick compared with
healthy children.
• All of these results may be influenced by the

----- Page 73 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
63
specific measure of QoL employed. Differences
in quality of the individual measures may
contribute to the findings.
• Given the status of work in this area, it is
important to obtain information from parents
and children whenever possible.

----- Page 74 (native) -----
To what extent do child self-reports correspond with the assessment made by parents and carers?
64
TABLE 6  Concordance between child and parent ratings on generic measures
Study and
N
Proxy
Age of
Disease
Domains
Inter-rater
Comments
questionnaire
child
group(s)
reliability
used
How Are You? 
995
Chronic illness:
7–13
Chronic illness n = 577
Quality of performance:
ICCs also computed which were
(HAY)
Mothers 88%
Healthy children n = 418
Physical activities
0.65;a 0.30b
comparable with Pearson’s
Bruil, 1999119
Fathers 9%
Cognitive tasks
0.51; 0.35
correlations
Both 5%
Social activities
0.44; 0.27
Healthy:
Prevalence:
Mothers 84%
Physical complaints
0.61; 0.45
Fathers 15%
Physical activities
0.60; 0.59
Both 1%
Social activities
0.49; 0.52
Cognitive tasks
0.37; 0.37
Happiness
0.36; 0.32
Quality of Well-
199
Mothers 92%
0.2–17.9 
CF
Symptom complex
0.23
Pearson product–moment
Being (QWB)
Fathers 8%
years
Functionality
0.55
correlations
Czyzewski 
Overall QWB
0.39
et al. 165
Perceived Illness 
35
Parents (no. of 
8–20
Cancer
Physical symptoms
0.84
t-tests showed that there were 
Experience (PIE)
mothers, fathers
Functional disability
0.81
no differences in mean ratings
Eiser et al., 1995126
or other not 
Restrictions
0.62
between adolescents and their
specified)
Parent behaviour
0.60
parents for any of the domains
Peer rejection
0.59
Psychological symptoms
0.56
Physical appearance
0.56
Interference-activity
0.54
Manipulation
0.54
Preoccupation-illness
0.52
School
0.51
Treatment
0.39
Disclosure
0.13 (n.s)
Total
0.35
continued

----- Page 75 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
65
TABLE 6 contd  Concordance between child and parent ratings on generic measures
Study and
N
Proxy
Age of
Disease
Domains
Inter-rater
Comments
questionnaire
child
group(s)
reliability
used
Perceived Illness 
31
Mothers only
8–25
Treated by limb salvage
Food
0.69
t-tests revealed that there were
Experience (PIE)
procedures for a primary 
Parental behaviour
0.66
no significant differences between
Eiser et al., 1999125
bone tumour
Disclosure
0.61
the means for child and 
Appearance
0.57
parent report
School/work
0.54
Peer rejection
0.53
Manipulation
0.48
Preoccupation
0.43
Interference with activity
0.43
Total
0.59
Glaser et al.,
27
Parents (n = 21)
6–17
CNS tumours = 27
Cognition
1.0 (kappa)
Good agreement between parent 
1997265
Teachers (n = 27)
years
Siblings = 21
Hearing
1.0
and child for all domains
Age- and sex-matched 
Vision
0.59
controls
Pain
0.66
Patients perceived ambulation
Dexterity
0.68
and speech worse than teachers
Ambulation
0.65
Speech
0.24
Emotion
0.26
Confidence for the future
1.0
Self-esteem
1.0
HUI Mark III
19  
Parents (no. of
5–16 years
CNS tumours
Speech, hearing, dexterity,
Good agreement for all
Glaser et al.,
(at home)
mothers, fathers,
ambulation, emotion, vision,
attributes in both settings
1997264
28 
or other not 
pain, cognition, self-esteem,
(in clinic)
specified)
confidence for future
Teachers
Children’s 
25
Mothers
9–15
Psychiatric disorder (PD)
Perception of level of 
ICCs
Quality 
Chronic physical disorder 
function (CPD: 0.57;
of Life
26
9–15
(CPD)
PD 0.57)
Graham et al.,
1997113
continued

----- Page 76 (native) -----
To what extent do child self-reports correspond with the assessment made by parents and carers?
66
TABLE 6 contd  Concordance between child and parent ratings on generic measures
Study and
N
Proxy
Age of
Disease
Domains
Inter-rater
Comments
questionnaire
child
group(s)
reliability
used
TACQOL
1105
Mothers 84%
8–11
School-based sample
QoL:
ICCs also computed which were
Theunissen et al.,
Fathers 11%
Cognitive functioning
0.61
comparable with Pearson’s r
1998129
Both 5%
Physical complaints
0.54
Social functioning
0.51
Forward stepwise, linear regression
Motor functioning
0.48
was conducted for each scale to
Autonomy
0.47
reveal relationships between 
absolute proxy agreement and
Health status:
background variables
Cognitive functioning
0.62
Physical complaints
0.56
Autonomy
0.53
Motor functioning
0.52
Social functioning
0.48
QoL/health status:
Negative emotions
0.55
Positive emotions
0.39
PedsQL
281
Mothers 87%
8–18
Cancer
Physical
0.57
ICCs reported
Varni et al.,
Pain
0.55
(submitted)124
Nausea
0.51
Procedural anxiety
0.48
Treatment anxiety
0.45
Cognitive
0.42
Psychological
0.38
Worry
0.35
Social
0.30
Appearance 
0.29
Communication with 
0.13
physician/nurse
Core (physical, social,
0.53
psychological) 
continued

----- Page 77 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
67
TABLE 6 contd  Concordance between child and parent ratings on generic measures
Study and
N
Proxy
Age of
Disease
Domains
Inter-rater
Comments
questionnaire
child
group(s)
reliability
used
Battery of measures
257
Mothers
6–18
Recurrent abdominal pain 
Children’s somatisation
0.47; 0.15
Correlations shown for the 
Walker & Heflinger,
Teachers
n = 90
Abdominal pain
0.46; 0.22
recurrent abdominal pain and
1998263
Organic abdominal pain
Functional disability
0.42; 0.12
well groups only
n = 63
Academic competence
0.38; 0.44
Well n = 56
Children’s depression
0.30; 0.22
Psychiatric n = 48
aChildren with chronic illness
bHealthy children
n.s. not significant
TABLE 7  Concordance between child and parent ratings on disease-specific measures
Study                  N (child–
Proxy
Age of
Disease
Domains
Inter-rater
Comments
parent
child
group(s)
reliability
pairs)
Quality of Life in 
64
Parent (no. of
12–18
Headache and 
Stress
0.48a
ICCs reported
Headaches –Youth 
mothers or 
non-headache
Impact on activities
0.47
report (QLH Y)
fathers not
Social interaction (sibling)
0.47
Langeveld et al.,
specified)
Social interaction (peers)
0.44
1997154
Depression
0.43
VAS health satisfaction 
0.40
Somatic symptoms (other)
0.39
Home and school 
0.36
VAS life satisfaction
0.33
Leisure activities
0.31
Harmony 
0.31
Fatigue
0.30
Strength/vitality
0.28
Cheerful mood
0.27
Optimism about future
–0.13 (n.s)
continued

----- Page 78 (native) -----
To what extent do child self-reports correspond with the assessment made by parents and carers?
68
TABLE 7 contd  Concordance between child and parent ratings on disease-specific measures
Study                  N (child–
Proxy
Age of
Disease
Domains
Inter-rater
Comments
parent
child
group(s)
reliability
pairs)
Behavioural 
42
Parent (no. of
5–20
Cancer patients 
Somatic distress
0.57
Correlations were also computed
Affective 
mothers or
undergoing bone
Quality of interactions
0.49
between parent–nurse and 
Somatic Exper-
fathers not
marrow 
Activity
0.43
nurse–child
iences Scale 
specified)
transplantation
Mood disturbance
0.35
(BASES)
Compliance
0.29
Phipps et al.,
1999142
Pediatric Cancer 
157
Parent (no. of 
8–18
Cancer
Physical functioning
0.43
Adolescent–parent concordance 
Quality of Life 
mothers and
Symptoms
0.42
using data standardised by
Questionnaire (PCQL)
fathers not
Psychological
0.34
Simpson’s paradox yielded results
Varni et al., 1998143
specified)
Social
0.27
essentially identical to those based
Cognitive
0.26
on the original data
Paediatric Cancer 
274
Parent (no. of
8–18
Cancer
Physical
0.59
Quality of Life-
mothers or
Cognitive
0.46
32 items
fathers not
Symptoms
0.45
Varni et al., 1998144
specified)
Psychological
0.41
Social
0.36
a Only ICC at first administration reported here. ICC also conducted at week 1, 2 and 3
VAS, visual analogue scale

----- Page 79 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
69
Aims and scope
In this chapter we consider the reasons for
adopting a battery approach to measurement. 
The battery approach refers to the use of measures
related to, but not specifically developed for the
measurement of QoL (e.g. physical functioning 
or depression). Based on our review, we identified
five studies where this approach was adopted. In
evaluating these papers, we conclude that there are
considerable methodological problems with this
approach, including the length and consequent
response burden for the child.
Background
As described in previous chapters, there are a
limited number of psychometrically valid measures
currently available for evaluation of QoL in children.
As a consequence, measures of concepts related to
different domains of QoL have sometimes been used
as proxies. Indeed, it is possible to identify measures
that could be used to assess physical function 
(e.g. physical symptoms and pain), psychological
function (e.g. anxiety, depression or body image),
and social function (e.g. employment, social
relations or marital status). Thus, a combination of
different, but previously validated measures may be
considered preferable to a single measure of QoL,
particularly where few psycho-metric data are
available. This battery or modular approach refers
to collections of specific measures that are scored
independently and reported as individual scores.82
Arguments in favour of a battery of measures to
assess QoL focus on three issues. First, as has been
shown in previous chapters, there were relatively
few reliable and valid measures available to assess
QoL, at least until very recently. Second, generic
QoL measures may lack sensitivity in the domain 
of greatest interest. For example, if the task is to
assess the impact of limb amputation on the child’s
QoL, then the limited number of questions
included to assess physical functioning in generic
measures is clearly inadequate. A battery approach
would allow for the addition of other questions or
measures that would provide a more comprehensive
assessment. Third, with few exceptions117,268 measures
are not suitable for self-report by children under
11 years of age. Researchers may therefore decide
it is preferable to use measures of proven value for
self-report in young children (e.g. self-esteem:
Harter and Pike247).
Results
Fifteen studies were identified in which a battery
approach to the measurement of QoL was
adopted. Although these studies had passed the
inclusion criteria identified in chapter 3, further
examination suggested that additional criteria were
needed. In particular, these studies were character-
ised by small sample sizes and unacceptable
amounts of missing data. In order to maintain
some degree of quality control over the contents 
of the review, we therefore decided to define
additional exclusion criteria for these studies. 
As a result, studies were excluded on the basis of
limited sample sizes (< 30), which in most cases
was combined with missing data, and a restricted
number of proxy measures. In this latter case, 
we excluded studies where the range of proxy
measures included was not such as to provide a
multidimensional measure of QoL (focusing
perhaps on physical to the exclusion of social QoL).
Of the fifteen studies identified, ten failed to fulfil
these inclusion criteria. The five studies included
are summarised in Table 8 (see page 74), and the
excluded studies are summarised in Table 9 (see
page 77). It is important to note that three of the
papers164,269,263 were book chapters resulting from
papers presented at a conference concerned with
assessment of QoL in children and adolescents
(October 1996, Case Western Reserve University 
in Cleveland, Ohio).
Aims
The main purpose of four papers was limited 
to describing QoL in a group of children with
chronic illness.263,269,270,275 The remaining paper
reported an evaluation of a health promotion
intervention and compared the efficacy of a 
battery approach with a single QoL measure.164.
Chapter 7
How feasible and reliable are proxy measures of
QoL in different disease contexts?

----- Page 80 (native) -----
How feasible and reliable are proxy measures of QoL in different disease contexts?
70
Study design
Four studies were described as longitudinal. How-
ever, only the baseline assessments were described
by Austin and co-workers,270 and the necessary
comparisons between baseline and follow-up 
data were not described in their later report.275
Longitudinal data were reported by Walker and
Heflinger263 who made follow-up phone calls 
5 years after initial entry into the study. Czyzewski
and co-workers164 evaluated patients and families at
baseline and follow-up at 18 and 30 months later.
Selection of tests
All researchers broadly justified their choice of
measures as reflecting the multidimensional nature
of QoL. Thus, they included measures of physical,
social and emotional well-being. Beyond this, there
was little attempt to provide information about
choice of specific proxy measures (i.e. why one
measure of depression rather than another).
In the five papers included, 16 different 
standardised measures were employed in the 
proxy assessment of QoL (Table 10). Gortmaker
and co-workers269 combined items from previously
reported measures to represent six domains
(health perceptions, physical resilience, physical
functioning, psychological functioning, social 
and role functioning and symptoms). Two papers
reported using interviews or questionnaires that
were developed specifically for the study to 
obtain general information relevant to QoL. 
These concerned issues such as number of 
school days missed or days in bed.269,270
Length of the battery
Information concerning the number of items
included in the battery, or the time taken for
administration and scoring was rarely reported. 
An exception was Gortmaker and co-workers,269
who reported that the battery of measures in their
study took approximately 20 minutes for parents 
to complete.
Appropriate use of tests
There was a tendency for researchers to select
subscales of measures rather than use complete
versions, thus potentially compromising established
psychometric criteria. Choices were justified on the
grounds of relevance to the particular domains
under consideration. Thus, Walker and Heflinger263
assessed perceived academic and social competence
with subscales of the Self Perception Profile 
for Children247 or Adolescents299 Austin and co-
workers270, 275 used subscales from the Child Behaviour
Checklist (CBCL),300 which they considered most
clearly reflected the psychological, social and
school domains of QoL.
Response rates
In their baseline study, Austin and co-workers270
reported that only one family declined to
participate because of the amount of time
involved. In their follow-up, Austin and co-
workers275 reported that seven families (out of 270)
chose not to participate, 14 had incomplete data,
18 were lost to follow-up and three were dropped
for other reasons. The remaining studies did not
report response rates. 
Age of children
Given the number of questionnaires that make up
a battery, and consequently the response burden
imposed, there may be limits on how far children
can assess their own QoL. Gortmaker and co-
workers269 reported that only children above 
12 years of age were able to provide data directly.
In the studies by Austin and co-workers270,275
children were aged between 8 and 12 years. As it
was perceived that children in this age range may
not be able to complete all measures in the battery,
some domains were assessed by mothers only, 
and for other domains different tests were used 
for child or mother completion. Walker and
Heflinger263 included children aged between 6 
and 18 years, presumably using interviewers to
read the questions to the younger children. In 
TABLE 10  Proxy measures employed in five studies that adopted
a battery approch to measurement of QoL
Measure
Study
CBCL
Austin et al., 1994,270 1996275
Czyzewski et al., 1998164
Gortmaker et al., 1998269
Self Concept
Austin et al., 1994,270 1996275
Self Perception Profile
Walker & Heflinger, 1998263
Health Resources Inventory Walker & Heflinger, 1998263
Depression
Walker & Heflinger, 1998263
Functional Disability Index
Walker & Heflinger, 1998263
Abdominal Pain Index 
Walker & Heflinger, 1998263
Children’s Somatisation 
Walker & Heflinger, 1998263
Inventory
Aids Controlled Trials 
Gortmaker et al., 1998269
Group QoL form
National Health 
Gortmaker et al., 1998269
Interview Survey
Behaviour Problems Index
Gortmaker et al., 1998269
Parenting Stress Index
Czyzewski et al., 1998164
Impact on Family
Czyzewski et al., 1998164
Vineland Adaptive 
Czyzewski et al., 1998164
Behaviour Scales
Family AGPAR
Austin et al., 1994,270 1996275
Children’s attitude to 
Austin et al., 1994,270 1996275
illness scale
NIH 
Czyzewski et al., 1998164

----- Page 81 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
71
the study by Czyzewski and co-workers164 data 
were collected only from parents and adolescents,
but not younger children (the sample included
patients aged between 1 and 18 years).
Psychometric properties of 
battery measures
Gortmaker and co-workers269 reported the 
reliability and validity of the QoL battery employed.
Reliability (internal consistency) for the six scales
was based on coefficient alpha. Construct validity 
was determined by comparing scale differences
between children (all of whom were infected 
with HIV) who were either diagnosed as having
AIDS or not. 
Czyzewski and co-workers164 examined the inter-
relationships between measures both within domains,
in order to understand the contributions of multiple
measures of the same domain, and between the QWB
and specific domain measures. Small-to-moderate
correlations were reported within domains 
(e.g. ‘impact related to illness’ with ‘parental stress’),
and the relationship between the QWB and other
QoL measures depended on the informant.
Austin and co-workers270 attempted to determine
the contributions of the different measures to
domain specific QoL by examining intercorrel-
ations among the 15 QoL variables, which were
grouped into four domains (physical, psychological/
behavioural, social and school). A similar pro-
cedure was adopted in their follow-up study. Austin
and co-workers275 grouped 19 QoL variables into
three domains (psychological, social and school).
Clinical validity was determined by comparing
children with asthma and epilepsy. In addition
Austin and co-workers (1996)275 examined validity
on the basis of disease severity (active or inactive).
As predicted, adolescents with active epilepsy
reported the poorest QoL.
Walker and Heflinger (1998)263 made limited
attempts to examine the reliability of their battery
by examining the degree of concordance between
child and parent report (see chapter 6). They also
examined discriminant validity by comparing
differences between the diagnostic groups with
respect to various domains of QoL and predictive
validity by identifying measures that significantly
predicted recovery at follow-up.
Determination of an overall QoL score
Only one study attempted to integrate the separate
findings to produce a general index of QoL.
Gortmaker and co-workers269 conducted a factor
analysis on the separate domains of QoL to
determine how far the separate measures in the
battery could be combined to yield an overall
score. For those diagnosed with AIDS, two factors
were identified. The first (50% of the variance)
included all domains except behaviour problems,
which loaded on the second factor (17%). 
For those who were infected but not diagnosed 
with AIDS, the first factor included physical
functioning, physical resilience and symptoms
(39%), and the second included psychosocial
functioning and health perceptions. This raises
questions about the appropriateness of assuming
that QoL can be measured for children with
different health problems using the same items. 
In the remaining studies, results were reported 
for the separate domains and no attempt was 
made to combine them to provide an overall 
QoL index.
How are results used to determine QoL?
In two studies, conclusions about QoL were 
made on the basis of comparisons with normative
data.164,269 In the remaining studies, QoL of the
target group was assessed by comparison with 
other sick groups.263,270,275
Discussion 
Appraisal of the reliability of proxy measures of
QoL is made difficult by:
• the limited number of studies that adopt this
approach and conform with basic psychometric
criteria (n = 5)
• the lack of information regarding reasons for
employing proxy measures of QoL
• failure to justify the selection of measures
• lack of information concerning the practicality
of the battery (e.g. time taken to administer,
total number of items)
• failure to report psychometric properties of 
the battery.
There are a number of potential problems with a
battery approach.
• In the absence of any agreement concerning
suitable domains of child QoL, each investigator
is likely to select those of most interest. Thus,
any battery does not necessarily include all the
domains typically identified in definitions of
QoL. This makes comparisons of QoL in
different diseases particularly difficult.198 The
inclusion of measures in a battery appears to 
be ad hoc, with the rationale for the inclusion 
of particular measures rarely made explicit. It is

----- Page 82 (native) -----
How feasible and reliable are proxy measures of QoL in different disease contexts?
72
impossible to be clear simply from the titles 
of instruments or their constituent scales and
dimensions what precisely is being measured.69
• Analysis of changes over time is particularly
difficult when multiple measures are used. 
• Considerations of statistical power have not
been well addressed in any of the studies. 
In addition, the precision with which key
parameters (e.g. reliability) have been assessed
varies significantly. Authors have generally failed
to consider psychometric properties of the
batteries they employ.
• Different measures are used for different age
groups. This may not be conducive to long-term
follow-up and can result in unacceptable levels
of missing data. 
•
A potential danger with this approach is that the
multiple comparisons that can be made lead to
erroneous conclusions, to the extent that simply
by chance one or two of the comparisons will
yield significant results. Multivariate analyses are
necessary to guard against such errors.
• Even if the individual measures employed have
established construct validity, the combination
of proxy measures within a domain may not be
appropriate. The scales used may not reflect
QoL, but may reflect other constructs. This is
demonstrated in the study by Gortmaker and co-
workers269 where the results of a factor analysis
suggest that the battery reflects at least two
domains, rather than a single construct of QoL.
Choice of measures is discussed more fully by
Gortmaker and co-workers269 who argue that it 
may be legitimate to drop specific domains for
some studies where there is no expectation that
QoL might be effected. Thus, it may not be
necessary to include a measure reflecting the
domain of physical QoL if there is no reason to
expect that physical functioning is affected. This
would allow QoL measurement to be tailored for
individual studies and keep the battery within
manageable time limits. (In practice, situations
where it is possible to be so confident are difficult
to identify).
Thus, decisions have to be made concerning
whether assessment of QoL should be compre-
hensive, with inclusion of measures that cover a
broad range of QoL domains, versus inclusion of
measures that tap into only those domains that are
relevant to the treatments or disease under study.
This would mean restricting assessment of children
with recurrent pain to a measure such as the
Abdominal Pain Index,284 rather than including
additional measures that might tap a wider range
of issues affecting the child. However, it is
important to balance the need for comprehen-
siveness with the burden imposed on the child
when asked to complete a lengthy battery. The 
use of a general measurement strategy may be
particularly important when the effects of the
treatment or disease on QoL are largely unknown.
However, when QoL components that are not
linked to a specific treatment or disease are
included in the battery, they may simply add
unnecessary complexity to the design and analysis.
It may therefore be preferable to use measures
with clearly stated hypotheses concerning the
relationships between the measures selected and
the treatments or disease processes under study.301
Comparison of the efficacy of the battery approach
over single measures of QoL was attempted in 
one study. Czyzewski and co-workers164 discuss the
utility of a multidimensional battery versus a single
measure to assess QoL in children and adolescents
with CF in the context of a family health education
intervention. They used a battery of measures,
which they considered reflected the key domains
of QoL (health, psychological, social, and func-
tional status). Results were compared with the
QWB Scale 279 as a single measure.
Apart from the advantages of cost, the use of
established measures in a battery may enable
comparisons to be made with population norms.
As such, this approach may be seen to have merits
over any currently available QoL measure, as there
are few such measures with population norms
available. In using norms in this way, it must be
recognised that information about subscales of
measures are unlikely to be reliable (see chapter
2). Any changes to the measures used may effect
the comparability of the data with norms and
comparisons across studies. Proxy measures that
tap into various domains of QoL may provide more
detailed information concerning the impact of a
disease on the patient’s QoL, and may provide
information that may not be obtained from a
single QoL measure.
Any battery of tests is only as good as the measures
included. There is some irony (and indeed
concern) in the fact that measurement of QoL
grew out of a general dissatisfaction with the
alternatives frequently used for assessment of sick
children, and then these same measures may be
used in batteries. The CBCL300 is a case in point.
This measure has been criticised as inappropriate
for work with sick children on a number of
grounds, including the fact that use of items
concerning somatic symptoms may result in
overestimation of behaviour problems for sick

----- Page 83 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
73
children.302 Consequently, proxy measures used 
to assess children with chronic illness should be
carefully reviewed to determine if any items are
confounded by illness factors. As a consequence,
standardised measures may need to be modified
(either by omitting certain items or adjusting scores)
to account for the inclusion of any items that
would artificially inflate the scores of sick children.
Summary
• The battery approach has not been frequently
used with children. We found that studies using
this approach fell short of our original inclusion
criteria. In particular, the inevitably lengthy test
batteries result in unacceptably high levels of
missing data.
• In the five studies that satisfied the inclusion
criteria, there was nevertheless considerable
variability in selection of measures.
• Evaluation is difficult because authors fail to
describe how they chose measures for their
batteries, and do not routinely report critical infor-
mation such as completion rates or missing data. 
• Decisions about use of a battery to assess QoL 
are complex. On the one hand, use of existing
measures can potentially eliminate the time and
expense required to develop a single measure of
QoL. On the other hand, a full battery of standard-
ised tests may be expensive in terms of the time
needed to administer and score. In addition,
battery measures tend to be lengthy to complete
and therefore demanding for sick children.
• Decisions have to be made concerning the
inclusion of measures that cover a broad 
range of domains that are relevant to the
treatments or disease under study. The use 
of a general measurement strategy may be 
more desirable when the effects of the treat-
ment or disease on QoL are largely unknown.
However, when QoL components that are not
linked to a specific treatment or disease are
included in the battery, they may simply 
add unnecessary complexity to the design 
and analysis. 
• It may therefore be preferable to use measures
with clearly stated hypotheses concerning the
relationships between the measures selected 
and the treatments or disease processes under
study.301 Gortmaker and co-workers269 argue that
a modular approach allows QoL measurement
to be tailored for individual studies so that
domains may be dropped for some studies
where there is no expectation of impact. At the
same time, this approach allows for the addition
of more sensitive measures concerned with
particular aspects of QoL that are expected to
be most affected by the condition or treatment
of interest. 
• The battery approach may be particularly
inappropriate for self-completion by younger
children. Use of measures developed by different
authors for different purposes may impose some
burden on children given that measures may
differ in response format. The battery approach
is also likely to result in longer measures and
greater response burden for children.

----- Page 84 (native) -----
How feasible and reliable are proxy measures of QoL in different disease contexts?
74
TABLE 8  Summary of studies using a battery approach to the assessment of QoL included in the review
Study
Aim(s)
Sample
Domains measured
Respondent and instrument
Comments
(as specified by authors) (subscales in parentheses)
Austin et al.,
Longitudinal evaluation of
270 children 
Physical:
Mother:
Results reported from the first data
1994270
the natural history of
aged 8–12 years 
Interview (school absences etc.)
collection of a longitudinal study
adaptation to asthma 
with epilepsy 
Psychological/behaviour:
Child:
and epilepsy
or asthma
Self Concept271
Different respondents for different domains
(anxiety, happiness/satisfaction)
Attitude to illness272
Intercorrelations reported among each
Mother:
of the QoL variables
CBCL (internalising, externalising,
social, school, peers) 273
Reliability and validity of the measures
not reported for the samples included
Social:
Child:
Family AGPAR274
Comparisons were made with norms
Mother:
for the CBCL and CBCL-TRF
CBCL (peer relations, social activity,
social problems)273
Total of 15 QoL variables
School:
Mother:
No attempt to create overall score
CBCL (school progress)273
Teacher:
Authors note that physical domain was 
CBCL-TRF 
not measured as comprehensively as the 
(school achievement, internalising,
other domains
externalising behaviour)273
Austin et al.,
To compare QoL in
Longitudinal 
Psychological:
Child:
Results reported from the second data collection
1996275
inactive or active 
follow-up (see 
Self concept (self anxiety,
of a longitudinal study
epilepsy with those 
Austin et al.,
self happiness)271
with asthma
1994)
Attitude to illness272
No comparisons were made with the data
Mother:
obtained at Time 1 (Austin et al., 1994)
Describe differences in 
228 children 12
CBCL (internalising, externalising 
QoL related to sex and 
to 16 years with
problems, thought problems,
Different respondents for different domains
illness severity
epilepsy or asthma
attention problems)273
Social:
Child:
Total of 19 QoL variables assessed
Family AGPAR274
Mother:
No attempt to create overall score
CBCL (peer relations, activities,
social problems)273
continued

----- Page 85 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
75
TABLE 8 contd  Summary of studies using a battery approach to the assessment of QoL included in the review
Study
Aim(s)
Sample
Domains measured
Respondent and instrument
Comments
(as specified by authors) (subscales in parentheses)
Teachers:
CBCL (social problems)273
School:
Child:
Self concept (intellectual)271
Mother:
CBCL (school progress)273
Teacher:
CBCL-TRF (school achievement,
internalising, externalising, thought 
problems, attention problems)273
Czyzewski 
To compare a battery and
Children 
Health status:
Clinician:
QoL inferred from comparison with 
et al., 1998164
a single metric approach;
with CF 
NIH276
population norms
assess the differential 
< 1 to 18 years
impact of CF on a range 
Psychosocial:
Parent:
No attempt to create overall QoL index
of domains;
Caregiver dyads 
Vineland Adaptive Behaviour277
evaluate intervention 
(n = 199)
Parent/Youth self-report:
Concluded that the QWB is less sensitive than
programme
CBCL
the battery approach in detecting current QoL
Dyads evaluated at 
Parent:
or expected age-related difference in QoL
baseline and 18 to 
Parenting Stress Index278
30 months after 
Impact on Family241
intervention
Family functioning:
Parent and child:
QWB279
Single metric:
Gortmaker 
To test the General 
444 children
Health perceptions:
Health ratings adapted from ACTG
The GHAC demonstrated very good
et al., 1998269
Health Assessment 
aged 5 to 11
QoL form for adults280
internal consistency
for Children (GHAC);
with HIV-1
a modular measure of 
Physical resilience:
7 questions from National Health
Significant difference between children with and
QoL to be used in 
Interview Survey281
without AIDS
AIDS clinical trials
continued

----- Page 86 (native) -----
How feasible and reliable are proxy measures of QoL in different disease contexts?
76
TABLE 8 contd  Summary of studies using a battery approach to the assessment of QoL included in the review
Study
Aim(s)
Sample
Domains measured
Respondent and Instrument
Comments
(as specified by authors) (subscales in parentheses)
To compare children with 
Physical function:
6 items adapted from  
Original 6 scales subject to factor analysis to 
and without AIDS
ACTG QoL280
create 2 factors. Factor 1 included physical 
functioning, physical resiliance, HIV-related 
GHAC forms were designed 
Psychological function:
Behaviour Problems Index282
symptoms) and factor 2 included psychosocial 
for parents of children aged 
functioning and health perceptions
6 months to 4 years, and 
Social and role function:
5 items from National Health 
5 to 11 years.An existing 
Interview Survey281
Employed different assessment instruments for 
adult report QoL 
different age groups
questionnaire was utilised 
HIV related symptoms:
ACTG QoL280
for 12 to 20 year-olds and 
QoL inferred from comparison with 
parents also filled out 
normative data
this form
Walker & 
To compare different groups Longitudinal
Physical:
Children’s Somatisation Inventory283
Child report (not parent report) was a significant 
Heflinger,
Abdominal Pain Index284
predictor of recovery
1998263
To predict QoL  
257 children 
outcomes 5 years after
aged 6–18 years
Functional:
Functional Disability Index285
No attempt to create overall index
clinic visit
Abdominal pain:
Emotional:
Children’s Depression 
Follow-up interview was conducted with 
To compare child and 
90 with recurrent 
Inventory (CDI)286,287
abdominal pain patients over the telephone 5 
parent ratings
abdominal pain;
years after the initial interview
63 with an organic Social:
Self Perception288
diagnosis;
Health Resources Inventory 
48 psychiatric 
(academic competence & 
conditions;
peer relations)289
56 healthy
CBCL-TRF. Child Behaviour Checklist – Teacher Report Form
ÑIH, National Institutes of Health
ACTG,AIDS Controlled Trial Group

----- Page 87 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
77
TABLE 9  Studies using a battery approach to the assessment of QoL that failed to reach the inclusion critera
Study
Design
Domains
Instruments
Results
Comments
Chin et al.,
Sample: 26 children 
Socialisation, daily 
Vineland Adaptive 
Comparisons were made with the
Small sample
1991290
(age 0.58–14.2)
living skills,
Behaviour Scales
normal range
undergoing orthotopic 
communication,
liver transplantation 
Single instrument used to 
(OLT) for end-stage 
motor skills
In all but 3 children QoL as perceived by 
assess QoL
liver disease
parents was good or excellent
Aim: to investigate 
Socialisation scored relatively highly while 
outcome and to evaluate 
gross motor and community daily living 
areas of potential ongoing 
scales performed less well
concern after OLT. QoL 
was assessed in those with 
a minimal follow-up period 
of 12 months
Cleary et al.,
Sample: 19 patients aged 
Functional status:
FSQ
Treatment with rG-CSF results in significant 
Small sample
1994291
4.5–18 years who were 
improvement in general health perceptions,
participants in a Phase II 
General health
Rand HIS
limitations of daily activities, and symptoms 
Missing data (not all
trial of the value of rG-CSF 
perceptions:
of the disease
patients completed all the
in children with congenital 
questionnaires)
agranulocytosis
Activity limitation:
Rand HIS
Only minor discomfort due to therapy 
was noted
Psychometric properties not
Aim: questionnaires were 
Disease-related 
examined
administered on 8 occasions 
symptoms:
during a clinical trial, to 
evaluate patient QoL
Discomfort related 
Author developed
to therapy:
Felder-Puig 
Sample: 60 patients aged 
Psychosocial
State Trait Anxiety 
Approximately 80% of patients revealed 
Assessment of psychosocial 
et al., 1998292
15 to 30 years. One year 
Inventory
minor psychosocial problems
QoL
since treatment for 
Frankfurt Self-Concept 
bone cancer
Scales
Neither clinical data nor physical or functional 
54% participation rate
Questionnaire on Life 
sequelae affected psychosocial adjustment
Aim: Evaluation of psycho-
Goals and Satisfaction
social QoL
with Life
continued

----- Page 88 (native) -----
How feasible and reliable are proxy measures of QoL in different disease contexts?
78
TABLE 9 contd  Studies using a battery approach to the assessment of QoL that failed to reach the inclusion critera
Study
Design
Domains
Instruments
Results
Comments
Herndon et al.,
Sample: 12 survivors with 
Physical, psychological
Standard mental 
Physical impairment was approximately 60%.
Small sample
19869
> 80% total body burns.
status evaluation
50% of children were completely independent 
Age range 8 months to 
in activities of daily living
12.4 years at time of burn
Louisville Behaviour 
Checklist
One-third of the children had excessive fear,
Aim: examination of QoL 
regression, neurotic and somatic complaints
after major thermal injury 
The Burn Injury 
in children
Questionnaire
The Activity 
Questionnaire
Johnson et al.,
Sample: 13 survivors of 
Intellectual functioning/ WISCC-R
Perceptual motor task performance was
Small sample
1994293
medulloblastoma 
school:
WISC-R
below average in more than half of the
age 1.7–15.9 years
Wide range Achievement
participants, but motor dexterity was more
57% of the patients
test-R
severely affected than perception
completed all components
Aim: to examine the quality 
Controlled Oral Word 
of the study
of long-term survival
Association Test
Problems in learning and a delay in physical
Hooper Visual 
growth and development were seen in the
Organisation Test
majority of patients
Purdue Pegboard
Wisconsin card 
sorting test
Benton Visual 
Retention Test
Wechsler Memory Scale
Rey Auditory Verbal 
Learning Test
Behavioural/
CBCL
emotional
Symptom Checklist:
self-report
Vineland Adaptive 
Behavior Scales
Harter Self Perception 
Profiles
continued

----- Page 89 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
79
TABLE 9 contd  Studies using a battery approach to the assessment of QoL that failed to reach the inclusion critera
Study
Design
Domains
Instruments
Results
Comments
Kun et al.,
Sample: 30 children with 
Intellectual:
Bloom’s functional status
Subnormal IQ levels were found in 8 children 
Small sample
1983294
primary brain tumours aged 
McCarthy Scales of 
who had cranial irradiation
1 year 9 months to 15 years 
Children’s Abilities
Not all the children 
8 months at diagnosis
WISC-R
Social and emotional problems were  
complete the assessment
Peabody Individual 
encountered in a large proportionof patients
tests
Aim: to examine intellectual,
Achievement Test
emotional and 
Statistically, only the scale of psychotic 
academic function
Emotional:
Personality Inventory 
tendencies was abnormally represented
for Children
Academic:
Mathematics
Reading recognition
Reading comprehension
Spelling
MacPhee et al.,
Sample: 30 children were 
Psychosocial:
Social Support 
Adolescents’ QoL scores significantly 
Small sample
1998295
aged 12–18 years with 
Network Questionnaire
correlated with satisfaction and 
Crohn’s disease or 
degree of closeness with their social 
Variable duration and severity 
ulcerative colitis
QOL for adolescents and 
support network
of disease
parents (Garret 
Aim: examination of psycho-
& Drossman)
Severity of illness did not correlate 
Selection bias (only dyads 
social factors that influence 
with adolescents’ QoL scores
included)
adolescent and family 
Family Inventoy of Life 
adjustment and QoL in 
Events and Changes for 
Mothers also completed the same 
newly diagnosed (< 5 years) 
Adolescents (A-FILE) and 
measures to assess their own QoL etc.
inflammatory bowel 
Parents (FILE)
disease patients
Coping Health Inventory 
for Parents
Adolescent Coping 
Orientation for Problem 
Experiences
continued

----- Page 90 (native) -----
How feasible and reliable are proxy measures of QoL in different disease contexts?
80
TABLE 9 contd  Studies using a battery approach to the assessment of QoL that failed to reach the inclusion critera
Study
Design
Domains
Instruments
Results
Comments
Martinez-
Sample: 39 children 4 to 
Psychological:
WISC/WISC-R
QoL scores were high in 49% (good QoL) of 
Small sample
Climent et al.,
23 years (mean 14 years) 
Terman-Merril test 
patients, intermediate in 20%, and low 
1994296
who were survivors of 
(children < 4)
(poor QoL) in 31%
cranial posterior tumours
Endocrine/ 
Growth and endocrine status
Aim: to develop a scale for
growth status:
assessing QoL in survivors
of posterior fossa tumours
Functional status:
Bloom’s scale
Nespoli et al.,
Sample: 36 children aged 
Anxiety:
Busnelli Anxiety Scale 
Average scores for the BAS did not fall  
Small sample
1995297
3 to 19 years who had 
(BAS; children 8–15 years)
outside the normal range reported for a  
undergone bone marrow 
sex and age-matched Italian population
Not all children 
transplants (BMT)
Depression:
CDI (children 9–16 years)
completed each of 
On the CDI shows a slight inadequacy on  
the measures
Aim: evaluation of QoL in 
Self image:
OSIQ (adolescents 
Fac 1 but was in the normal range for Fac 2
children who underwent 
13–19years)
BMT in childhood
OSIQ scores were in the normal range except 
for lower scored on the superior adjustment 
scale for BMT girls
Packer et al.,
Sample: 24 long-term 
Domains were 
WISC-R
12% of patients had an Full Scale Intelligence 
Not all children completed 
1987298
survivors of medullo-
not clear
Wide Range Achieve-
Quotient below the normal range
each of the measures
blastoma of the 
ment Test
posterior fossa
Vineland Social 
Specific learning, memory and fine-motor 
Maturity Scale
disabilities were found in over 50% of patients
Aim: to characterise the 
Finger Tapping and 
QoL of children surviving 
Grooved Pegboard
medulloblastoma and the 
factors affecting outcome
Performance level:
Beery Developmental Test 
of Visual Motor Integration
Target Test
Intelligence:
Benton Visual Retention Test
Sentence Memory
School performance 
Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test
and other measures 
Selective Reminding Memory Procedure
of outcome:
Verbal Fluency
FSQ, Functional Status Questionnaire; Rand HIS, Rand Health Insurance Study;WISC.Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children

----- Page 91 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
81
Aims and scope
So far our review has drawn heavily on issues
involved in measuring QoL, and attempting to
answer the specific questions identified by the
HTA. The focus on measurement is important, 
but the resulting debates about quality threaten to
undermine the use and integration of QoL measure-
ment in both clinical practice and research. 
In justifying the need for this review in chapter 1, 
it was argued that QoL measures were potentially
useful in a number of different contexts. In this
chapter, we attempt to review how far QoL
measures have been used to measure outcomes.
The review is based on the searches conducted to
answer the four main questions of the review, 
and therefore does not necessarily include all 
the available and relevant review. The findings
nevertheless point to the limited use of QoL
measures in research. In trying to account for
these findings, we consider a number of barriers 
or misconceptions about the measurement of QoL
in research and clinical practice.
QoL measurement in practice
Comparing outcomes in clinical trials
QoL measures were originally considered in 
terms of their potential value for assessing out-
comes in clinical trials involving patients with life-
threatening conditions.303,304 More recently, their
value has also been recognised in a greater range
of situations, including evaluations involving 
non-life-threatening conditions. 
QoL measures might be useful to compare
different chemotherapy regimens such as
continuous or intermittent therapy, or alternative
methods of delivering nebulised budesonide in 
the treatment of steroid-dependent children with
asthma.305 “Traditional end-points to measure
effectiveness, such as disease-free survival and
survival, need to be supplemented by outcomes
reflecting the impact of treatment on the patient,
and in some instances, families”.305
Bradlyn and co-workers303 conducted a national
survey to determine how far QoL measures were
employed in Phase III clinical trials in paediatric
oncology. Research publications were identified 
in bibliographies from two major US Oncology
Groups (Pediatric Oncology Group and Children’s
Cancer Group). They did not restrict their work 
to the use of comprehensive QoL measures but
defined QoL very broadly to include any assess-
ment of individual domains such as mobility, or
relations with parents. Based on this broad
definition, QoL measures were only included in
3% of paediatric oncology trials. (Comparable
figures suggest that some 8.2% of cancer trials for
adults include QoL measures.306) Any evaluation
based strictly on the use of standardised QoL
measures would suggest an even lower incidence.
In adult work, despite the increasing availability of
QoL measures, researchers continue to rely on
ad hoc questions in evaluations of clinical trials.307
In paediatric work, QoL is often discussed, but not
yet routinely integrated in trial evaluation.
Some tangential evidence that QoL measures could
be used to compare outcomes in chemotherapy
trials was provided by Barr and co-workers.308 They
used the HUI (marks 2 and 3) to document health-
related QoL in children with acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia in remission during post-induction chemo-
therapy. Eighteen families took part, and children
ranged from 11 months to 14 years in age. Ratings
were made by nurses, parents and where appro-
priate, by children themselves. The data suggest
that the burden of morbidity is cyclical in nature,
mirroring the schedule of chemotherapy. The impact
on QoL was least at the onset of the treatment cycle
(following a week of no treatment) and greatest at
the beginning of the second week (following use 
of steroids). Pain was the most frequently reported
indicator of morbidity, followed by emotion and
mobility. This study is exemplary in documenting
the relationship between steroid therapy and QoL,
and suggests also that the HUI (marks 2 and 3) is
sufficiently sensitive in this context. In providing
direct evidence of the morbidity associated with
maintenance chemotherapy, and evidence for the
sensitivity of the HUI measures, it paves the way 
for future work in which QoL outcomes can be
assessed in clinical trials.
The growth in measures of QoL specifically for
work with children with non-life-threatening
Chapter 8
The use of QoL measures in different contexts

----- Page 92 (native) -----
The use of QoL measures in different contexts
82
conditions such as asthma or eczema will provide
the opportunity to evaluate treatment change in
terms of QoL rather than, or in addition to clinical
indicators. Such a shift involving the focus on out-
comes of interest to the patient, is to be welcomed.
An additional benefit may involve greater insight
into factors such as patient adherence to treatment
recommendations. (It might be expected that
patients who perceive improvements in their QoL
would be generally more adherent than those who
perceive no changes or a reduction in QoL.309
Future research concerned with the relationship
between treatment regimens, QoL and adherence
may offer useful insights into patient behaviour
and decision-making.)
It is important that new treatments are assessed in
terms of safety efficacy as well as QoL. If patients
themselves do not notice an improvement they are
unlikely to adhere to protocols. Thus, Harper and
co-workers310 compared multiple short courses of
cyclosporin (12 weeks) with continuous therapy for
a year with respect to efficacy, safety, tolerability and
QoL. Although there were no differences in QoL
at 12 weeks, it was better for both child and family
in the continuous treatment group at 12 months. 
QoL measures also have potential in evaluating the
effects of community-based screening programmes.
They may be used in two ways. First screening may
result in considerable distress for some families.
Where a child is identified as having a condition,
QoL is necessarily compromised. However, it is also
possible that even where the child is identified as
not at risk, the degree of anxiety is accelerated.
Thus, QoL measures may be useful in assessing the
immediate emotional burden of screening. There
is also the issue of what follows from screening. If 
a child is identified through screening to have a
hearing problem, then justification for the value
must be assessed in relation to the ensuing benefits
to the child of early identification of the problem.
Interventions to improve language or cognition are
important but overall evaluation of benefits may be
expected to have wider ramifications in terms of
facilitating the child’s development and normal
family relationships. Again, there seems to be huge
scope for QoL measures in community-based
screening programmes and interventions.
Evaluating interventions
QoL measures have a potential role in evaluating
the efficacy of psychosocial interventions. The
extensive literature describing the social and
psychological consequences of chronic disease for
children suggests that much more attention needs
to be paid to alleviating the impact of disease and
treatment rather than focusing on identification
and description.311 In practice, there have been few
reported evaluations of psychosocial interventions
for children that include specific measurement of
QoL. (This is not to say that many interventions
are not undertaken, but they are often not evalu-
ated.) In part, the lack of formal evaluation can be
attributed to the non-availability of suitable
measures. There may also be ethical objections where
interventions are offered only to some children. 
One exception was reported by Kazak and co-
workers,312 who devised an intervention to reduce
distress among children undergoing bone marrow
aspirations and lumbar punctures. Children were
compared in two arms of a randomised, controlled
prospective study. One group (n = 45) received a
pharmacological intervention only, and the other
group a combined pharmacological and psycho-
logical intervention (n = 47). Outcome measures
included child distress, parent-rated assessment of
child QoL145 and parenting stress. Child distress
was lower in the combined intervention group, 
but there were no differences in QoL scores.
(Subsidiary analyses suggested that QoL for both
groups improved over the 6-month course of the
study. Thus, there is evidence that this QoL
measure lacks sensitivity to identify differences 
as a function of the intervention, but may more
adequately reflect changes over time.)
The importance of QoL data in evaluating inter-
ventions is emphasised in a study by Jelalian and
co-workers.313 They reported an intervention to
increase food intake and weight gain in children
with CF. Although the intervention was successful
(in terms of weight gain), families rated the accom-
panying improvements in the child’s energy levels
and ability to participate in sports as equally important. 
These studies support recommendations to include
QoL measures in evaluating treatment interventions.
Perceived improvements in QoL may be more
important to child and family QoL than changes 
in clinical function noted by paediatricians. 
Allocating scarce resources
QoL measures have often been justified in terms of
their potential role in allocation of resources and
public policy decision-making.83 Parents too have
expressed concern about the value of treatment 
for all infants.314 In recognition of this, guidelines
have been published regarding eligibility for
intensive care.315 Of relevance to this question 
is work by de Keizer and co-workers,316 who
attempted to predict health status and QoL in
children following admission to intensive care,

----- Page 93 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
83
based on HUI scores. The most important
predictors of health status 1 year after admission
were level of sensation, mobility and cognition on
admission. Other contributing variables included
ability for self-care, systolic blood pressure, oxygen,
Glasgow Coma Scale scores, glucose and age. 
While considerable work needs to be conducted 
in this area, the ability to predict future health
status on the basis of simple measurement such as
this is potentially useful in clinical decision-making.
Currently available QoL measures, however, may
not be perceived to be sufficiently well developed
for use in this context. ‘Ultimately, QoL assessment
can provide data regarding the true cost of child-
hood cancer, taking into account not only life-years
saved, but also reflecting a quality-adjusted analysis
of those benefits’.83 QoL data may have some
potential for prioritising and allocating resources,
but currently available measures may lack the
sophistication that would be demanded. 
Assessing the outcomes of treatment 
in the long term
Increasing long-term survival, albeit with greater
morbidity, has accounted for much of the work
involving QoL. The issue is particularly acute for
survivors of potentially life-threatening conditions
such as childhood cancer or renal disease, sur-
vivors of neonatal intensive care, and previously
healthy children who experience major accidents
or injuries. For many of these children, survival is
associated with major stresses and compromises to
everyday function. The financial cost involved in
continuing medical care is a considerable burden
for the health service. Assessment of QoL is import-
ant in order to provide an appropriate follow-up
service in both the immediate and long term.
The most comprehensive series of follow-up studies
involving QoL assessments have been reported for
survivors of neonatal intensive care by Saigal and
co-workers.317 Based on assessments involving the
HUI measures,78 survivors of neonatal intensive
care report a greater burden of morbidity and 
rate their QoL to be significantly lower than 
age-matched healthy controls.317 Even so, most
survivors were relatively satisfied with their QoL.
Findings such as these perhaps justify use of QoL
measures in assessing outcomes for these survivors.
Based on simple outcome measures, it is clear that
the group as a whole have considerable morbidity.
However, children are able to enjoy a good QoL
and find ways to compensate for any physical
morbidity. However, in that it was not possible to
include the most severely affected individuals in
the study, some reservations remain about the 
QoL of survivors of neonatal intensive care.
Considerable follow-up of survivors of childhood
cancer has also taken place (for review see
Eiser318), although much of this has not been 
based on formal assessment of QoL. A number 
of outcome measures are now available for this
purpose; indeed some measures have been
developed specifically to assess QoL in survivors 
of childhood cancer (e.g. Varni et al. 143). 
Palliative care
The focus in medical training on treatment and cure
may make it difficult for some medical and nursing
staff to accept when palliative care is more
appropriate. For some, a decision to recommend
palliative care can be perceived to be a failure.319, 320
Continuing intensive treatment in the face of pro-
gressive disease can be a major obstacle to the
attainment of good QoL. One difficulty in assessing
QoL in palliative care lies in defining exactly when
curative care ceases and terminal care begins. 
Many children may experience a period of normal
life even after the point when cure is no longer
perceived to be possible. “The transition between
aggressive treatments to cure or prolong good
quality life and palliative care may not be clear”.321
As has been recognised in adult work, it is important
to evaluate QoL at an early stage and not wait till the
patient is too ill to benefit from any assessment. 
Guidelines for improving the QoL of children in
palliative care have been defined by a Working
Party convened by the Societe Internationale
D’Oncologie Pediatrique and chaired by
Jankovic.322 In considering good practice in
palliative care, they recommend:
• evaluation of the child’s physical, psychological
and practical needs
• research into the use of optimising analgesia,
control of emesis and psychological symptoms
• consideration of the impact of the palliative 
care team on the child and family
• consideration of the role of cytotoxic agents 
and radiotherapy
• assessment of QoL
• formal training within medicine on manage-
ment of the dying child.
Although she does not focus her discussion of
palliative care on QoL, Goldman321 makes a
number of relevant points. Factors such as the
child’s understanding of illness and death need 
to be considered and appropriate means of
communication (play, drama, art, school-work)
adopted. Goldman discusses the use of faces scales
to assess pain, but does not consider formal QoL

----- Page 94 (native) -----
The use of QoL measures in different contexts
84
scales. Certainly no measure currently available
would seem to be appropriate for these purposes.
However, standardised measures of QoL in
palliative care may be useful in making decisions
about the efficacy of alternative treatments and
assessing change in the individual child’s evaluation
of their own QoL. They may also have a place 
in determining the child’s views about the value 
of treatment. 
Reluctance to assess QoL during palliative care 
is invariably based on assumptions that patients 
are too ill to rate their own QoL. The assumption
has rarely been tested. For children, a good QoL
measure for work in palliative care probably needs
to take into account the control of symptoms, 
the impact on the family of treatment both in 
the immediate and longer term, and the child’s
emotional and spiritual well-being. Assessments of
the effectiveness of treatment must not only focus
on the immediate consequences of the child’s
death, but also the longer-term implications for 
the family. Clearly none of the currently available
generic measures have sufficient sensitivity for this
purpose. There remains however, a need for some
means of assessing how far treatments used in
palliative care really improve QoL either for the
child or for the family.
Barriers to adoption of 
QoL measures
Despite the amount of work invested in developing
QoL measures, it is disappointing how little they
have been adopted for use in either research or
general clinical practice. The dissemination of
information about QoL, and inclusion in everyday
practice must be a goal, but for the moment
interest remains at an academic level. In the
absence of hard data, we may need to speculate 
as to why QoL measures have not been used in
outcome studies as much as might be hoped. They
may be perceived as ‘soft’ and time consuming.323
Clinicians question particularly the significance or
meaning of small changes in QoL and have difficulty
understanding how far changes in scores have
clinical, rather than statistical, significance.68,324
Thus, there is potential conflict between scale
developers with a concern for statistical significance
and clinicians interested in clinical significance.
The relationship between statistical and clinical
significance needs to be clarified.
Additional barriers relate to the interpretation of
QoL data. In terms of clinical need, the question
of meaningfulness of QoL scores has not generally
been addressed by those involved in developing
measures. Thus, if change in QoL is measured on a
seven-point Likert scale, we need to determine the
practical meaning to the patient of a change from
a rating of 4 to 6. Does this represent twice as good
an improvement as a change from 4 to 5? There is
scope here for considerable research work.
As so often in work with children, in the absence 
of hard data we need to draw on work with adults
to answer this question. Although little is formally
known about the attitudes of clinicians to use of
QoL measures, a report by Taylor and co-workers325
yields some insight into clinician attitudes. Sixty
adult cancer clinicians were interviewed about
their understanding of QoL. They were asked
about their understanding of definitions and
measurement, and their attitudes to using QoL
information in their practice. Although most were
aware that QoL could be defined and measured, 
a number of barriers to use were identified. 
The majority questioned the reliability and 
validity of currently available measures and were 
of the view that collecting QoL data would impose
additional time burdens on staff. In addition,
rather than facilitate decision-making, there was 
a view that inclusion of QoL data made decisions
more difficult. Particularly where QoL data is
collected by other professionals, clinicians felt 
that their authority was challenged, and distance
created between them and their patients.
Despite this, clinicians felt that responsibility 
for QoL data rested with nursing or healthcare
workers. QoL data were perceived to be interesting
but not necessarily the responsibility of medical
staff. They questioned the face validity of patient
responses to QoL scales and identified their lack 
of knowledge and inability to keep abreast of
emerging issues as a reason for their reluctance 
to use QoL instruments. Questions about the
generalisability or specificity of instruments was a
further problem. In the context of clinical trials,
many accepted the potential value of QoL data in
assessing the overall value of the trial, but argued
that the data lacked specificity for individual care.
Discussions with paediatricians suggest other reasons.
There is of course, a concern that measurement of
QoL takes too much time for integration in a busy
paediatric clinic. Use of paper and pencil measures
may be seen to compromise attempts to establish
rapport with the child. This is a real concern and
provides an additional reason why modification of
adult measures may not be appropriate for work
with children. However, we must work toward a

----- Page 95 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
85
balance between the very informal approaches to
collection of QoL data adopted by most paedia-
tricians in everyday practice, and the rigidness and
impersonal approaches that characterise most
paper and pencil measures currently available.
Summary
• In justifying the need for this review in chapter 1, 
it was argued that QoL measures were
potentially useful in a variety of contexts. 
These may include:
– comparing outcomes in clinical trials
– evaluating interventions
– allocating scarce resources
– assessing the outcomes of treatment in the 
long term, and
– palliative care.
• Despite the increasing interest in developing
measures of QoL, they have not been used
routinely in research as evidenced by our
computer-based searches. (It is not known 
how far they are used in routine clinical
practice.) 
• In accounting for the limited interest in using 
QoL measures, we speculate that there are a
number of perceived barriers, which probably
include the following:
– concern with psychometric properties of
measures such as validity and reliability and
much less focus on the content and
acceptability to families
– perceptions that QoL measurement increases
the time of a consultation, is the domain 
of nurses and psychological support staff
rather than the paediatrician, and imposes 
an additional and unnecessary burden 
on families.

----- Page 96 (ocr) -----


----- Page 97 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
87
Aims and scope
We first consider the implications of our review 
for the four key questions identified by the HTA
Programme. We go on to make wider inferences,
regarding the future development and value of QoL
measures in paediatrics. Although adult work pro-
vides one frame of reference for paediatric work,
disagreements among those involved in adult QoL
work suggests that considerable caution needs to be
taken. Given that interest in QoL is relatively recent,
our review is necessarily limited both by our own
approach to identification of papers and by the
quality of work identified. For this reason, we con-
sider in some detail, the limitations of the review.
Given our findings, we make some recommen-
dations regarding the most suitable measures 
for assessing child QoL in different contexts 
(e.g. clinical trials, evaluating interventions). 
We conclude with an agenda for priorities for
future development. First, there does remain a
need to continue to refine and improve the 
quality of measures available. A strategy for 
future development is outlined.
QoL – the heart of paediatrics?
Priorities for the healthcare of children have been
the subject of some review.326 Based on the principles
defined by recent legislation (The Children Act,
1999327 and the Education Act, 1996328) guidance is
given for purchasing authorities about the services
that should be provided to enable as many children
as possible to reach adult life with their potential
uncompromised by illness, environmental hazard
or unhealthy lifestyle.329 Social Service, Education
Departments and Child Health Services are
required to work together in order to assess and
provide for children in need and those with special
education needs. How this works has been subject
to scrutiny but recommendations have been made
for the definition of joint planning mechanisms.
However, decisions about resource allocation and
service provisions are blighted by the absence of
evidence-based methods to distinguish between
different therapeutic interventions or modes of
service delivery.
The extension of QoL research, from a small area
of well-defined and serious health problems such
as childhood cancer or very low birth-weight, 
to include measures of the well-being of children
in general, and to include those children whose
needs span the interdisciplinary and interagency
professional boundaries, is an essential step
towards measuring health gain and efficiency
within an integrated children’s service. QoL is 
no longer the sole province of those involved 
in high-technology disciplines, but is increasingly
of concern to a wider audience concerned with 
the well-being of children in general. The QoL 
of children is fundamental to the aims of
paediatricians, as exemplified by the mission
statement of the Royal College of Paediatrics 
and Child Health (RCPCH), and implicit within
the accepted ‘duties’ of a paediatrician.
“The Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health
advances standards of medical care for children,
builds programmes of research and training and
champions the rights of children.”
[http://www.rcpch.ac.uk/rcpch/about/
appeal/index.htm] (original emphasis)
Among the ‘Duties of a Paediatrician’ specified 
by the RCPCH are the following.
• Paediatricians should pay due regard to 
the domestic, sociological, environmental 
and genetic dimensions of the health 
of children.
• Paediatricians, whatever their speciality 
interest, should understand their particular
responsibilities for the holistic and life-long
health of children who come under their care:
each contact is an opportunity for health
promotion and disease prevention.
• Paediatricians should be aware of current
medical and political affairs affecting the lives
and health of children. 
• Paediatricians should serve as advocates for the
health needs of children locally, nationally and
internationally.
• Paediatricians should see themselves as
ambassadors for children and for the speciality
of paediatrics.
• Above all, paediatricians should be courteous 
and compassionate in all their professional
dealings with children, their parents and other
carers, placing the child’s best interests at the
centre of all clinical considerations.
Chapter 9
Measuring QoL in children – the state of the art

----- Page 98 (native) -----
Measuring QoL in children – the state of the art
88
Although QoL is not mentioned specifically, it is 
clear that the attainment of the child’s QoL is at
the heart of paediatrics. Whether defined as the
child’s best interests, or the ‘holistic and life-long
health of children,’ QoL is a central concern 
in practice.
In this final chapter, we first summarise our 
findings with respect to the four key questions
defined at the outset. We then attempt to extend our
conclusions, and consider the wider implications 
of the review for the future development of QoL
measures and their integration into clinical practice
and research. 
Implications of the review for 
the four key questions
To what extent are adult measures
used in the evaluation of healthcare
interventions in children?
Given that work involving measurement of adult
QoL is more established than comparable work for
children, it follows that it should be possible to
learn from experience gained in the adult field.
From this perspective, asking how far, and how
well, measurement of QoL for children can benefit
from what has been learnt in adult work, is very
reasonable. We need to remember that there
remain many difficulties in measuring QoL in
adults, and disagreements between key workers
about theory, definition and measurement.
In reviewing adult measures, Aaronson330 emphasises
the biases in scale development, amounting in
many instances to a ‘reinvention of the wheel.’ 
He observes that the preoccupation with develop-
ment of measures “appears to reflect the system 
of rewards operating in the social sciences, 
rather than a legitimate gap in the available
resource pool”. 
Any decision to develop child measures by changing
adult measures needs to proceed in the knowledge
of the limitations that have come to light. There
are concerns among those involved in the develop-
ment of adult measures about the limitations of
current methods and theoretical perspectives
employed. In addition, measures developed for
adults are likely to be inappropriate for work with
children. These difficulties need to be considered
in relation to other areas where it is apparent 
that adult work is not an appropriate model for
paediatrics. Children have specific needs and
cannot be considered as small adults. This also
needs to be recognised at a policy level. There 
is inadequate representation of children and
adolescents in membership of modernisation
action teams to draw up action plans for health.331
Children are not routinely considered to be a
special group with regard to funding for research
or development; improving child health is not a
high priority for local service delivery; specific
services for children are not available in 40% 
of the UK.191 Services for children can only be
improved when we stop treating them as an
extension of adult services and make more
appropriate provision for, and evaluation 
of, their QoL.
Conclusions
• Given the more extensive work concerning 
adult QoL, it is reasonable to ask how far this
can guide work in paediatrics.
• As a model for work in paediatrics, we need 
to understand the limitations of adult work,
particularly in terms of disagreements about
theory, definition and method.
• There needs to be greater recognition of 
the special needs of children in provision 
of services and development and evaluation 
of QoL measures.
• Considerable caution needs to be exer-
cised in using adult work as a model 
for paediatrics.
How appropriate are adult measures
for use with children?
We identified a number of reasons why care needs
to be taken in applying adult models for work with
children. Measures developed for adults are likely
to be too long for children. Insufficient account 
is taken of children’s different cognitive and
language skills, or their abilities to understand 
and use rating scales. At the least, assessment of
the reading age necessary to complete a measure
should be provided. Critically, key domains used 
to measure adult QoL may lack appropriateness 
for assessment of children’s QoL. This response
burden and lack of suitability of domains are key
arguments against general adaptation of adult
measures for children. Our review leads us to
conclude that modifying adult measures is not 
to be recommended.
New measures for children need to draw on 
theories of cognitive, social and emotional
development. They need to adopt more child-
friendly approaches, and we recommend the 
use of puppets, pictures and computers. These 
may be more attractive for children, and incidentally
counter paediatricians’ arguments that collection
of QoL data jeopardises the establishment of rapport

----- Page 99 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
89
with children. Crucially, development of measures
needs to draw on work that describes children’s
abilities to use rating scales of different lengths,
and their understanding of emotional terms of the
type often used as anchors.
Conclusions
• Measures need to be developed which take into
account the child’s understanding of health and
illness, language and reading skills, and ability to
use rating scales.
• Publication of new QoL measures should
include information about reliability, validity
and sensitivity, as well as estimates of reading 
age necessary for completion.
• We need to move away from paper and pencil
assessment of QoL, and develop measures that
are more child friendly (e.g. include pictorial
support, use of computers).
To what extent do child self-reports
correspond with the assessment made
by parents and carers?
Implicit in many definitions of QoL is the notion
that it is unique to the individual. However, we
have to accept that there are circumstances in
which we have to rely on proxy raters. The most
common include situations where children are 
too young or too ill to answer for themselves. 
In these situations, a critical question is how far
ratings between child and proxy can be expected
to match. There are a number of reasons why we
might not expect concordance between children
and their parents. They do not necessarily share
the same perspective or experience of an event.
Indeed, we must accept that it is a natural part 
of development that children do not want to 
share all their thoughts and feelings with their
parents. Furthermore, parents have their own
concerns and anxieties which may colour their
perception of the child’s QoL. 
Obtaining QoL data directly from children may 
be the most desirable option, but we have to 
allow for situations where this is not possible. In
order to anticipate the range of situations in which
QoL ratings may be useful, it is important that
measures of QoL provide for parallel ratings by
child and proxy. Given the importance of this, 
basic research is needed to determine the
relationship between child and proxy ratings, 
taking into account variables such as age, gender
and health status. The use of proxies other 
than parents needs to be explored. Additional 
work needs to clarify how far child and proxy
ratings differ depending on the domain of 
QoL assessed.
Conclusions
• For children who are too young, ill, or unable 
to answer for themselves, all measures should
include some provision for proxy ratings. 
• All measures should include versions for self-
completion by children as well as parallel forms
for proxies. Questions should be re-phrased
away from the search for concordance and
towards understanding the circumstances in
which parents and children agree (or disagree)
about the child’s QoL.
• Parents’ ratings of the child’s QoL are influenced
by their own health and well-being. It is important
to develop a research programme to increase
understanding of how parent mental health
influences their perceptions of child QoL.
• Proxies other than parents may have some value
and should be used more widely.
• Basic research to identify characteristics of
parent and child that are associated with more
‘accuracy’ is needed, as well as to determine
behaviours and emotions that are more
amenable to accurate proxy report.
How feasible and reliable are 
proxy measures of QoL in different
disease contexts?
In the absence of comprehensive and validated
QoL measures, the battery approach, which
involves assessment of established measures related
to QoL, is potentially useful. However, the use of 
a battery of measures to assess QoL in children 
has not been a popular method. Many studies 
that were identified were excluded for lack of
methodological rigour. Any battery is only as 
good as the individual measures involved. The
practice of selecting some items or scales from
established proxy measures is not recommended,
as it results in measures of unknown psychometric
quality. Batteries tend to impose considerable
response burden on children. As more compre-
hensive measures of QoL become available, there
would seem to be few arguments in favour of 
this method.
Conclusions
• The battery approach is limited by the quality 
of measures available.
• The quality of studies using this approach 
was very limited, and restricts our ability to
evaluate the approach.
• There are considerable practical disadvantages
in using a battery approach with children 
(e.g. length). 
• The development of comprehensive 
QoL measures limits the value of 
this approach.

----- Page 100 (native) -----
Measuring QoL in children – the state of the art
90
The future development and
integration of QoL measures 
into research and practice
Theoretical and methodological issues
In reviewing adult work, Battista and Hodge332
conclude that much of the work in the last two
decades has focused on three issues. These include:
• the concern with ‘tool-making’ with the
emphasis on developing measures and
establishing their psychometric properties
• the emphasis on multidimensional constructs
and concern to define the domains that should
be sampled
• the question of whether multidimensionality
and specificity can be captured in generic
measures, and thus how far disease-specific
instruments are needed.
These issues are as relevant in paediatric QoL
assessment as in adults.
Tool-making
The need for high methodological standards in the
development of measures for both children and adults
is paramount. Many currently available measures
fall short of the standards that could reasonably be
expected. First, a common procedure in determining
items in a measure involves preliminary interviews
or focus groups with a small number of patients
(or clinicians). The items in a measure are necessarily
based on the views of a very small number of
patients who have agreed to be involved and may
not be representative of the total population. 
To date, considerable attention has been given 
to establishing the psychometric properties of a
measure, and much less to issues of content and
face validity. There has been little recognition of
how far psychometric properties such as reliability
and validity are dependent on sample characteristics,
or across different populations and cultures. A
measure with validity established in one population
will not necessarily perform as well in another. 
Where there is a clear conceptual understanding
about what is to be measured, the use of appro-
priate psychometric techniques helps to ensure
that measures have acceptable psychometric
properties. It is customary to report reliability
(internal consistency) or validity, with an assump-
tion that if a measure fulfils these requirements,
little else needs to be considered. However, adher-
ence to recommended psychometric techniques
does not by itself guarantee that the resulting
measure reflects the concept to be measured. 
First, the practice of excluding certain items on 
the basis of statistical criteria can lead to some bias.
Items that may be important to individuals are
excluded while items that fulfil psychometric
requirements may be included, even if they 
would not be endorsed by any single individual. 
Second, it is possible for items to hang together 
to form a scale but not necessarily measure QoL.
What psychometrics does is to establish the items
to be included purely on statistical grounds, in
particular by determining the inter-correlations
between items. As such, psychometrics does not
take into account the content or meaning of the
items. There is therefore no guarantee that the
scale really covers the full range of items of
interest. The risk is that some scales may be highly
internally consistent but reflect a very narrow
range in terms of items of interest. Thus, we need
to look beyond levels of Cronbach’s alpha when
evaluating a measure.
Third, however the initial item pool is determined,
further issues relate to how these items are
organised into domains. Some argue that factor
analysis is the ideal method for establishing con-
struct validity.94 Multitrait-multimethod modelling,
exploratory factor analysis and confirmatory factor
analysis are sophisticated statistical techniques,
which are yet to be exploited fully in the measure-
ment of QoL. In many cases, given small sample
sizes, factor analysis is not possible, and decisions
about the organisation of items into domains are
made on more ad hoc bases. Validity testing is often
based on correlations with clinical indices such as
severity of the disease, or time since diagnosis.
Clinical status measures of this kind are not
necessarily related to QoL in any simple fashion.
Indeed, if they were, we might ask why we want 
to measure QoL at all.
Disillusionment with conventional approaches to
scale development has resulted in calls for more
individualised or qualitative approaches. For
adults, these include approaches based on patient-
generated measures. This approach draws on
definitions of QoL involving perceived differences
between an individual’s hopes and expectations
and their present experience.63
Ruta and co-workers333 describe the development
of the Patient Generated Index (PGI) which
attempts to reflect patients’ views about their
health and its meaning in the context of their lives.
The PGI is completed in three stages. Patients are
first asked to list five areas of their lives affected by
their condition. They then rate how badly they are

----- Page 101 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
91
affected in each of these areas on a scale from 0 to
100, where 0 represents the worse they can imagine
and 100 represents exactly how they would like to
be. A sixth box allows them to rate all other areas
of their life. In the third and final stage, patients
are asked to imagine they can improve some or all
of the chosen areas in their life. They are given 
60 points to spend across one or more areas.
Points allocated to each area represent the relative
importance of potential improvements in each
area. By multiplying each of the six ratings by the
proportion of points allocated to the area and
summing these scores, an index is generated
between 0 and 100. The resulting score is assumed
to represent the extent to which reality falls short
of patients’ hopes and expectations in areas of life
that they value most. The authors provide evidence
which suggests that the method is acceptable and
comprehensible to adult patients.
The basic assumption of the PGI, that the domains
of QoL need to reflect an individual’s lifestyle,
wants and aspirations, is shared by a number of
other workers.334 These assumptions are reflected
in other measures for adults (The Schedule for the
Evaluation of Individual QoL335), but have not yet
been fully utilised for children.
Theoretical concepts and their interpretations
There is increasing disillusionment with theory,
application and measurement among some of
those working in adult QoL. The lack of theory is
perceived to be a major limitation. Without theory
‘there is no means of linking what is actually and
what is supposedly being measured’.336 Lack of
theory has contributed to the diversity in number
and definition of domains and lack of clarity about
how the separate domains relate together.
The need for a more theoretically driven account
of QoL has been suggested by a number of
workers. Within adult QoL research, some attempts
to use causal modelling approaches to specify the
relationships between factors contributing to QoL
have been made.48,337 Fayers and co-workers95 stress
the need to distinguish between factors that are
causal and those that are consequences or effects
of QoL. Causal factors include symptoms and 
side-effects experienced as part of treatment
programmes which in themselves may cause poor
QoL. Other items such as anxiety or depression
may reflect underlying QoL. These effect
indicators can serve to highlight poor QoL. The
authors suggest that causal and effect indicators
have fundamentally different relationships with
QoL. Causal indicators may be a good indicator of
poor, but not of good health-related QoL. This is
because the presence of symptoms may reliably
indicate poor QoL but the absence of symptoms
does not necessarily mean that patients report
good QoL. In contrast, effect indicators may
successfully indicate both good and poor QoL. 
To the extent that most definitions of QoL
emphasise the patient’s perspective, a theory 
which attempts to account for the processes
underlying how patients make decisions about
their QoL is needed. Thus, we need to specify 
how the individual makes a decision as to whether
QoL is good or bad. These decisions are likely to
be made on the basis of comparisons between
perceptions of past QoL, or between current
functioning and how far this differs from activities
engaged in by salient comparison groups. Deci-
sions about who children compare themselves 
with (e.g. a healthy peer or patient with similar
disease), and whether the comparison is made
along dimensions that result in positive or negative
views about themselves, will have implications for
their judgements of their own QoL.338, 339
To a large extent, the lack of theory is at the heart
of the confusion underlying QoL. Without a theory
“We have to guard against defining QoL in terms
of what is measured by instruments named QoL.”340
Multidimensionality and specificity in generic
measures, and disease-specific instruments
Although developed to take into account the
‘patient’s perspective, many scales focus heavily on
objective indices such as experience of symptoms,
and relatively little on the patient’s perspective.
Functional status and symptoms are not synonymous
with QoL’.336 Many articles begin by defining QoL
in terms of its multidimensional nature, and imply
that there is agreement about the nature of these
domains. In fact, as we have shown, there is
considerable variability in both the number and
definition of domains in both child and adult work.
Issues about the number and definition of domains
are at the heart of arguments about the merits of
generic and disease-specific measures. Generic and
disease-specific measures tend to be developed for
different purposes. Many generic measures were
developed for use in population-based health
surveys, and are considered appropriate for all
children regardless of health status.
There are, however, serious limitations with disease-
specific measures, in that they do not allow for
comparisons across samples of children differing 
in health status. Disease-specific measures were
developed to understand the range of responses

----- Page 102 (native) -----
Measuring QoL in children – the state of the art
92
to be found within a population of children with a
defined condition. They include items to assess the
child’s concern about specific aspects of treatment
and symptoms that reflect the disease.
There is a tendency to see generic and disease-
specific approaches to be diametrically opposite.
Assumptions that disease-specific measures are
preferable in clinical trial work have not been
formally established. Use of both generic and
disease-specific measures may have some advantage
but imposes a huge burden on patients. Yet neither
alone will give a complete assessment. Solutions
may include the development of measures
involving a generic core with disease-specific
modules added where appropriate.123 These
provide the opportunity to compare children with
different conditions (based on generic sections),
and to assess the impact of disease (based on
disease-specific sections). Modules are currently
available for conditions including cancer, diabetes,
asthma and arthritis. However, we need to bear 
in mind that this approach is not suitable for
children with more than one condition, and that
many children will have a disease for which no
module is available.
Limitations of the review
It is important to consider two main sources of
limitations in our review. Our conclusions are
necessarily limited by the processes involved in
conducting the searches and the decisions we
made regarding inclusion and exclusion criteria.
In addition, they are limited by the quantity and
quality of literature available at the time. Assessment
of QoL in children is a newly emerging field, and
our conclusions are therefore based on a relatively
limited body of empirical work.
In conducting the literature searches, we took the
decision to focus on specific databases that were
available to us. It is possible that different studies
might have been identified if we had searched
different databases. In addition, we restricted this
review to work in English language journals. Any
other decision would have increased the costs, and
required the employment of translators. The result
may be some bias to the inclusion of studies
conducted in the USA and UK. 
We also took a decision to adopt very generous
criteria regarding definition of QoL so that we
included any measure supposedly measuring QoL,
health status, or well-being. As a consequence, we
probably included a larger number of studies than
if we had employed stricter criteria focusing
specifically on QoL. Our view was that such a
decision would result in so few articles to be
included that few meaningful conclusions could 
be drawn. Adopting more strict criteria and
including only measures that reflect QoL as
opposed to health status would have resulted 
in a very brief review. Given the current interest 
in QoL measure-ment, we felt it was important 
to adopt this broad-based approach to 
inclusion in order to contribute to greater
clarification of exactly what is being measured 
in the future.
Comparison of our work with previous reviews
suggests limited overlap in terms of measures of
QoL identified. For example, we have included
fewer measures than Bullinger and Ravens-
Sieberer18 and more than Levi and Drotar.341
However, examination of the specific measures
included in the different reviews suggests that
discrepancies arise through lack of definition 
of QoL. Previous reviews differ in how far they
include measures of function, well-being, or health
status in addition to QoL. The discrepancies do
not arise because we have systematically excluded
important articles in languages other than English.
The inclusion in our review of a number of
measures, which were originally developed in
European languages but subsequently translated
into English, goes some way in off-setting any
criticisms of bias.
Of greater fundamental importance, our
conclusions, particularly those connected with 
the four questions we were asked to answer, are
necessarily limited by the quality of published 
work in this area. This applies particularly to the
questions involving use of proxy respondents for
children who are unable to provide QoL data
themselves. We feel that quite different 
conclusions might be found depending on 
the specific measures of QoL used. This 
criticism also adds strength to the argument 
that measurement of QoL needs to be theory
driven, rather than subject to the vagaries of
idiosyncratic measures.
Choices in measuring child QoL
Choice in relation to purpose 
“If the past two decades have seen the triumph of
psychometrics, the field appears poised for a post-
psychometric phase, for advancing QoL’s role in
policy requires advocacy of the very concept of QoL
as a socially desirable and demanded outcome.”332

----- Page 103 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
93
All currently available measures have some limitations.
The measurement of any psychological concept
such as QoL is inherently different from measuring
a physical concept such as height, and it may
therefore be inevitable that we must live with 
some limitation in any measure. However, this is
not to say that we should give up on measuring
QoL. For children, QoL is too important to be
disregarded. Further development of measures
depends crucially on experience gained in using
the measures that are now available. This is rele-
vant not only for refinement of currently available
measures, but also to enable the development of
more sophisticated measures in the future. For
these reasons, it is important to recognise the
limitations of currently available measures, while
also acknowledging that improve-ments can only
be developed when we understand how current
measures perform in practice.
Given the current state of the art, we draw on
information about the performance characteristics
of available measures summarised in Tables 2 and 3.
Based on these data, we conclude that only three
generic measures and two disease-specific measures
fulfil the very basic criteria identified. Our own
recommendations regarding choices for different
purposes might therefore involve the following. 
For work evaluating clinical trials, whether in 
the context of high technology medicine such as
childhood cancer, or in a community setting, there
is a need for a brief measure of QoL that can be
completed during a regular clinic visit. In order 
to recruit a large sample of patients, a measure is
needed that is simple to administer with minimal
training or expertise. The measure needs to
include those aspects of functioning that are 
most likely to be compromised by the treatment
protocol. Thus there is a need for measures that
focus on physical symptoms and emotional well-
being. Particularly for children (compared with
adults) and if there is any concern about cognitive
side-effects of the protocol, then assessment of
school or learning needs to be included. Given the
concern with physical symptoms, it is likely that
disease-specific measures might be more useful than
generic. The PedsQL and its associated modules
for work in oncology, asthma or diabetes143 is one of
the more thoroughly developed measures currently
available. In asthma, the measure by Juniper and
co-workers140 also has much to recommend it. 
The inclusion of QoL data in clinical trials creates
new questions about statistical analyses which have
not been resolved. The analysis of multivariate
QoL data (and the inevitable missing data) poses 
a very different problem compared with analyses
based on univariate outcomes such as survival.
Strategies to manage missing data are important, 
as is the need for hypothesis-driven trials
The choice of measures for evaluation of
psychosocial interventions is relatively similar. If
the need is for a brief assessment then generic
measures such as the PedsQL123 or HUI2 or HUI378
have some merit. However, it is unlikely that either
of these will address the full range of functioning
that might need to be assessed (and indeed they
were not designed to do so). Additional measures
will therefore need to be included depending on
the specific purpose of the intervention. Where 
the goal is to achieve greater school integration or
improve family functioning, then the CHQ19 may
be more appropriate. However, advantages of the
CHQ need to be set against the length of the
currently available measure (though shorter 
forms are in the process of development).
There are also measures developed for specific
purposes, such as the BASES141 for work involving
children undergoing bone marrow transplantation.
This does fulfil the basic criteria we identified, 
and has potential use in evaluating interventions
involving children undergoing bone marrow
transplantation. It is clear that there are many
other specific contexts in paediatrics where Qol
measures may be desirable (e.g. palliative care),
but no measure is currently available. 
Cross-cultural work
In evaluating new treatments involving rare
conditions, international measures of QoL have
been advocated. Sharing data in drug trials may
lead to more rapid evaluations of the efficacy of
new treatment than relying on single-nation
studies. International measures may have other
uses in monitoring the health of populations and
in programme evaluation. For cross-cultural work,
it is perhaps attractive to consider translation of
measures already available. 
However, potential pitfalls in the translation of
measures need to be recognised. First, measures
developed for a specific purpose in one culture
may be inappropriate elsewhere. 
Second, specific items may differ in meaning
between cultures. ‘Feeling sick’ means feeling
nauseous to British children, but is used as a more
general indicator of illness in other cultures. 
Third, norms developed in one culture may not
translate well to others. For example, cut-off points

----- Page 104 (native) -----
Measuring QoL in children – the state of the art
94
for normal and abnormal behaviour on the CBCL300
differ for USA and Australian children.342,343
Differences between cultures may be attributable
to genuine differences between the prevalence of
attributes in cultures, or may be an artefact of
ambiguous language use.112 Translating a QoL
instrument for use in different countries may appear
a cheap and satisfactory option, but in fact requires
considerable work to establish true comparability.
Norms established in one country cannot be
assumed to have the same meaning elsewhere.
In recognition of these problems, recommendations
about the process of translation of QoL measures
have been made, largely with respect to adult work,344
and more specifically for work with children.345
A process of forward and backward translation,
comparison of the back translation with the original
source, review by lay-panels, committee review and
psychometric testing of the translated version is
normally recommended. At least four levels of
cross-cultural equivalence have been defined:
conceptual equivalence; construct or item equivalence;
operational equivalence and metric equivalence.346, 347
Conceptual equivalence refers to the extent to
which the items in the target language are similar
to the source, and must include both semantic
meaning and formulation of the items as well as
the underlying concept. This is achieved through
the translation process and qualitative testing.
Construct or item equivalence is the extent to
which individuals in different cultural groups
respond to the same item in similar ways and is
evaluated using classical test theory (test–retest
reliability). Operational equivalence refers to the
relative performance of the instrument using
different modes of administration (self-report,
interview). Metric equivalence is the extent to
which individuals in different cultures are ranked
similarly along a continuum of QoL; (patients with
CF in different countries who have similar pulmonary
scores will have similar scores on a QoL measure).
There is neither agreement among researchers
about defining these different aspects of
equivalence, nor about how different types of
equivalence should be assessed. On the basis of a
literature search, Herdman and co-workers348 for
example, found that the four-way classification
described above was too simple. He was able to
identify 19 different types of equivalence.
Conceptual (30%), semantic (12%), functional
(8%) and scale equivalence (8%) were reported
most frequently. Although there was almost
universal agreement about the definition of
semantic equivalence, there was much less
agreement regarding conceptual and functional
equivalence. Herdman and co-workers348
concluded that there are real short-comings in
current approaches involving translation of QoL
instruments, which can be attributed to lack of
agreement in definitions of equivalence, as well as
the assumptions underlying cross-cultural research.
Notwithstanding rigorous translation processes,
there is a fundamental question concerning how
well any measure developed in one culture can
satisfactorily address QoL in another. The
approach of the WHOQOL Group349 in which
measures are developed simultaneously in different
cultures represents one solution to this problem.
Although this approach has resulted in a measure
of QoL for adults,349 work with children is at a
more preliminary level.350
To the extent that there has been greater investment
from the USA, many measures recommended
above may in fact prove less acceptable, given
cultural differences in the meaning of illness,
organisation of healthcare services and relations
between parents and children. Consideration
needs to be given to the language (e.g. questions
about ‘difficulties walking one block’ don’t 
mean very much to children outside the USA).
Other issues may be even more critical. In the
cancer-specific QoL measure described by Varni
and co-workers143 for example, a number of
questions, directed at children ask about their
concern about relapse, or their cancer coming
back. Inclusion of such direct questions (or even
use of the term ‘cancer’) may be unacceptable to
some paediatricians and families in the UK.
Despite the practical difficulties, a number of
efforts are currently being made to translate QoL
measures for children into different languages.
• The HUI is undergoing development in Austria,
France, Japan, The Netherlands, Singapore and
the UK.351
• A measure to assess QoL in CF developed
initially in French by Henry and co-workers has
been translated into German and Spanish.352 In
addition, Quittner and her group have reported
initial steps in translation for use in the USA.353
(The original measure was not included in the
review as only abstracts were available).
• The CHQ15 is being adopted by a number of
different groups. Australian norms have been
reported by Waters and co-workers.354 Efforts to
develop an Anglicised version of this measure
are being undertaken by Eiser and colleagues 
in Swansea.355

----- Page 105 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
95
• The Childhood Asthma questionnaires,248
originally developed in the UK have been
modified for work with Australian samples.
Although mean QoL scores did not differ
between British and Australian children with
asthma, scores for the subset of terms relevant
for normal children showed that QoL scores
were higher for Australian children. These
differences were interpreted in the context of
cultural expectations about QoL. French and 
co-workers356 note a number of problems in
developing internationally equivalent measures.
Australian children (aged 11–12 years) were
noted to be more socially independent and
knowledgeable about their asthma compared
with British children. They were also more 
likely than British children to raise issues 
about being different because of their asthma.
Only British teenagers but not younger children
expressed concerns about being different. 
As a consequence, the authors decided to use
the form of the questionnaire originally
developed for British teenagers even though
they were working with younger children 
in Australia.
• The PedsQoL143,144 is undergoing translation
into a number of languages. Details are available
on the website (http://www.pedsql.org).
To a large extent, workers in the QoL field assume
an ‘absolutist’ approach to cross-cultural work 
(i.e. that culture has only a minimal impact 
on QoL, which will consequently be essentially
invariant across cultures). This ‘imposed ethics’
results in QoL being defined and operationalised
in one culture and then imposed directly on to
another. These assumptions are reflected in most
guidelines currently available for translation of
QoL instruments, which do not involve an 
initial assessment of the relevance of the 
concepts measured in the questionnaire to 
the target culture. The logical extension of 
the assumption that QoL measures are culture 
free would be the failure to assess conceptual
equivalence at all. Similarly, the concept of 
scalar equivalence can be ignored on the 
grounds that the pattern of relationships between
scales would also be equivalent. The emphasis 
in the absolutist approach is on establishing
semantic equivalence. The absolutist approach
needs to be contrasted with the universalist 
and relativist approaches as described by Berry 
and co-workers.206 There needs to be a more 
open orientation to the idea that culture 
has a significant impact on the way concepts 
are expressed and acknowledges the substantial
role of culture in variations in behaviour.
Conclusions and final
recommendations
Despite the rapid growth in development of
measures of child QoL, the results of this review
suggest that a number of fundamental issues
remain to be addressed. Many of the recom-
mendations previously made concerning the
development and selection of QoL measures for
use with adults apply also to work with children
(see Fitzpatrick et al.69). However, as a result of 
this review, we would add a number of additional
recommendations. These include the need for
empirical research concerning:
• the implementation of QoL measures in
paediatric research
• the link between theory and measurement
development
• adoption of child-centred approaches 
to measurement
• clarification of the relationship between child
and proxy ratings.
The implementation of QoL measures
in paediatric research
While a more rigorous theoretical and method-
ological approach to the development of measures
is a clear precurser to their use in practice, exper-
ience with currently available measures is also
important to establish a precedent for the evaluation
of the child’s QoL in paediatric practice. 
In this context, the rationale for including QoL
measures in evaluations of clinical trials for both
life-threatening and less-serious disease has been
well argued. However, to date, arguments over the
merits of different measures have restricted the
adoption of QoL measures. We need to identify a
series of randomised trials where there are clear
hypotheses regarding the likely consequences of
treatment for QoL. This will involve national
collaboration to ensure size of samples, and critical
discussion to ensure that the trial involves genuine
implications for QoL. The value of QoL also needs
to be considered in some screening programmes.
Neonatal screening for hearing impairment is a
case in point. Although currently available
measures have their limitations, the development
of more satisfactory assessment tools is partially
dependent on information about how current
measures perform in practice.
The link between theory and
measurement development 
We need to develop more rigorous approaches to
understanding how judgements of QoL are made

----- Page 106 (native) -----
Measuring QoL in children – the state of the art
96
and change during the course of child development.
Adoption of a theoretical model that enables us 
to make predictions about how groups will differ,
or how QoL will change during the course of a
disease are essential to move us away from the
current descriptive approach to work. A theor-
etical approach will also clarify the domains to 
be measured, rather than relying on ad hoc
selection of domains and items depending on
specific circumstances.
In practice, a number of theoretical approaches
may potentially be of value. These include:
• theories of child and adolescent development,
which can contribute to our understanding of
how QoL changes across the life-span, and the
relationship between child and proxy ratings 
• theories from Social Psychology and Sociology,
which can contribute to understanding the
processes underlying judgements of QoL,
particularly in so far as our perceptions of ourselves
are integral with our relationship to others. 
Adoption of child-centred approaches
to measurement 
Paper and pencil measures are unlikely to be as useful
in paediatrics as they have proved in adult work. They
are less attractive for children, and also for paedia-
tricians, who may feel that they compromise the establish-
ment of rapport. Research is needed to determine
the most reliable and effective methods for obtaining
reliable information from young children. 
• Direct comparisons between different response
scales (e.g. Likert, visual analogue, smiley faces)
are required, as well as work delineating the
appropriateness of these methods for work with
children of different ages. 
• There is a need for the development of
alternatives to paper and pencil measures,
including the use of puppets and interactive
computer presentation. 
• Research involving children’s understanding of
time needs to be integrated in order to
determine the most appropriate time frame for
which children can accurately recall information.
• Developers and users of measures need to
consider the readability of the measure.
Clarification of the relationship
between child and proxy ratings
We need to accept that both child and proxy
ratings have value. The question is to clarify how
differences in perceptions of QoL arise between
child and proxy and the implications for the
child’s QoL. This applies as much to clinicians 
as parents, teachers and other proxies. For
clinicians, judgements will be influenced by 
their medical training, their views about this 
child’s progress in comparison with children
undergoing similar treatment, and in relation 
to the progress made over the course of treatment
by the individual child. Judgements will also be
limited to the extent that they reflect knowledge 
in very limited settings, usually a hospital or 
clinic. In contrast, parents will be influenced 
by the development of other children they know
(their own or those of friends), their expectations
and hopes for their child, additional life stresses,
and their own mental health. Compared with
clinicians, they will be aware of the child’s QoL 
in a greater range of situations, and this may
increase their sensitivity. Research should focus 
on the following.
• Determination of how proxy mental health
influences ratings of the child’s QoL. Beyond
this it is important to clarify how parent mental
health and perceptions of the child’s disease
influence QoL over time. This is relevant to
issues concerning how parenting practices and
family organisation can subsequently effect the
child’s QoL.
• Determination of how discrepancies arise
between clinicians and parents in their
perceptions of the child’s QoL. Research 
of this kind may also be of relevance to 
issues of communication (and failed
communication).

----- Page 107 (native) -----
T
his research was commissioned by the NHS
R&D HTA Programme. We are grateful for 
the comments received from the HTA referees. 
We also wish to thank the following who
commented on an earlier draft of this review:
Professor Ronald Barr, Dr Jim Crossley, Professor
Adrian Davis, Dr Adam Glaser, Dr Chris McCabe,
Dr Ellen Perrin, Dr Ron Smith and Yvonne Vance.
We are extremely grateful to them all for the time
and effort they put into this task, and for their very
helpful and insightful comments. 
We would also like to thank all those who responded
to our requests for information (see below),
particularly to those who sent pre-publication
copies of papers.
We are also grateful to Sarah Cox for her secretarial
support in preparing the final manuscript.
The following individuals responded to requests
for information
Professor Cliff Bailey, Leeds, St James’s Hospital, UK
Professor Clare Bradley, Royal Holloway, UK
Dr Jacqueline Collier, Nottingham University, UK
Professor Joyce Cramer, Harvard University, USA
Dr Allan Colver, University of Newcastle-upon-
Tyne, UK
Professor Adrian Davies, MRC Institute for Hearing
Research, UK
Dr AY Finlay, University of Wales College of
Medicine, UK
Dr Davina French, University of Western Australia,
Australia
Dr David Goodwin, Jefferson Health System,
Malvern PA, USA
Dr Peter Hoare, Edinburgh Sick Children’s NHS
Trust, UK
Professor Elizabeth Juniper, McMaster University,
Canada
Dr Jeanne Landgraff, HealthAct, Boston, USA
Professor Alexander Quittner, University of
Florida, USA
Dr Denise Reid, University of Toronto, Canada
Dr Anne Riley, Johns Hopkins University, USA
Professor Saroj Saigal, McMaster University, Canada
Dr Ulrike Ravens-Sieberer, Hamburg, Germany
Dr Sarah Smith, MRC Institute of Hearing
Research, Nottingham, UK
Professor Leslie Spieth, Children’s Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, USA
Professor Barbara Starfield, Johns Hopkins
University, USA
Dr Julie Trudel, Hospital Ste-Justine, Montreal
Dr AG Thomas, Manchester Children’s Hospitals, UK
Professor James Varni, Children’s Hospital and
Health Center, San Diego, USA
Dr Ton Vogels, TNO Prevention and Health, 
The Netherlands
Dr Elizabeth Waters, University of Melbourne,
Australia
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
97
Acknowledgements

----- Page 108 (ocr) -----


----- Page 109 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
99
1. 
Bergner M. Quality of life, health status and clinical
research. Med Care 1989;27:S148–S156.
2.
It’s official: university makes you happier and
healthier. The Times 2 2000 Apr 11;Pages 8–9.
3. 
Quality of life gets a higher profile. The Guardian
1998 Nov 24;Page 2.
4. 
Lindstrom B, Koehler L. Youth, disability and
quality of life. Pediatrician 1991;18(2):121–8.
5. 
Nussbaum MC. The fragility of goodness.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1986.
6. 
Jordan TE. Developing an international index of
quality of life for children: The NICQL Index. 
J R Soc Health 1983;4:127–30.
7. 
UNICEF. State of the world’s children. 1990.
8. 
Ditesheim JA, Templeton JMJ. Short-term v long-
term quality of life in children following repair of
high imperforate anus. J Pediatr Surg
1987;22(7):581–7.
9. 
Herndon DN, LeMaster J, Beard S, Bernstein N,
Lewis SR, Rutan TC, et al. The quality of life after
major thermal injury in children: an analysis of 
12 survivors with greater than or equal to 80% total
body, 70% third-degree burns. J Trauma 1986;
26(7):609–19.
10.
Henning P, Tomlinson L, Rigden SPA, Haycock GB,
Chantler C. Long-term outcome of treatment of
end stage renal failure. Arch Dis Child
1988;63(1):35–40.
11. Lansky LL, List MA, Lansky SB, Cohen ME, 
Sinks LF. Toward the development of a play
performance scale for children (PPSC). Cancer
1985;56(S7):1837–40.
12. Lansky SB, List MA, Lansky LL, Ritter-Sterr C,
Miller D. The measurement of performance in
childhood cancer patients. Cancer 1987;60:1651–6.
13. Eisen M, Ware JE, Donald C, Brook RH. Measuring
components of children’s health status. Med Care
1979;17:902–21.
14. Stein REK, Jessop DJ. Functional Status II(R): 
a measure of child health status. Med Care
1990;28(11):1041–55.
15.
Landgraf JM, Abetz L, Ware JE. The CHQ user’s
manual. 1st ed. Boston, MA: The Health Institute,
New England Medical Center; 1996.
16. Mok JY, Laing IA, Ferguhar JW. Young diabetics:
memories, current lifestyles and attitudes. Diabetic
Med 1984;1(3):227–30.
17. Ahlfield JE, Soler NG, Marcus SD. The young adult
with diabetes – impact of the disease on marriage 
and having children. Diabetes Care 1985;8(1):52–6.
18. Bullinger M, Ravens-Sieberer U. Health related
QOL assessment in children: a review of the
literature. Revue Europeenne de Psychologie Appliquee
1995;45(4):245–54.
19. Landgraf JM, Abetz LN. Functional status and 
well-being of children representing three cultural
groups: initial self-reports using the CHQ-CF87.
Psychol Health 1997;12(6):839–54.
20. Spieth LE, Harris C.V. Assessment of health-related
quality of life in children and adolescents: an
integrative review. J Pediatr Psychol
1996;21(2):175–93.
21. Eiser C. Choices in measuring quality of life in
children with cancer: A comment. Psycho-Oncology
1995;4:121–31.
22. Eiser C, Jenney MM. Measuring symptomatic
benefit and quality of life in paediatric oncology. 
Br J Cancer 1996;73:1313–16.
23. Koot HM. The study of quality of life in 
children and adolescents with chronic 
disabling conditions: concepts and methods. 
In: Koot HM, Wallander JL, editors. Quality 
of life in children and adolescents: concepts,
methods and findings. UK: Harwood Academic
Press. In press.
24. Vannucci RC. Current and potentially new
management strategies for perinatal hypoxic-
ischemic encephalopathy. Pediatrics
1990;85(6):961–8.
25. Ausejo M, Saenz A, Pham B, Kellner JD, 
Johnson DW, Moher D, et al. The effectiveness of
glucocorticoids in treating croup: meta-analysis.
BMJ 1999;319(7210):595–600.
26. Gortmaker S, Sappenfield W. Chronic childhood
disorders: prevalence and impact. Pediatr Clin North
Am 1984;31:3–18.
27. Newacheck PW, Taylor WR. Childhood chronic
illness: prevalence, severity, and impact. Am J Public
Health 1992;82:364–74.
28. Stiller CA. Population based survival rates for
childhood cancer in Britain, 1980–1991. 
BMJ 1994;309:1612–16.
29. Newacheck PW, Halfon N. Prevalence and impact
of disability and chronic conditions in children. 
Am J Public Health 1998;88:610–7.
References

----- Page 110 (native) -----
References
100
30. Vollmer WM, Osborne ML, Buist AS. 20-year trends
in the prevalence of asthma and chronic airflow
obstruction in an HMO. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1998;157:1079–84.
31. Gortmaker SL, Dietz WH, Sobol AM, Wehler CA.
Increasing pediatric obesity in the United States.
Am J Dis Child 1987;141:535–40.
32. Swanson JM, Lerner M, Williams L. More frequent
diagnosis of attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder.
N Engl J Med 1995;333:944.
33. Metcalfe MA, Baum JD. Incidents of insulin
dependent diabetes in children under 15 year in
the British Isles during 1988. BMJ 1991;302:443–7.
34. Engel BT. Psychosomatic medicine, behavioural
medicine, just plain medicine. Psychosom Med
1986;48:466–79.
35. Hawkins MM, Stevens MCG. The long term
survivors. BMJ 1996;52:898–923.
36. Brown RT. Cognitive aspects of chronic illness in
children. New York: The Guilford Press; 1999.
37. Larsson B, Carlsson J. A school based, nurse
administered relaxation training for children with
chronic tension type head-ache. J Child Psychol
Psychiatry 1996;32:821–32.
38. House of Commons Health Committee. Second,
third, fourth, and fifth reports of session 1996–7.
London. House of Commons Health Committee; 1997.
39. Royal College of Pediatrics and Child Health: Ethics
Advisory Committee. Guidelines for the ethical
conduct of medical research involving children.
Arch Dis Child 2000;82:177–82.
40. Ellis R, Leventhal B. Information needs and
decision making preferences of children with
cancer. Psycho-Oncology 1993;2:277–84.
41. Alderson P. Will you help us with our research? 
Arch Dis Child 1995;72:541–2.
42. Postlethwaite RJ, Reynolds JM, Wood AJ, Evans JH,
Lewis MA, Eminson DM. Recruiting patients to
clinical trials: lessons from studies of growth
hormone treatment in renal failure. Arch Dis Child
1995;73:30–5.
43. Weithorn LA, Campbell SB. The competency of
children and adolescents to make informed
treatment decisions. Child Dev 1982;53:1589–98.
44. Spilker B, Spilker B, editors. Quality of life and
pharmacoeconomics in clinical trials. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven Publishers; 1996.
45. Feeny D, Furlong W, Mulhern RK, Barr RD,
Hudson M. A framework for assessing health-
related quality of life among children with cancer.
Int J Cancer 1999;S12:2–9.
46. Patrick DL, Bergner M. Measurement of health
status in the 1990s. Annu Rev Public Health
1990;11:165–83.
47. Guyatt GH, Feeny DH, Patrick DL. Measuring health-
related quality-of-life. Ann Intern Med 1993;118:622–9.
48. Wilson IB, Cleary PD. Linking clinical variables with
health-related quality of life. JAMA 1995;59–65.
49. Leidy NK. Functional status and the forward
progress of merry-go-rounds: toward a coherent
analytical framework. Nurs Res 1994;43:196–202.
50. Feeny D, Furlong W, Boyle M, Torrance GW. Multi-
attribute health-status classification systems: health
utilities index. Pharmacoeconomics 1995;7:490–502.
51. Starfield B. Measure of outcome: a proposed
scheme. Milbank Q 1974;52:39–50.
52. Starfield B, Riley A. Profiling health and illness in
children and adolescents. In: Drotar D, editor.
Measuring health-related quality of life in children
and adolescents: implications for research and
practice. Mahwah, USA: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc; 1998.
53. Bowling A. Measuring disease. Buckingham: 
Open University Press; 1995.
54. Aaronson NK, Meyeravitz BE, Bard M, Bloom JR,
Fauzy FI, Feldstein M, et al. Quality of life research
in oncology: past achievements and future
priorities. Cancer 1991;67(3):839–43.
55. Gotay CC, Korn EL, McCabe MS, Moore TD,
Cheson BD. Quality of life assessment in cancer
treatment protocols: research issues in protocol
development. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84(575):579.
56. Ware JE. Conceptualising disease impact and
treatment outcomes. Cancer 1984;53:2316–23.
57. World Health Organization. World Health
Organization Constitution. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 1947.
58. WHOQOL Group. World Health Organization
Quality of Life Assessment (WHOQOL): position
paper from the World Health Organization. Soc Sci
Med 1995;41:1403.
59. Testa MA, Simonson DC. Assessment of quality-of-
life outcomes. N Engl J Med 1996;334(13):835–40.
60.  Schipper H, Clinch JJ, Olweny CLM. Quality of life
studies: definitions and conceptual frameworks. In:
Spilker B, editor. Quality of life and
pharmacoeconomics in clinical trials. 2nd ed.
Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers; 1996.
61. Cummins RA. Self-rated quality of life scales for
people with an intellectual disability: a review. 
Appl Res Intellect Disabil 1995;10(3):199–216.
62. Leplege A, Hunt S. The problem of quality of life 
in medicine. JAMA 1997;278(1):47–50.
63. Calman KC. Definitions and dimensions of quality
of life. In: Aaronson NK, Beckmann J, editors. The
quality of life of cancer patients. New York: Raven
Press; 1987.

----- Page 111 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
101
64. Hayry M. Measuring quality of life: Why, how and
what? In: Joyce CRB, O’Boyle CA, McGee H,
editors. Individual quality of life: approaches to
conceptualisation and assessment. Australia:
Harwood Academic Publishers; 1999. 
65. Gill TM, Feinstein AR. A critical appraisal of the
quality of quality-of-life measurements. JAMA
1994;272:619–26.
66. Smith KW, Avis NE, Assmann SF. Distinguishing
between quality of life and health status in quality
of life research: a meta-anlysis. Qual Life Res
1999;8(5):447–59.
67. Guyatt GH, Deyo RA, Charlson M, Levine MN,
Mitchell A. Responsiveness and validity in health-
status measurement: a clarification. J Clin Epidemiol
1989;42(5):403–8.
68. Deyo RA, Patrick DL. Barriers to the use of health
status measures in clinical investigation, patient
care and policy research. Med Care
1989;27(S3):254–68.
69. Fitzpatrick R, Davey C, Buxton MJ, Jones DR.
Evaluating patient-based outcome measures for use
in clinical trials. Health Technol Assess 1998;2(14).
70. Patrick DL, Deyo RA. Generic and disease-specific
measures in assessing health status and quality of
life. Med Care 1989;27(3):S127–S232
71. Fallowfield L. An overview of quality of life measure-
ments. In: Trimble MR, Dodson WE, editors. Epilepsy
and quality of life. New York: Raven Press; 1994.
72. O’Connor R. Issues in the measurement of health-
related quality of life. Working Paper 30, NHMRC
National Centre for Health Program Evaluation.
Melbourne, Australia; 1993.
73. Bergner M, Bobbit RA, Carter SR, Gilson BS. The
Sickness Impact Profile: development and final
revision of a health status measure. Med Care
1981;19(8):787–805.
74. Plant P, McEwen J, Prescott K. Use of the
Nottingham Health Profile to test the validity of
census variables to proxy the need for health care. 
J Public Health Med 1996;18(3):313–20.
75. Ware JE, Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36-item short-
form health survey (SF-36): conceptual framework
and items selection. Med Care 1992;30:473–83.
76. von Neumann J, Morgenstern O. Theory of games
and economic behaviour. Princetown, New Jersey:
Princetown University Press; 1944.
77. Feeny DH, Torrance GW. Incorporating utility-
based quality-of-life assessment measures in clinical-
trials – 2 examples. Med Care 1989;27:S190–S204.
78. Feeny D, Furlong W, Barr RD, Torrance GW,
Rosenbaum P, Weitzman S. A comprehensive
multiattribute system for classifying the health
status of survivors of childhood cancer. J Clin Oncol
1992;10(6):923–8.
79. Boyle MH, Offord DR, Hoffman HG, Catlin GP,
Byles JA, Cadman DT, et al. Ontario Child Health
Study: methodology. Arch Gen Psychiatry
1987;44:826–31.
80. Juniper EF, Guyatt GH, Feeny DH, Griffith LE,
Ferrie PJ. Minimum skills required by children to
complete health- related quality of life instruments
for asthma: comparison of measurement properties.
Eur Respir J 1997;10(10):2285–94.
81. Patrick DL, Erickson P. Health status and health
policy. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1993.
82. Patrick DL, Erickson P. Assessing health-related
quality of life for clinical decision making. In:
Walker SR, Lancaster RM, editors. Quality of life:
assessment and application. England: MTP Press;
1988. 
83. Bradlyn AS, Ritchey AK, Harris CV, Moore IM,
O’Brien RT, Parsons SK, et al. Quality of life
research in pediatric oncology. Cancer
1996;78(6):1333–9.
84. Eiser C. Children’s quality of life measures. 
Arch Dis Child 1997;77:350–4.
85. Mulhern RK, Horowitz ME, Ochs J, Friedman AG.
Assessment of quality of life among pediatric
patients with cancer. Psychol Assess 1989;1(2):130–48.
86. Jenney ME, Kane RL, Lurie N. Developing a
measure of health outcomes in survivors of
childhood cancer: a review of the issues. 
Med Pediatr Oncol 1995;24(3):145–53.
87. WHO/IACAPAP. Report of a WHO/IACAPAP
Working Party on the Measurement of Quality of
Life in Children; 1993 Jun 3–4; London, UK.
88. Cronbach LJ. Coefficient alpha and the internal
structure of tests. Psychometrika 1951;16:297–334.
89. Nunnally J. Psychometric theory. 2nd ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill; 1978.
90. Bowling A. Measuring health: a review of quality of
life measurement scales. 2nd ed. Buckingham:
Open University Press; 1997.
91. Bradley C. Measuring quality of life in diabetes. 
In: Marshall SM, Home PD, Rizza RA. editors. The
Diabetes Annual/10. Elsevier Science; 1996. 
92. Cohen J. Weighted kappa: nominal scale agreement
with provision for scaled disagreement or partial
credit. Psychol Bull 1968;70:213–20.
93. Cronbach LJ, Meehl PE. Construct validity in
psychological tests. Psychol Bull 1955;52:281–302.
94. Armstrong FD, Toledano SR, Miloslavich K,
Lackman-Zeman L, Levy JD, Gay CL,  et al. The
Miami Pediatric Quality of Life Questionnaire:
Parent Scale. Int J Cancer 1999;S12:11–17
95. Fayers PM, Hand DJ, Bjordal K, Groenvold M.
Causal indicators in quality of life research. Qual
Life Res 1997;6:393–406.

----- Page 112 (native) -----
References
102
96. Hays RD, Anderson R, Revicki D. Psychometric
considerations in evaluating health-related quality
of life measures. Qual Life Res 1993;2:441–9.
97. Wechsler D. Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children –
Revised. New York: Psychological Corporation; 1974.
98. Kline P. The handbook of psychological testing.
London: Routledge; 1992.
99. Campbell DT, Fiske DW. Convergent and
discriminant validation by the multitrait-
multimethod matrix. Psychol Bull 1959;47:81–105.
100. Hays RD, Hadorn DC. Responsiveness to change:
an aspect of validity, not a separate dimension. 
Qual Life Res 1992;1:73–5.
101. Oppenheim AN. Questionnaire design,
interviewing and attitude measurement. 
London: Pinter Publishers; 1992.
102. Revicki DA, Kaplan RM. Relationship between
psychometric and utility-based approaches to the
measurement of health-related quality of life. 
Qual Life Res 1993;2:477–87.
103. Rosenbaum PL, Saigal S. Measuring health-related
quality of life in pediatric populations: conceptual
issues. In: Spilker B, editor. Quality of life and
phamacoeconomics in clinical trials. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven Publishers; 1996.
104. Binger C, Ablin A, Feverstein R, Kushner J, Zoger S,
Mikkelson C. Childhood leukemia: emotional
impact on patient and family. N Engl J Med
1969;280:414–18.
105. Pless IB, Pinkerton P. Chronic childhood disorder:
promoting patterns of adjustment. London: Henry
Kimpton; 1975.
106. Editorial. Age limits of pediatrics. Pediatrics
1972;49:463.
107. Riley AW, Forrest CB, Starfield B, Green B, Kang M,
Ensminger M. Reliability and validity of the
adolescent health profile-types. Med Care
1998;36(8):1237–48.
108. Riley AW, Green BF, Forrest CB, Kang M,
Ensminger ME. A taxonomy of adolescent health:
development of the adolescent health profile-types.
Med Care 1998;26(8):1228–36.
109. Starfield B, Bergner M, Ensminger M, Riley A, 
Ryan S, Green B, et al. Adolescent health status
measurement: development of the Child Health
and Illness Profile. Pediatrics 1993;91(2):430–5.
110. Starfield B, Riley AW, Green BF, Ensminger ME,
Ryan SA, Kelleher K, et al. The adolescent child
health and illness profile. a population-based
measure of health. Med Care 1995;18(4):465–72.
111. Starfield B, Forrest CB, Ryan SA, Riley AW,
Ensminger ME, Green BF. Health Statistics of well
vs ill adolescents. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med
1996;150(12):1249–56.
112. Landgraf JM, Maunsell E, Speechley KN, 
Bullinger M, Campbell S, Abetz L, et al.
Canadian-French, German and UK versions of the
Child Health Questionnaire: methodology and
preliminary item scaling results. Qual Life Res
1998;7(5):433–45.
113. Graham P, Stevenson J, Flynn D. A new measure 
of health-related quality of life for children:
preliminary findings. Psychol Health
1997;12(5):655–65.
114. Wasson JH, Kairys SW, Nelson EC, Kalishman N,
Baribeau P. A short survey for assessing health and
social problems of adolescents. J Fam Pract 1994;
38(5):489–94.
115. Wasson JH, Kairys SW, Nelson EC. Adolescent
health and social problems: a method for 
detection and early management. Arch Fam Med
1995;4:51–6.
116. Eiser C, Vance YH, Seamark D. The development of
a theoretically driven measure of quality of life for
children aged 6–11 years. Child Care Health Dev.
2000;26:445–56.
117. Eiser C, Cotter I, Oades P, Seamark D, Smith R.
Health-related quality-of-life measures for children.
Int J Cancer 1999;S12: 87–90.
118. Collier J. Developing a generic child quality of life
questionnaire. The British Psychological Society, Health
Psychology Update 1997;28:12–16.
119. Bruil J. Development of a quality of life instrument
for children with chronic illness. Ledien, The
Netherlands: Health Psychology, Leiden University;
1999.
120. Ravens-Siberer U, Theiling S, Bullinger M.
Assessing quality of life in chronically ill children –
the parents and the parents’ view. 11th Inter-
national Congress of the European Society for
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry; 1999 Sep 15–19;
Congress Centrum Hamburg; 8(S2).
121. Lindstrom B, Eriksson B. Quality of life among
children in Nordic countries. Qual Life Res
1993;2(1):23–32.
122. Lindstrom B. Quality of life for children and
disabled children based on health as a resource
concept. J Epidemiol Community Health
1994;48(6):529–30.
123. Varni JW, Seid M, Rode CA. The PedsQL:
measurement model for the pediatric quality of life
inventory. Med Care 1999;37(2):126–39.
124. Varni JW, Seid M, Jacobs JR, Rode CA. The PedsQL:
II. Development of the asthma and arthritis disease-
specific modules for the Pediatric Quality of Life
Inventory. Submitted.
125. Eiser C, Kopel S, Cool P, Grimer R. The perceived
illness experience scale (PIE): reliability and validity
revisited. Child Care Health Dev 1999;25(3):179–90.

----- Page 113 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
103
126. Eiser C, Havermans T, Craft A, Kernahan J.
Development of a measure to assess the perceived
illness experience after treatment for cancer. Arch
Dis Child 1995;72(4):302–7.
127. Raphael D, Rukholm E, Brown I, Hill-Bailey P. 
The quality of life profile – adolescent version:
background, description and initial validation. 
J Adolesc Health 1996;19(5):366–75.
128. Iorio R, Pensati P, Botta S, Moschella S, Impagliazzo N,
Vajro P, et al. Side effects of alpha-interferon
therapy and impact on health-related quality of life
in children with chronic viral hepatitis. Pediatr J
Infect Dis 1997;16(10):984–90.
129. Theunissen NC, Vogels T, Koopman HM, Verrips GH,
Zwinderman K, Verloove-Vanhorick SP, et al. The
proxy problem: child report versus parent report in
health-related quality of life research. Qual Life Res
1998;7(5):387–97.
130. Vogels T, Verrips GH, Verloove-Vanhorick SP,
Fekkes M, Kamphuis RP, Koopman HM, et al.
Measuring health-related quality of life in children:
the development of the TACQOL parent form.
Qual Life Res 1998;7(5):457–65.
131. Spencer NJ, Coe C. The development and
validation of a measure of parent-reported child
health and morbidity: The Warwick Child Health
and Morbidity Profile. Child Care Health Dev
1996;22(6):367–79.
132. Boyle MH, Furlong W, Feeny D, Torrance GW,
Hatcher J. Reliability of the Health Utilities Index
Mark III used in the 1991 cycle 6 Canadian General
Social Survey Health Questionnaire. Qual Life Res
1995;4:249–57.
133. Apajasalo M, Sintonen C, Holmberg C, Sinkkonen J.
Quality of life in early adolescence: a sixteen-
dimensional health-related measure (16D). 
Qual Life Res 1996;5(2):205–11.
134. Apajasalo M, Rautonen J, Holmberg C, Sinkkonen J.
Quality of life in pre-adolescence: a 17-dimensional
health-related measure (17D). Qual Life Res
1996;5(6):532–8.
135. Bradlyn AS, Harris CV, Warner JE, Ritchey AK,
Zaboy K. An investigation of the validity of the
quality of Well-Being Scale with pediatric oncology
patients. Health Psychol 1993;12(3):246–50.
136. Mishoe SC, Baker RR, Poole S, Harrell LM, Avant CB,
Rupp NT. Development of an instrument to assess
stress levels and quality of life in children with
asthma. J Asthma 1998;35(7):553–63.
137. Gibson PG, Henry RL, Vimpani GV, Halliday J.
Asthma knowledge, attitudes, and quality of life in
adolescents. Arch Dis Child 1995;73(4):321–6.
138. Christie MJ, French D, Sowden A, West A.
Development of child-centered disease-specific
questionnaires for living with asthma. Psychosom
Med 1993;55(6):541–8.
139. French DJ, Christie MJ, Sowden AJ. The 
reproducibility of the Childhood Asthma
Questionnaires. Qual Life Res 1994;3(3):215–24.
140. Juniper EF, Guyatt GH, Feeny DH, Ferrie PJ,
Griffith LE, Townsend M. Measuring quality of life
in children with asthma. Qual Life Res
1996;5(1):35–46.
141. Phipps S, Hinds PS, Channell S, Bell GL.
Measurement of behavioural, affective, 
and somatic responses to pediatric bone marrow
transplantation: development of the BASES scale. 
J Pediatr Oncol Nurs 1994;11(3):109–17.
142. Phipps S, Dunavant M, Jayawardene D, Srivastiva DK.
Assessment of health related quality of life in acute
in-patient settings: use of the BASES Scales in
children undergoing bone marrow transplantation.
Int J Cancer 1999;S12:18–24.
143. Varni JW, Katz ER, Quiggins DJL, Friedman-Bender A.
The Pediatric Cancer Quality of Life Inventory-32
(PCQL-32): I. Reliability and validity. Cancer
1998;82(6):1184–96.
144. Varni JW, Katz ER, Seid M, Quiggins DJ, 
Friedman-Bender A, Castro CM. The Pediatric
Cancer Quality of Life Inventory (PCQL). I.
Instrument development, descriptive statistics, 
and cross-informant variance. J Behav Med
1998;21(2):179–204.
145. Goodwin DA, Boggs SR, Graham-Pole J.
Development and validation of the Pediatric
Oncology Quality of Life Scale. Psychol Assess
1994;6(4):321–8.
146. Hoare P, Russell M. The quality of life of 
children with chronic epilepsy and their 
families: preliminary findings with a new assess-
ment measure. Dev Med Child Neurol
1995;37(8):689–96.
147. Wildrick D, Parker-Fisher S, Morales A. Quality of
life in children with well-controlled epilepsy. 
J Neurosci Nurs 1996;28:192–8.
148. Keene DL, Higgins MJ, Ventureyra EC. 
Outcome and life prospects after surgical
management of medically intractable epilepsy 
in patients under 18 years of age. Childs Nerv 
Syst 1997;13(10):530–5.
149. Cramer JA, Westbrook L, Devinsky O, Perrine K,
Glassman M, Camfield C. Development of a quality
of life inventory for adolescents: The QOLIE-AD-48.
Epilepsia 1999;40(8):1114–21.
150. Duffy CM, Duffy KN. Health assessment in the
rheumatic diseases of childhood. Curr Opin
Rheumatol 1997;9(5):440–7.
151. Rabbett H, Elbadri A, Thwaites R, Northover H,
Dady I, Firth D, et al. Quality of life in children 
with Crohn’s disease. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr
1996;23(5):528–33.

----- Page 114 (native) -----
References
104
152. Lewis-Jones MS, Finlay AY. The Children’s
Dermatology Life Quality Index (CDLQI): initial
validation and practical use. Br J Dermatol
1995;132(6):942–9.
153. Ingersoll GM, Marrero DG. A modified quality-of-
life measure for youths: psychometric properties.
Diabetes Educucation 1991;17(2):114–18.
154. Langeveld JH, Koot HM, Passchier J. Headache
intensity and quality of life in adolescents: how are
changes in headache intensity in adolescents
related to changes in experienced quality of life?
Headache 1997;37(1):37–42.
155. Langeveld JH, Koot HM, Passchier J. 
Do experienced stress and trait negative affectivity
moderate the relationship between headache and
quality of life in adolescents? J Pediatr Psychol
1999;24(1):1–11.
156. Reid DT, Renwick RM. Preliminary validation of a
new instrument to measure life satisfaction in
adolescents with neuromuscular disorders. Int J
Rehabil Res 1994;17(2):184–8.
157. Rosenfeld RM, Goldsmith AJ, Tetlus L, Balzano A.
Quality of life for children with otitis media. Arch
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1997;123(10):1049–54.
158. Juniper EF, Guyatt GH, Dolovich J. Assessment of
quality-of-life in adolescents with allergic
rhinoconjunctivitis – development and testing of a
questionnaire for clinical-trials. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 1994;93:413–23.
159. Pilpel D, Leiberman E, Zadik Z, Carel CA. Effect of
growth hormone treatment on quality of life of
short-stature children. Horm Res 1995;44:1–5.
160. Parkin PC, Kirpalani HM, Rosenbaum PL, Fehlings DL,
Van Nie A, Willan AR, et al. Development of a
health-related quality of life instrument for use 
in children with spina bifida. Qual Life Res
1997;6(2):123–32.
161. Climent JM, Reig A, Sanchez J, Roda C.
Construction and validation of a specific quality 
of life instrument for adolescents with spine
deformities. Spine 1995;20(18):2006–11.
162.  Kaplan RM. Implications of quality of life
assessment in public policy for adolescent health.
In: Drotar D, editor. Measuring health-related
quality of life in children and adolescents. New
Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1998.
163. Munzenberger PJ, Van Wagnen CA, Abdulhamid I,
Walker PC. Quality of life as a treatment outcome
in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pharmacotherapy
1999;19(4):393–8.
164. Czyzewski DI, Bartholomew L, Kay. Quality of life
outcomes in children and adolescents with cystic
fibrosis. In: Drotar D, editor. Measuring health-
related quality of life in children and adolescents:
implications for research and practice. Mahwah,
USA: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1998.
165. Czyzewski DI, Mariotto MJ, Bartholomew LK,
LeCompte SH, Sockrider MM. Measurement of
quality of well being in a child and adolescent cystic
fibrosis population. Med Care 1994;32(9):965–72.
166. Kaplan RM, Anderson JP. The general health policy
model: Update and applications. Health Serv Res
1988;23:203–35.
167. Deyo RA, Inui TS, Leininger J, Overman SS.
Psychosocial function in rheumatoid-arthritis-
clinical use of a self administered health-status
instrument. Arch Intern Med 1982;142(5):879–82.
168. Deyo RA, Inui TS, Leininger JD, Overman SS.
Measuring functional outcomes in chronic disease:
a comparison of traditional scales and a self-
administered health status questionnaire in patients
with rheumatoid arthritis. Med Care 1983;21:180–92.
169. Nelson EC, Wasson JH, Johnson DJ, Hays R.
Dartmouth COOP Functional Health Assessment
Charts: brief measures for clinical practice. 
In: Spilker B, editor. Quality of life and
pharmacoeconomics in clinical trials. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven Publishers; 1996. p. 161–8 
170. Sintonen H, Pekurinen M. A fifteen-dimensional
measure of health-related quality of life (15D) and
its applications. In: Walker SR, Rosser RM, editors.
Quality of life assessment: key issues in the 1990s.
Dordrecht: Kluver Academic Publishers; 1993. 
171. Juniper EF, Guyatt GH, Ferrie PJ, Griffith LE.
Measuring quality of life in asthma. Am Rev Respir
Dis 1993;147:832–8.
172. Karnofsy DA, Burchenal JH. The clinical evaluation
of chemotherapeutics in cancer. In: MacLeod CM,
editor. Evaluation of chemotherapeutic agents. 
New York: Columbia University Press; 1949. 
173. Finlay AY, Khan GK. Dermatology Life Quality
Index (DLQI) – a simple practical measure for
routine clinical use. Clin Exp Dermatol
1994;19:210–16.
174. The DCCT Research Group. Reliability and validity
of a diabetes quality-of-life measure for the diabetes
control and complications trial (DCCT). Diabetes
Care 1988;11:725–32.
175. Devinsky O, Vickrey BG, Cramer JA, Hermann B,
Meador K, Hays RD. Development of an instrument
of health-related quality of life for people with
epilepsy. Epilepsia 1995;36:1089–104.
176. Juniper EF, Guyatt GH. Development and testing of
a new measure of health status for clinical trials in
rhinoconjunctivitis. Clin Exp Allergy 1991;21:77–83.
177. Juniper EF, Howland WC, Roberts NB, Thompson
AK, King DR. Measuring quality of life in children
with rhinoconjunctivitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol
1998;101:163–70.
178. Kaplan RM, Bush JW. Health-related quality of life
measurement for evaluation research and policy
analysis. Health Psychol 1982;1:61–80.

----- Page 115 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
105
179. Fanshel S, Bush JW. A health status index and its
application to health services outcomes. Operational
Res 1970;18:1021–65.
180. Kaplan RM, Bush JW, Berry CC. Health status:
Types of validity for an index of well-being. Health
Serv Res 1976;11:478–507.
181. Bergner M. Development, testing and use of the
Sickness Impact Profile. In: Walker SR, Rosser RM,
editors. Quality of life assessment: key issues in the
1990s. Lancaster: MIT Press; 1988. 
182. Deyo RA, Diehl AK. Measuring physical and
psychosocial function in patients with lower back
pain. Spine 1983;8(6):635–42.
183. Sullivan M, Ahlmen M, Bjelle A. Health status
assessment in rheumatiod arthritus. I. Further work
on the validity of the Sickness Impact Profile. 
J Rheumatol 1990;17(4):439–47.
184. Longstreth WT Jr, Nelson L, Linde M, Munoz D.
Utility of the Sickness Impact Profile in Parkinson’s
disease. J Geriatr Psychiatr Neurol 1992;5(3):142–8.
185. Weinberger M, Samsa GA, Tierney WM, Belyea MJ,
Hiner SL. Generic versus disease specific health
status measures: comparing the Sickness Impact
Profile and the Arthritis Impact Measurement
Scales. J Rheumatol 1992;19(4):543–6.
186. Smith HE. Head injury follow-up: Is the Sickness
Impact Profile a useful clinical tool? Clin Rehabil
1992;6(1):31–9.
187. Vickrey BG, Perrine KR, Hays RD. QOLIE-89
(version 1.0) Scoring Manual. Santa Monica, CA:
RAND; 1993.
188. Long AF, Dixon P. Monitoring outcomes in routine
practice: defining appropriate measurement
criteria. J Eval Clin Pract 1996;2(1):71–8.
189. Guttmann-Bauman I, Flaherty BP, Strugger M,
McEvoy RC. Metabolic control and quality-of-life
self-assessment in adolescents with IDDM. Diabetes
Care 1998;21(6):915–18.
190. Jacobson AM, De Groot M, Samson J. The effects of
psychiatric disorders and symptoms on quality of
life in patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes Care 1994;17:268–74.
191. Aynsley-Green A, Barker M, Burr S, Macfarlane A,
Morgan J, Silbert J, et al. Education and debate: who
is speaking for children and adolescents and for their
health at the policy level? BMJ 2000;321:229–32.
192. Graham P. Depression in pre-pubertal children. 
Dev Med Child Neurol 1974;16(3):340–9.
193. Kazdin AE. Childhood depression. J Child Psychol
Psychiatry 1990;31(1):121–60.
194. Carpay HA, Arts WFM. Outcome assessment in
epilepsy: available rating scales for adults and
methodological issues pertaining to the
development of scales for childhood epilepsy.
Epilepsy Res 1996;24:127–36.
195. Beckung E, Uvebrant P. Motor and sensory
impairments in children with intractable epilepsy.
Epilepsia 1993;34:924–9.
196. Huttenlocher PR, Hapke RJ. A follow-up study of
intractable seizures in childhood. Ann Neurol
1990;28:699–705.
197. Wallander J, Varni JW. Effects of pediatric chronic
physical disorders on child and family adjustment. 
J Child Psychol Psychiatry 1998;39(1):29–46.
198. Rosenbaum P, Cadman D, Kirpalani H. Pediatrics:
assessing quality of life. In: Spilker B, editor. Quality
of life assessments in clinical trials. New York: Raven
Press; 1990. 
199. Garrison WT, McQuiston S. Chronic illness during
childhood and adolescence: psychological aspects.
Developmental Clinical Psychology and Psychiatry
Series. Vol. 19. Newbury park, CA: Sage
publications; 1989.
200. Kazak AE. Families of chronically ill children: a
systems and social-ecological model of adaption 
and challenge. J Consult Clin Psychol 1989;57:25–30.
201. Shalet SM, Gibson B, Swindell R. Effect of spinal
irradiation on growth. Arch Dis Child
1987;62(5):461–4.
202. McGee HM. Quality of life: assessment issues for
children with chronic illness and their families. In:
Christie MJ, French DJ, editors. Assessment of
quality of life in children with asthma. Langhorne,
PA: Harwood Academic Publishers; 1994. 
203. Eiser C, Kopel SJ. Children’s perceptions of health
and illness. In: Petrie KJ, Weinman JA, editors.
Perceptions of health and illness: current research
and applications. Singapore: Harwood Academic
Publishers; 1997. 
204. Bibace R, Walsh ME. R.Bibace, Children’s
conceptions of illness. In: Walsh ME, editor. New
directions for child development: No 14 Children’s
conceptions of health, illness and bodily functions.
San Fransisco: Jossey-Bass; 1981. 
205. Harbeck C, Peterson L. Elephants dancing in my
head – a developmental approach to children’s
concepts of specific pains. Child Dev
1992;63(1):138–49.
206. Berry SL, Hayford JR, Ross CK, Pachman LM,
Lavigne JV. Conceptions of illness by children with
juvenile rheumatiod arthritis: a cognitive
developmental approach. J Pediatr Psychol
1993;18:83–97.
207. Sayer AG, Willett JB, Perrin EC. Measuring
understanding of illness causality in healthy
children and in children with chronic illness: a
construct validation. J Appl Dev Psychol
1993;14:11–36.
208. Meadows AT, McKee L, Kazak AE. Psychosocial
status of young-adult survivors of childhood cancer
– a survey. Med Pediatr Oncol 1989;17(6):466–70.

----- Page 116 (native) -----
References
106
209. Cummins RA. On the trail of the gold standard for
subjective well-being. Social Indicators Research
1995;35(2):179–200.
210. Borthwick-Duffy SA. Quality of life of persons with
severe or profound mental retardation. In:
Schalock RL, Begab MJ, editors. Quality of life:
perspectives and issues. Washington DC: American
Association on Mental Retardation; 1990. 
211. Barr RD, Pai MR, Weitzman S, Feeny D, Furlong W,
Rosenbaum P, et al. A multiattributional approach
to health-status measurement and clinical
management illustrated by an application to brain-
tumors in childhood. Int J Oncol 1994;4:639–48.
212. Spirito A, deLawyer DD, Stark LJ. Peer relations
and social adjustment of chronically ill children and
adolescents. Clin Psychol Rev 1991;11:539–64.
213. Bernt TJ, Hoyle SG. Stability and change in child
and adolescent friendships. Dev Psychol
1985;21(6):1007–15.
214. Rubin KH, Chen X, McDougall P, Bowker A,
McKinnon J. The Waterloo Longitudinal Project:
predicting adolescent internalizing and
externalizing problems from early and mid-
childhood. Dev Psychopathol 1995;7:751–64.
215. Noeke-Hoeksema S, Girgus JS. The emergence of
gender differences in depression during
adolescence. Psychol Bull 1994;115: 424–43.
216. Mulhern RK. Neuropsychological late effects. In:
Bearison DJ, Mulhern RK, editors. Pediatric psycho-
oncology: psychological perspectives on children
with cancer. New York: Oxford Press; 1994. 
217. Rovet JF, Ehrlich RM, Hoppe M. Intellectual deficits
associated with early onset of insulin dependent
diabetes mellitus in children. Diabetes Care
1987;10(4): 510–15.
218. Lemanek KL, Hood C. Asthma. In: Brown RT,
editor. Cognitive aspects of chronic illness in
children. New York: The Guilford Press; 1999. 
219. Bender BG. Are asthmatic children educationally
handicapped? School Psychol Q 1995;10:274–91.
220. Wolters PL, Brouwers P, Perez LA. Pediatric HIV
infection. In: Brown RT, editor. Cognitive aspects of
chronic illness in children. New York: The Guilford
Press; 1999. 
221. Frank NC, Allison SM, Cant MEC. Sickle cell disease
In: Brown RT, editor. Cognitive aspects of chronic
disease in children. New York: The Guilford Press; 1999.
222. Delamater AM, Brady EU, Blumberg MJ. Cardiac
conditions. In: Brown RT, editor. Cognitive aspects
of chronic illnesses in children. New York: The
Guilford Press; 1999. 
223. Heimentz JR, Hynd GW, Jimenz M. Seizure
disorders. In: Brown RT, editor. Cognitive aspects of
chronic illnesses in children. New York: The
Guilford Press; 1999. 
224. Erickson EH. Identity and the life-cycle. Psychol
Issues 1959;1(18):164.
225. Hopwood P. The assessment of body image in
cancer patients. Eur J Cancer 1992;29A:276–81.
226. Kopel SJ, Eiser C, Cool P, Grimer RJ, Carter SR.
Brief report: assessment of body image in survivors
of childhood cancer. J Pediatr Psychol 1998;23:141–7.
227. Elkind D. Egocentricism in adolescence. Child Dev
1967;38:1025–34.
228. Smith C. Smoking among young people: some
recent developments in Wales. Health Education
Journal 1991;50:8–11.
229. Walker LS, Garber J, Greene JW. Somatic
complaints in pediatric patients: a prospective study
of the role of negative life events, child, social, and
academic competence, and parental somatic
symptoms. J Consult Clin Psychol 1994;62:1213–21.
230. Blount RL, Landolf-Fritshe B, Powers SW, Sturges JW.
Differences between high and low coping children
and between parent and staff behaviors during
painful medical procedures. J Pediatr Psychol
1991;16(6):795–809.
231. Manne SL, Jacobsen PB, Gorfinkle K, Gerstein F,
Redd WH. Treatment adherence difficulties among
children with cancer: the role of parenting style. 
J Pediatr Psychol 1993;18:47–62.
232. Simopoulos AP. Diet and health: scientific concepts
and principles. Am J Clin Nutr 1987;45:1015–410.
233. Armstrong N. Children’s physical activity patterns
and coronary heart disease. In: Coronary
Prevention Group. Should the prevention of heart
disease begin in childhood? London: Coronary
Prevention Group; 1989. 
234. Stone WL, Lemanek KL. Developmental issues in
children’s self-reports. In: La Greca A, editor.
Through the eyes of the child: obtaining self-
reports from children and adolescents. Boston:
Allyn and Bacon; 1990. 
235. Titman P, Smith M, Graham P. Assessment of the
quality of life of children. Clin Child Psychol
Psychiatry 1997;2(4):597–606.
236. Flesch R. A new readability yardstick. J Appl Psychol
1948;32:221–33.
237. Siegal M, Patty J, Eiser C. A re-examination of
children’s conceptions of contagion. Psychol Health
1990;4:159–65.
238. Pantell RH, Lewis CC. Measuring the impact of
medical care on children. J Chronic Dis
1987;40(S1):99–108.
239. West A. Methodological issues in the assessment 
of quality of life in childhood asthma: what
educational research has to offer. In: Christie MJ,
French DJ, editors. Assessment of quality of life in
children with asthma. Langhorne, PA: Harwood
Academic Publishers; 1994.

----- Page 117 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
107
240. Torrance GW. Measurement of health state utilities
for economic appraisal: a review. J Health Econ
1986;5:1–30.
241. Stein REK, Reissman CK. Development of an
impact-on-family scale: preliminary findings. Med
Care 1980;18(4):465–72.
242. Juniper EF, Guyatt G, Willan AR, Griffith LE.
Determining a minimal important change in a
disease-specific quality of life instrument. J Clin
Epidemiol 1994;47:81–7.
243. Ridgeway D, Waters E, Kuczaj SA. Acquisition of
emotion-descriptive language: receptive and
productive vocabulary norms for ages 18 months to
6 years. Dev Psychol 1985;21:901–8.
244. Harris PL. Children’s understanding of the link
between situation and emotion. J Exp Child Psychol
1983;36:490–509.
245. Harris PL, Lipian MS. Saarni C, Understanding
emotion and experiencing emotion. In: Harris PL,
editor. Children’s understanding of emotion.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1989. 
246. McGrath P, McAlpine LM. Psychological perspectives
on pediatric pain. J Pediatr 1993;122:52–8.
247. Harter S, Pike K. The Pictorial Scale of Perceived
Competence and Social Acceptance for young
children. Child Dev 1984;48(5):80–7.
248. French D, Christie M. Developing outcome
measures for children: “Quality of life” assessment
for pediatric asthma. In: Huchinson A, McColl E,
Christie M, Riccalton C, editors. Health outcome
measures in primary and out-patient care. Australia:
Harwood Academic Publishers; 1996. 
249. Friedman WJ. Children’s representation of the
pattern of daily activities. Child Dev
1990;61:1399–412.
250. Ginsberg HP. Entering the child’s mind: the clinical
interview in psychological research and practice.
New York: Cambridge University Press; 1997.
251. Mohay H. Interviewing children and adolescents.
In: Sanders M, Mitchell C, Byrne G, editors.
Medical consultation skills: behavioral and
interpersonal dimensions of health care.
Melbourne: Addison Wesley; 1997. 
252. Mize J, Ladd GW. Predicting preschoolers peer behav-
iour and status from their interpersonal strategies –
a comparison of verbal and enactive responses to hypo-
thetical social dilemmas. Dev Psychol 1988;24(6):782–8.
253. Sprangers MAG, Aaronson NK. The role of health
care providers and significant others in evaluating
the quality of life of patients with chronic disease: a
review. J Clin Epidemiol 1992;45:743–60.
254. Camp LD, O’Sullivan PS. Comparison of medical,
surgical, and oncology patients’ descriptions of pain
and nurses’ documentation of pain assessments. 
J Adv Nurs 1987;12:593–8.
255. Teske K, Daut RL, Cleeland CS. Relationships
between nurses’ observations and patients’ self-
reports of pain. Pain 1983;16(3):289–96.
256. Derogatis LR, Abeloff MD, McBeth CD. Cancer
patients and their physicians in the perception of
psychological symptoms. Psychosomatics
1976;17:197–201.
257. Jachuck SJ, Brierley H, Jachuck S, Willcox PM. The
effects of hypotensive drugs on the quality of life. 
J R Coll Gen Pract 1982;32:103–5.
258. Epstein AM, Hall JA, Tognetti J, Son LH, Conant L.
Using proxies to evaluate quality of life. Can they
provide valid information about patients’ health
status and satisfaction with medical care? Med Care
1989;27:S91–S98.
259. Sneeuw KCA, Aaronson NK, Sprangers MAG,
Detmar SB, Wever LD, Schornagel JH. Comparison
of patient and proxy EORTC QLQ-C30 ratings in
assessing the quality of life of cancer patients. J Clin
Epidemiol 1998;51(7):617–31.
260. Achenbach TM, McConaughy SH, Howell CT.
Child/adolescent behavioural and emotional
problems: Implications of cross-informant
correlations for situational specificity. Psychol Bull
1987;101(2):213–32.
261. Ennett ST, DeVellis BM, Earp JA, Kredich D,
Warren RW, Wilhelm CL. Disease experience and
psychosocial adjustment in children with juvenile
rheumatoid arthritis: children’s versus mothers’
reports. J Pediatr Psychol 1991;16(5):557–68.
262. Fivush R, Hamond NR, Harsch N, Singer A, Wolf A.
Content and consistency of young children’s
autobiographical recall. Discourse Processes
1991;14:372–88.
263. Walker LS, Heflinger CA. Quality of life predictors
of outcome in pediatric abdominal pain patients:
findings at initial assessment and 5-year follow-up.
In: Drotar D, editor. Measuring health-related
quality of life in children and adolescents:
implications for research and practice. Mahwah,
USA: Lawrence Erlbaum; 1998.
264. Glaser AW, Davies K, Walker D, Brazier D. Influence
of proxy respondents and mode of administration
on health status assessment following central
nervous system tumours in childhood. Qual Life Res
1997;6(1):43–53.
265. Glaser AW, Abdul RN, CL U, Walker DA. School
behaviour and health status after central nervous
system tumours in childhood. Br J Cancer
1997;76(5):643–50.
266. Billson AL, Walker DA. Assessment of health status in
survivors of cancer. Arch Dis Child 1994;70(3):200–4.
267. Parsons SK, Barlow SE, Levy SL, Supran SE, Kaplan
SH. Health-related quality of life in pediatric bone
marrow transplant survivors: according to whom?
Int J Cancer 1999;S12:46–51.

----- Page 118 (native) -----
References
108
268. French DJ, Christie MJ, West A. Quality of life in
childhood asthma: development of the childhood
asthma questionnaires. In: Christie MJ, French DJ,
editors. The assessment of quality of life in children
with asthma. Chur: Harwood; 1994. 
269. Gortmaker SL, Lenderking WR, Clark C, Lee S,
Fowler MG, Oleske JM and the ACTG 219 Team.
Development and use of a pediatric quality of life
questionnaire in AIDS clinical trials: reliability and
validity of the General Health Assessment for
Children. In: Drotar D, editor. Measuring health-
related quality of life in children and adolescents:
implications for research and practice. Mahwah,
USA: Lawrence Erlbaum; 1998.
270. Austin JK, Smith MS, Risinger MW, McNelis AM.
Childhood epilepsy and asthma: comparison of
quality of life. Epilepsia 1994;35(3):608–15.
271. Piers EV. Piers-Harris. Children’s Self-Concept
Scale. Revised manual. Los Angeles, CA: Western
Psychological Services; 1984.
272. Austin JK, Huberty TJ. Development of the Child
Attitude to Illness Scale (CATIS). J Pediatr Psychol
1993;18:467–80.
273. Achenbach TM, Edelbrock C. Manual for the child
behaviour checklist and revised child behaviour
profile. Burlington, VT: Queen City Printers; 1983.
274. Austin JK, Huberty TJ. Revision of the Family
APGAR for use by 8-year-olds. Fam Syst Med
1989;7(3):323–7.
275. Austin JK, Huster GA, Dunn DW, Risinger MW.
Adolescents with active or inactive epilepsy or
asthma: a comparison of quality of life. Epilepsia
1996;37(12):1228–38.
276. Sockrider MM, Swank PR, Seilheimer DK, 
Schidlow DV. Internal validity and reliability 
of a modified NIH score. Pediatr Pulmonol
1994;17:86–96.
277. Sparrow SS, Balla DA, Cicchetti DV. Vineland
Adapative Behaviour Scales. Circle Pines, MN:
American Guidance Service; 1994.
278. Abidin RR. Parenting Stress Index Manual.
Charlottesville, VA: Pediatric Psychology Press; 1983.
279. Kaplan RM. Health outcome models for policy
analysis. Health Psychol 1989;8:723–35.
280. Testa MA, Lenderking WR. Quality of life
considerations in AIDS clinical trials. In: Finkelstein
DM, Schownfeld DA, editors. AIDS clinical trials.
New Yory: Wiley-Liss, Inc; 1995. 
281. Adams PF, Marano MA. Current estimates from the
National Health Interview Survey, 1994. National
Centre for Health Statistics. Vital Health Stat
1995;10(193).
282. Peterson JL, Zill N. Marital disruption, parent-child
relationships and behaviour problems in children. 
J Marriage Family 1986;48:295–307.
283. Garber J, Walker LS, Zeman JL. Somatization
symptoms in a community sample of children and
adolescents: further validation of the Children’s
Somatization Inventory. Psychol Assess
1991;3:588–95.
284. Walker LS, Smith CA, Garber J, Van Slyke DA.
Development and validation of the Pain Response
Inventory for children. Psychol Assess
1997;9:392–405.
285. Walker LS, Greene JW. The Functional Disability
Inventory: measuring a neglected dimension of
child heath status. J Pediatr Psychol 1991;16:39–58.
286. Kovacs P. Rating scales to assess depression in
school-aged children. Acta Paedopsychiatr
1980;46:305–15.
287. Radloff LS. The CES-D scale: a self report
depression scale for research in the general
population. Appl Psychol Measure 1977;1:385–401.
288. Harter S. Manual for self-perception profile for
adolescents. Denver: University of Denver Press;
1988.
289. Gesten EL. A health resources inventory: the
development of a measure of the personal and
social competence of primary grade children. 
J Consult Clin Psychol 1976;44:775–86.
290. Chin SE, Shepherd RW, Cleghorn GJ, Patrick MK,
Javorsky G, Frangoulis E, et al. Survival, growth and
quality of life in children after orthotopic liver
transplantation: a 5 year experience. J Pediatr Child
Health 1991;27(6):380–5.
291. Cleary PD, Morrissey G, Yver A, Oster G. The 
effects of rG-CSF on health-related quality of life in
children with congenital agranulocytosis. Qual Life
Res 1994;3(5):307–15.
292. Felder-Puig R, Formann AK, Mildner A,
Bretschneider W, Bucher B, Windhager R, et al.
Quality of life and psychosocial adjustment of
young patients after treatment of bone cancer.
Cancer 1998;83:69–75.
293. Johnson DL, McCabe MA, Nicholson HS, Joseph AL,
Getson PR, Byrne J, et al. Quality of long-term
survival in young children with medulloblastoma. 
J Neurosurg 1994;80(6):1004–10.
294. Kun LE, Mulhern RK, Crisco JJ. Quality of life in
children treated for brain tumors. Intellectual,
emotional, and academic function. J Neurosurg
1983;58(1):1–6.
295. MacPhee M, Hoffenberg EJ, Feranchak A. Quality-
of-life factors in adolescent inflammatory bowel
disease. Inflammatory Bowel Disease 1998;4(1):6–11.
296. Martinez-Climent J, Castel SV, Esquembre MC,
Verdeguer MA, Ferris TJA. Scale for assessing
quality of life of children survivors of cranial
posterior fossa tumors. J Neurooncol
1994;22(1):67–76.

----- Page 119 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
109
297. Nespoli L, Verri AP, Locatelli F, Bertuggia L. The
impact of pediatric bone marrow transplantation on
quality of life. Qual Life Res 1995;4(3):233–40.
298. Packer RJ, Sposto R, Atkins TE, Sutton LN, Bruce DA,
Siegel KR, et al. Quality of life in children with
primitive neuroectodermal tumors (medullo-
blastoma) of the posterior fossa. Pediatr Neurosci
1987;13(4):169–75.
299. Harter S. The perceived competence scale for
children. Child Dev 1982;53:87–97.
300. Achenbach TM. Manual for the Child Behaviour
Checklist/4-18 and 1991 Profile. Burlington:
University of Vermount Press; 1991.
301. Shumaker SA, Anderson RT, Czajkowski SM.
Psychological tests and scales In: Spilker B, editor.
Quality of life assessments in clinical trials. New
York: Raven Press; 1990. 
302. Perrin EC, Stein REK, Drotar D. Cautions in using
the Child Behaviour Checklist: observations based
on research about children with a chronic illness. 
J Pediatr Psychol 1991;16(4):411–21.
303. Bradlyn AS, Harris CV, Spieth LE. Quality of life
assessment in pediatric oncology: a retrospective
review of phase III reports. Soc Sci Med
1995;41(10):1463–5.
304. Eigen H, Clark NM, Wolle JM. Clinical-behavioural
aspects of cystic fibrosis – directions for future
research. Am Rev Respir Dis 1987;136(6):1509–13.
305. Ilangovan P, Pederson S, Godfrey S, Nikander K,
Noviski N, Warner JO. Treatment of severe steroid
dependent preschool asthma with nebulised
budesonide suspension. Arch Dis Child
1993;68(3):356–9.
306. Sanders C, Egger M, Donovan J, Tallon D, Frankel S.
Reporting on quality of life in randomised
controlled trials: bibliographic study. BMJ
1998;317(7167):1191–4.
307. Chassany O, Bergmann JF, Caulin C. Authors are
creating database of quality of life questionnaires
[letter]. BMJ 1999;318(7191):1142–3.
308. Barr RD, Petrie C, Furlong W, Rothney M, 
Feeny D. Health-related quality of life during 
post-induction chemotherapy in children with acute
lymphoblastic leukemia in remission. Int J Oncol
1997;11:333–9.
309. Abbott J, Dodd M, Bilton D, Webb AK. Treatment
compliance in adults with cystic fibrosis. Thorax
1994;49:115–20.
310. Harper JI, Ahmed I, Barclay G, Lacour M, Hoeger
P, Cork MJ, et al. Cyclosporin for severe childhood
atopic dermatitis: short course versus continued
therapy. Br J Dermatol 2000;142:52–4.
311. Thompson RJ, Gustafson KE. Adaption to chronic
childhood illness. Washington: American
Psychological Society; 1996.
312. Kazak AE, Penati B, Boyer BA, Himelstein B. 
A randomized controlled prospective outcome
study of a psychological and pharmacological
intervention protocol for procedural distress in
pediatric leukemia. J Pediatr Psychol
1996;21(5):615–31.
313. Jelalian E, Stark LJ, Reynolds L, Seifer R. Nutrition
intervention for weight gain in cystic fibrosis: a
meta analysis. J Pediatr 1998;132:486–92. 
314. Harrison H. The principles for family-centred
neonatal care. Pediatrics 1993;92:643–50.
315. Allen MC, Donohue PK, Dusman AE. The limit of
viability: neonatal outcome of infants born at 22-
weeks to 25-weeks gestation. N Engl J Med
1993;329(22):1597–601.
316. de Keizer NF, Bonsel GJ, Gemke RJBJ. Health status
prediction in critically ill children: a pilot study
introducing standardised health ratios. Qual Life Res
1997;6:192–9.
317. Saigal S, Feeny D, Rosenbaum P, Furlong W,
Burrows E, Stoskopf B. Self-perceived health status
and health-related quality of life of extremely low-
birth-weight infants at adolescence. JAMA
1996;276(6):453–9.
318. Eiser C. Practitioner review: long-term consequences
of childhood cancer. J Child Psychol Psychiatry
1998;39(5):621–33.
319. Wiener JM. Response of medical personnel to the
fatal illness of a child. In: Schoenberg B, Carr AC,
Peretz D, Kutscher AH, editors. Loss and grief. New
York: Columbia University Press; 1970. 
320. Levine A, Artiss, KL, Susman EJ. The impact of
childhood cancer on doctors and nurses.
Proceedings of the American Cancer Society:
National Conference on the Care of the Child 
with Cancer. American Cancer Society; 1979.
321. Goldman A. ABC of palliative care: special
problems of children. BMJ 1998;316:49–52.
322. Jankovic M, Van Dongen-Melman JEWM, 
Vasiatou-Kosmidis H, Jenney MEM. Improving 
the quality of life for children with cancer. Tumori
1999;85:273–9.
323. Skeel RT. Do we need a new end point in clinical
trials today – response. J Natl Cancer Inst
1989;81(14):1107.
324. Revicki DA. Relationship between health utility and
psychometric health status measures. Med Care
1992;27:254–68.
325. Taylor KM, Macdonald KG, Bezjak A, Ng P,
DePetrillo AD. Physicians’ perspective on quality 
of life: an exploratory study of oncologists. Qual Life
Res 1996;5:5–14.
326. Child Health in the Community: a guide to good
practice. Department of Health; 1996.
327. The Children Act. The Stationary Office; 1989.

----- Page 120 (native) -----
References
110
328. The Education Act. The Stationary Office; 1996.
329. Towards a combined child health service. British
Paediatric Association. 1990.
330. Aaronson N. Assessing the quality of life of patients
in cancer clinical trials: common problems and
common sense solutions. Eur J Cancer
1990;28A:1304–6.
331. Department of Health. Health secretary announces
membership of modernisation action teams to draw
up national plan for health. London. Department
of Health (Press release 2000/02081). 2000.
332. Battista RN, Hodge MJ. Quality of life research and
health technology assessment: a time for synergy.
Qual Life Res 1996;5:413–18.
333. Ruta DA, Garratt AM, Leng M, Russell IT,
MacDonald LM. A new approach to the
measurement of quality of life: the patient
generated index. Med Care 1994;32(11):1109–26.
334. Joyce CRB, O’Boyle CA, McGee H. Individual
quality of life: approaches to conceptualisation 
and assessment. Australia: Harwood Academic
Publishers; 1999.
335. McGee HM, O’Boyle CA, Hickey AM, O’Malley K,
Joyce CRB. Assessing the quality of life of the
individual: the SEIQoL with a healthy and a
gastroenterology unit population. Psychol Med
1991;21:749–59.
336. Hunt S. The concept of outcome. Scand J Urol
Nephrol 1997;183:S71–S74
337. Hays RD, Stewart AL. The structure of self-reported
health in chronic disease patients. Psychol Assess
1990;2:22–30.
338. Eiser C, Eiser JR. Social comparisons and quality of
life among survivors of childhood cancer. Psychol
Health 2000;15:435–50.
339. Skevington SM. Social comparisons in cross-cultural
quality of life assessment. Int J Mental Health
1994;23:29–47.
340. Wallander JL. Theoretical and developmental issues
in QL for children and adolescents. In: Wallander
JL, Koot HM, editors. Quality of life in children and
adolescents: concepts, methods and findings. UK:
Harwood Academic Publishers. In press. 
341. Levi R, Drotar D. Critical issues and needs in
health-related quality of life assessment of children
and adolescents with chronic health conditions. In:
Drotar D, editor. Measuring health-related quality
of life in children and adolescents. New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum; 1998. 
342. Bond L, Nolan T, Adler R, Robertson C. The Child
Behaviour Checklist in a Melbourne urban sample.
Australian Psychologist 1994;29(2):103-9.
343. Hensley VR. Australian normative study of the
Achenbach Child Behaviour Checklist. Australian
Psychologist 1988;23(3):371–82.
344. Kuyken W, Orley J, Hudelson P, Sartorius N. Quality
of life assessment across cultures. Int J Mental Health
1994;23(2):5–27.
345. Bullinger M, Anderson R, Cella D, Aaronson N.
Developing and evaluating cross-cultural
instruments from minimum requirements to
optimal. Qual Life Res 1993;2(6):451–9.
346. Anderson RT, Aaronson NK, Alain PL, Wilkin D.
International use and application of generic health-
related measure. In: Spilker B, editor. Quality of life
and pharmacoeconomics in clinical trials.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven; 1996. 
347. Hui CCH, Traindis HC. Measurement in cross-
cultural psychology. J Cross Cultural Psychol
1985;16(2):131–52.
348. Herdman M, Fox-Rusby J, Badia X. ‘Equivalence’
and the translation and adaptation of health-related
quality of life questionnaires. Qual Life Res
1997;6(3):237–47.
349. WHOQOL Group. The World Health Organization
Quality of Life Assessment (WHOQOL):
development and general psychometric properties.
Soc Sci Med 1998;46:1576–85.
350. Jirojankul P, Skevington S. Developing a quality of
life measure for children aged 5–8 years. Br J Health
Psychol. In press.
351. Feeny D, Furlong W, Torrence GW. The Health
Utilities Index: an update. Qual Life Newsletter
1999;22:8–9.
352. Henry B, Grosskopf C, Aussage P, De Fontbrune S,
Goehrs JM. Measuring quality of life in children
with cystic fibrosis: The Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaires
(CFQ). Pediatr Pulmonol 1997;S14:331.
353. Quittner AL, Sweeney S, Watrous M, Muzenberger
P, Bearss K, Nitza AG, et al. Development of disease-
specific quality of life measure for cystic fibrosis:
linguistic validation of the French CFQ. J Pediatr
Psychol 2000;25:403–14
354. Waters E, Salmon L, Wake M. The parent form
Child Health Questionnaire in Austrailia:
comparison of reliability, validity, structure and
norms. J Pediatr Psychol 2000;25:381–91.
355. Eiser C, Kemp A, Jenney M, Maddocks A, Wandgraf J,
Russell I, et al. Quality of life in UK children. 
Wales Office of Research and Development.
Research in progress.
356. French DJ, Carroll A, Christie MJ. Health-related
quality of life in Australian children with asthma:
lessons for the cross-cultural use of life instruments.
Qual Life Res 1998;7(5):409–19.

----- Page 121 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
111
1.
(quality of life) and (child* or adolesc*)
2.
(health status or functional status or well-
being) and (child* or adolesc*)
3.
chronic illness or chronic disease or arthritis or
asthma or cancer or cystic fibrosis or diabetes
or epilepsy or AIDS or trauma or burns or
technology dependent or low birthweight
4. 1 and 3
5. 2 and 3
6.
4 and (measure* or scale or index)
7. 5 and (measure* or scale or index)
8.
self report or self-report or self assessment or
self-assessment or child* report or adolesc*
report
9. 4 and 8
10. 5 and 8
11. 1 and 8
12. 2 and 8
13. (parent or mother or carer) and (report 
or assessment)
14. 4 and 13
15. 5 and 13
16. 1 and 13
17. 2 and 13
18. (6 or 7 or 11 or 12 or 16 or 17) and 
(reliab* or valid*)
Search 4 produces the main general papers 
on quality of life in children and adolescents. 
This result was supplemented by the results of
search 5 which uses alternative terms for quality 
of life.
Searches 6 and 7 produced papers that report
general measures of quality of life in children and
adolescents with chronic illnesses.
Appendix 1
Terms used in the search of electronic databases

----- Page 122 (ocr) -----


----- Page 123 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
113
Appendix 2
Data extraction form
Reference number:
Reviewer:
Date of coding:
Name of instrument:
Instrument in file:Y/N
Disease specific (             ) specify        
Generic
A.
DETAILS OF PUBLICATION
1.
Author(s):
2.
Title:
3.
Source and Ref:
4.
Institution/contact address:
5.
U.S.A.
U.K.
AUST/NZ.
EURO.
OTHER
B.
RESEARCH QUESTION
Aim(s) (Indicate here the aims of the study)
(1)
Development of QoL measure
(2)
Determine statistical properties of QoL measure
(3)
Compare proxy ratings
(4)
Compare outcome in clinical trial
(5)
Compare treatments
(6)
Evaluate intervention
(7)
Other (specify)

----- Page 124 (native) -----
Appendix 2
114
C.
DESCRIPTION OF MEASURE (indicate ‘not reported’ if any information is not given)
1.
Pre-existing measure (specify name and changes made):
2.
(i) Did the development and testing of the instrument involve separate stages?
(ii) Is the pilot stage reported?
3.
(i) Method of item generation (e.g. semi-structured interview):
(ii) Informant(s) (e.g. children, parents, health professionals):
4.
Design of measure:
(i)
(a) Adult   (b) Child centred   (c) Both
(ii) (a) Quality of Life   (b) Health Status
5.
Definition of QoL used:
(a) Multidimensional/WHO   (b) Cost effectiveness   (c) Goal-orientated
6.
Age range(s) which measure is suitable for (as stated by author):
7.
Number of domains:
8.
Name of domains:
9.
Total number of items:
10. Proxy ratings available? (Y/N)
11. Time taken to complete the measure
12. Response scale (e.g. visual analogue, likert)
13. Did questions involve assessment across time frames? (e.g. last week, last month?)

----- Page 125 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
115
D. PROCEDURE (indicate ‘not reported’ if any information is not given)
STUDY DESIGN
1.
Design of study:
RCT
Cohort study with matched concurrent controls
Cohort study with unmatched concurrent controls
Cohort study with historic controls
Cohort study with no controls
Other (specify)
2.
Method of randomisation:
3.
Diagnostic classification (ICD-10):
4.
Inclusion criteria:
5.
Exclusion criteria:
6.
Recruitment procedures:
7.
SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS
(i) Number of participants in each condition/target group/control:
(ii) Mean age:
Age range:
(iii) Sex:
— % female   — % male          
(iv) Ethnicity:
(v) Age at diagnosis:
(vi) Time since diagnosis:
(vii) Time since completion of treatment:
8.
(i) Representativeness of the sample:
(ii) Number of participants vs. non-participants:
9.
Informant (e.g. child, mother, father, clinician, teacher):
10. Method of administration and by whom (e.g. post/phone/interview):
11. Length of follow-up (complete if longitudinal design):

----- Page 126 (native) -----
Appendix 2
116
E.
EVALUATION (indicate ‘not applicable’ to those sections which are not relevant)
1.
DEVELOPMENT OF AN INSTRUMENT
Validation measures used:
Child completed:
Parent completed:
Clinical:
RELIABILITY:
2.
CROSS-SECTIONAL STUDIES
Base line measures (specify whether child/parent completed)
3.
LONGITUDINAL STUDIES 
Follow-up measures
F.
ANALYSIS
1.
Statistical techniques used
2.
(i) Attrition rate
(ii) How was attrition managed?
3.
Number followed up in each condition

----- Page 127 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
117
G.
RESULTS
Quantitative results (free text)
For example:-
•  Specify: validity (content, construct, concurrent, divergent & discriminant), and reliability 
(test-retest, inter-rater, internal consistency). Report correlation coefficients where necessary.
•  Specify: differences between different populations, and differences between domains of QoL.
H.
QUALITY OF THE STUDY
1.
Effectiveness of measures (author’s conclusions)
2.
Effectiveness of measures (reviewer’s conclusions, if different from above)
3.
Limitations of measure and procedure (author’s comments)
4.
Limitations of measure and procedure (reviewer’s comments, if different from above)
Measure included with the article Y/N

----- Page 128 (native) -----
Appendix 2
118
I.
REVIEWER’S DECISION
1.
Does the study address the following (Y/N)? include additional comments 
(i) The extent to which adult measures are used with children
(ii) Appropriateness of adult measures for use with children
(iii) Role of proxy raters and the feasibility
(iv) Reliability of proxy measures of QoL
2.
Is the paper to be included?  
YES       NO       UNSURE
3.
Reasons for decision

----- Page 129 (native) -----
TABLE 11
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
119
Study
Excluded studies
Almond PS, Morell P, Matas AJ, Gillingham KJ, Chau KS, Brown A, et al. Transplanted children with QoL not measured
long-term graft function have an excellent quality of life. Transplant Proc 1991;23(1 Pt 2):1380–1
Alsarraf R, Jung CJ, Perkins J, Crowley C, Gates GA. Otitis media health status evaluation: a pilot 
Clinical/functional health
study for the investigation of cost-effective outcomes of recurrent acute otitis media treatment.
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1998;107(2):120–8
Asikainen I, Kaste M, Sarna S. Predicting late outcome for patients with traumatic brain injury 
Sample aged 0.8–71
referred to a rehabilitation programme: a study of 508 Finnish patients 5 years or more after 
Clinical/functional
injury. Brain Inj 1998;12(2):95–107
measures
Asonuma K, Inomata Y, Uemoto S, Egawa H, Kiuchi T, Okajima H, et al. Growth and quality of  
Clinical (height and 
life after living-related liver transplantation in children. Pediatr Transplant 1998;2(1):64–9
recovery weight)
Balestrini MR, Zanette M, Micheli R, Fornari M, Solero CL, Broggi G. Hemispheric cerebral 
Survival
tumors in children. Long-term prognosis concerning survival rate and quality of life – 
Neuropsychological 
considerations on a series of 64 cases operated upon. Childs Nerv Syst 1990;6(3):143–7
assessment only
Baumgardner DJ, Burtea ED. Quality-of-life in technology-dependent children receiving home 
Qualitative interviews
care, and their families – a qualitative study. WMJ 1998;97(8):51–5
Bender BG. Measurement of quality of life in pediatric asthma clinical trials. Ann Allergy
Review
Asthma Immunol 1996;77(6):438–45
Berardo DH, Berardo FM. Quality of life across age and family stage. J Palliat Care 
Comment
1992;8(3):52–5
Berdeaux G, Hervie C, Smajda C, Marquis P. Parental quality of life and recurrent ENT 
Parental QoL
infections in their children: development of a questionnaire. Rhinitis Survey Group.
Qual Life Res 1998;7(6):501–12
Boggs SR, Graham-Pole J, Miller EM. Life-threatening illness and invasive treatment: the future 
Review article
of quality of life assessment and research in pediatric oncology. In: Johnson JH, Johnson SB,
editors.Advances in child health psychology. Gainseville, FL: University of Florida Press; 1991
Bomalaski MD,Teague JL, Brooks B.The long-term impact of urological management on the 
Older than 18 years of 
quality of life of children with spina bifida. J Urol 1995;154(2 Pt 2):778–81
age; education
achievements
Bradford R. Children’s psychological health status – the impact of liver transplantation: a review.
Review
J R Soc Med 1991;84(9):550–3
Bradlyn AS, Harris CV, Spieth LE. Quality of life assessment in pediatric oncology: a retrospective Review
review of phase III reports. Soc Sci Med 1995;41(10):1463–5
Bradlyn AS, Pollock BH.Assessment of quality of life. N Engl J Med 1996;335(7):521
Comment
Brown SW. Quality of life – a view from the playground. Seizure 1994;3 Suppl A:11–15
Comment
Bullinger M, Bullinger M, Ravens-Sieberer U. Health related QOL assessment in children:
Review
a review of the literature. Eur Rev Appl Psychol/Revue Europeenne de Psychologie Appliquee
1995;45(4):245–54
Casey FA, Craig B G, Mulholland HC. Quality of life in surgically palliated complex congenital 
Treadmill activity and 
heart disease. Arch Dis Child 1994;70(5):382–6
school attendance
continued
Appendix 3
Excluded studies

----- Page 130 (native) -----
TABLE 11 contd
Appendix 3
120
Study 
Excluded studies
Chang P. Psychosocial needs of long-term childhood cancer survivors: a review of literature.
Review
Pediatrician 1991;18(1):20–4
Christie MJ, French D,Weatherstone L,West A.The patients’ perceptions of chronic disease and 
Discussion
its management: psychosomatics, holism and quality of life in contemporary management of 
childhood asthma. Psychother Psychosom 1991;56(4):197–203
Clark DB, Kirisci L. Posttraumatic stress disorder, depression, alcohol use disorders and quality 
Not a chronic illness
of life in adolescents. Anxiety 1996;2(5):226–33
Cohen SR, Suzman K, Simms C, Burstein FD, Riski J, Montgomery GAC. Sleep apnea surgery 
Surgery
versus tracheostomy in children: an exploratory study of the comparative effects on quality 
of life. Plast Reconstr Surg 1998;102(6):1855–64
Crites LS, Siegel CA. Improving the quality of life for youngsters with HIV. Child Today
QoL not measured
1990;19(3):24–7
Crowley MJ, Kazdin AE. Child psychosocial functioning and parent quality of life among clinically 
Parent QoL
referred children. J Child Fam Stud 1998;7(2):233–51
Daniels H, Hogg B.An intercultural comparison of the quality of life of children and youth with 
Disabilities
handicaps in Denmark, Italy, the United Kingdom and Germany. Educ Child Psychol 
1991;8(4):74–83
Ditesheim JA,Templeton JMJ. Short-term v long-term quality of life in children following repair 
No psychometric data
of high imperforate anus. J Pediatr Surg 1987;22(7):581–7
Dodson WE. Quality of life measurements in children with epilepsy. In:Trimble MR, Dodson WE,
Review
editors. Epilepsy and quality of life. New York: Raven Press; 1994
Duffy CM, Duffy KN. Health assessment in the rheumatic diseases of childhood. Curr Opin
Review
Rheumatol 1997;9(5):440–7
Eiser C, Jenney ME. Measuring symptomatic benefit and quality of life in paediatric oncology 
Editorial
[editorial]. Br J Cancer 1996;73(11):1313–16
Eiser C. Children’s quality of life measures. Arch Dis Child 1997;77(4):350–4
Review
Eiser C, Havermans T. Knowledge and attitudes as determinants of ‘quality of life’ in children 
Review
with asthma. In: Christie MJ, French DJ, editors.The assessment of quality of life in children 
with asthma. Chur: Harwood; 1994
Enskar K, Carlsson M, von Essen L, Kreuger A, Hamrin E. Development of a tool to measure the 
Parent QoL
life situation of parents of children with cancer. Qual Life Res 1997;6(3):248–56
Erling A. Methodological considerations in the assessment of health-related quality of life in 
Review
children. Acta Paediatr Suppl 1999;88(428):106–7
Facione N. Quality of life issues in chronic otitis media with effusion: parameters for future 
Clinical, qualitative 
study. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1991;22(2):167–79
assessment
Faulkner MS, Clark FS. Quality of life for parents of children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes.
Parent QoL
Diabetes Educ 1998;24(6):721–7
Feldman BM,Ayling-Campos A, Luy L, Stevens D, Silverman ED, Laxer RM. Measuring disability 
Function
in juvenile dermatomyositis: validity of the childhood health assessment questionnaire.
J Rheumatol 1995;22(2):326–31
Ferry GD. Quality of life in inflammatory bowel disease: background and definitions.
Review
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 1999;28(4):S15–S18
Finkelstein JW. Methods, models, and measures of health-related quality of life for children 
Review
and adolescents. In: Drotar D, editor. Measuring health-related quality of life in children and 
adolescents. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum; 1998
Finlay AY, Lewis-Jones MS, Sharp JL, Dykes PJ. Children’s Dermatology Life Quality Index:
Abstract
cartoon version validation [abstract]. Br J Dermatol 1998;139:15
continued

----- Page 131 (native) -----
TABLE 11 contd
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
121
Study contd
Excluded studies
Flat B, Srskaar D,Vinje O, Lien G,Aasland A, Moum T, Frre O. Measuring disability in early 
Function
juvenile rheumatoid arthritis: evaluation of a Norwegian version of the childhood Health 
Assessment Questionnaire. J Rheumatol 1998;25(9):1851–8
Fuggle P, Shand PA, Gill LJ, Davies SC. Pain, quality of life, and coping in sickle cell disease.
Diary study
Arch Dis Child 1996;75(3):199–203
Gerard K. Determining the contribution of residential respite care to the quality of life of 
Severe learning 
children with severe learning difficulties. Child Care Health Dev 1990;16(3):177–88
disabilities 
Glaser A,Walker D. Quality of life in surgically palliated complex congenital heart disease 
Letter
[letter; comment]. Arch Dis Child 1994;71(5):482
Gotay CC. Quality of life among survivors of childhood cancer: a critical review and 
Review
implications for intervention. J Psychosoc Oncol 1987;5(4):5–23
Goycochea-Robles MV, Garduno-Espinosa J,Vilchis-Guizar E, Ortiz-Alvarez O, Burgos-Vargas R.
Function
Validation of a Spanish version of the Childhood Health Assessment Questionnaire.
J Rheumatol 1997;24(11):2242–5
Grunberg SM, Groshen S, Steingass S, Zaretsky S. Comparison of conditional quality of life 
Sample aged 12–84 
terminology and visual analogue scale measurements. Qual Life Res 1996;5(1):65–72
years
Hack MA. Consideration of the use of health status, functional outcome, and quality-of-life to 
Review article
monitor neonatal intensive care practice. Pediatrics 1999;103(1 Suppl E):319–28
Haverkamp F, Noeker M.‘Short stature in children – a questionnaire for parents’: a new 
Psychosocial
instrument for growth disorder-specific psychosocial adaptation in children.
Qual Life Res 1998;7(5):447–55
Hawkins WE, Hawkins MJ, Seeley J. Stress, health-related behavior and quality of life on 
Not chronic illness
depressive symptomatology in a sample of adolescents. Psychol Rep 1992;71(1):183–6
Hayes RP, Grinzaid KA, Duffey EB, Elsas LJ.The impact of Gaucher disease and its treatment 
Sample aged 8–67 years
on quality of life. Qual Life Res 1998;7(6):521–34
Henry B, Grosskopf C,Aussage P, de Fontbrune S, Goehrs JM. Measuring quality of life in 
Abstract
children with cystic fibrosis: the cystic fibrosis questionnaires (CFQ).
Pediatr Pulmonol 1997;S14:331
Hinds PS. Quality of life in children and adolescents with cancer. Semin Oncol Nurs 
Review
1990;6(4):285–91
Hinterberger W, Gadner H, Hocker P, Hajek-Rosenmayr A, Graninger W, Grabner G, et al.
Clinical outcome
Survival and quality of life in 23 patients with severe aplastic anemia treated with bone 
marrow transplantation (BMT). Blut 1987;54(3):137–46
Hodges K,Wong MM, Latessa M. Use of the Child and Adolescent Functional Assessment Scale 
Function
(CAFAS) as an outcome measure in clinical settings. J Behav Health Serv Res 1998;25(3):325–36
Ishibashi A. Japanese nurse interested in the quality of life for children and adolescents with 
Letter
cancer [letter]. J Pediatr Oncol Nurs 1994;11(4):138
Ivan TM, Glazer JP. Quality of life in pediatric psychiatry: a new outcome measure.
Review
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am 1994;3(3):599–611
Jacobson AM, Fried K. Conceptual issues in developing quality of life assessments for children:
Review
illustrations from studies of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. In: Drotar D, editor. Measuring 
health-related quality of life in children and adolescents: implications for research and practice.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1998
Jenkin D, Danjoux C, Greenberg MAT. Subsequent quality of life for children irradiated for a 
Survival and functional 
brain tumor before age four years. Med Pediatr Oncol 1998;31(6):506–11
morbidity
Jenney ME, Kane RL, Lurie NA. Developing a measure of health outcomes in survivors of 
Review
childhood cancer: a review of the issues. Med Pediatr Oncol 1995;24(3):145–53
continued

----- Page 132 (native) -----
TABLE 11 contd
Appendix 3
122
Study 
Excluded studies
Johnson SB, Kelly M, Henretta JC, Cunningham WR,Tomer A, Silverstein JH.A longitudinal 
Clinical outcome
analysis of adherence and health status in childhood diabetes. J Pediatr Psychol 1992;17(5):537–53
Jones B.The quality of life [editorial]. Child Care Health Dev 1981;7(2):65–6
Editorial
Jordan TE. Developing an international index of quality of life for children: the NICQL Index.
Not chronic illness
J R Soc Health 1983;103(4):127–30
Joyce K, Singer M, Isralowitz R. Impact of respite care on parents’ perceptions of quality of life.
Parent QoL
Ment Retard 1983;21(4):153–6
Juniper EF. How important is quality of life in pediatric asthma? Pediatr Pulmonol Suppl
Review
1997;15:17–21
Juniper EF. Rhinitis management: the patient’s perspective. Clin Exp Allergy 1998;28(S6):34–8
Review
Juniper EF, Guyatt GH, Feeny DH, Ferrie PJ, Griffith LE,Townsend M. Measuring quality of life 
Parent QoL
in the parents of children with asthma. Qual Life Res 1996;5(1):27–34
Kaplan RM. Implications of quality of life assessment in public policy for adolescent health. In:
Review
Drotar D, editor. Measuring health-related quality of life in children and adolescents. New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum; 1998
Kaplan SH, Barlow S, Spetter D, Sullivan L, Khan A, Grand R.Assessing functional status and 
Abstract
health related quality of life among school-aged children: reliability and validity of a new 
self-reported measure [abstract]. Qual Life Res 1995;4:444
Keown PA, Shackleton CR, Ferguson BM.The influence of long-term morbidity on health 
Review
status and rehabilitation following paediatric organ transplantation. Eur J Pediatr 
1992;151 Suppl 1:S70–5
Kiltie AE, Gattamaneni HR. Survival and quality of life of paediatric intracranial germ cell 
Evaluation of case notes;
tumour patients treated at the Christie Hospital, 1972–1993. Med Pediatr Oncol
neurological and 
1995;25(6):450–6
functional data
Kiltie AE, Lashford LS, Gattamaneni HR. Survival and late effects in medulloblastoma patients 
Survival, marital status,
treated with craniospinal irradiation under three years old. Med Pediatr Oncol 
height
1995;28(5):348–54
Kind P. Measuring quality of life in children. In: Christie MJ, French DJ, editors.The assessment 
Review
of quality of life in children with asthma. Chur: Harwood; 1994
Kohler JA, Radford M.Terminal care for children dying of cancer: quantity and quality of life.
Qualitative data
BMJ 1985;291(6488):115–16
Koot HM, Bouman NH. Potential uses for quality-of-life measures in childhood inflammatory 
Review
bowel disease. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 1999;28(4):S56–S61
Korsch BM. Health-related quality of life after organ transplantation in childhood 
Editorial
[editorial; comment]. Pediatr Transplant 1997;1(2):99–100
Kraybill EN, Bose CL, Corbet AJ, Garcia-Prats J,Asbill D, Edwards K, et al. Double-blind 
Morbidity
evaluation of developmental and health status to age 2 years of infants weighing 700 to 
1350 grams treated prophylactically at birth with a single dose of synthetic surfactant or 
air placebo. J Pediatr 1995;126(5 Pt 2):S33–S42
Krmar RT, Eymann A, Ramirez JA, Ferraris JR. Quality of life after kidney transplantation in 
No psychometric 
children. Transplantation 1997;64(3):540–1
properties
Lantos JD. Some moral and political pitfalls in measuring quality of life. In: Drotar D, editor.
Review
Measuring health-related quality of life in children and adolescents. New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum; 1998
LeBidois J, Kachaner J,Vouhe P, Sidi D,Tamisier D. Heart transplantation in children: mid-term 
Survival, clinical data
results and quality of life. Eur J Pediatr 1992;151 Suppl 1:S59–64
continued

----- Page 133 (native) -----
TABLE 11 contd
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
123
Study
Excluded studies
Lenderking WR,Testa MA, Katzenstein D, Hammer S. Measuring quality of life in early HIV 
Sample aged 13–70 
disease: the modular approach. Qual Life Res 1997;6(6):515–30
years
Leung WC. Use of health services by children. Objective measures of health status are 
Letter
essential [letter; comment]. BMJ 1999;318(7187):877
Levi R, Drotar D. Critical issues and needs in health-related quality of life assessment of children Review
and adolescents with chronic health conditions. In: Drotar DM. editor. Measuring health-related 
quality of life in children and adolescents. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum; 1998
Lin ST,Yang CP, Liang DC. Health status of patients with childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia 
Clinical data
in continuous complete remission for over five years.The Taiwan Children’s Cancer Study Group.
J Formos Med Assoc 1993;92(8):702–10
Lockey RF, DuBuske LM, Friedman B, Petrocella V, Cox F, Rickard K. Nocturnal asthma: effect of 
Predominantly adult 
salmeterol on quality of life and clinical outcomes. Chest 1999;115(3):666–73
sample
Mackie PC, Jessen EC, Jarvis SN.The lifestyle assessment questionnaire: an instrument to 
Disability
measure the impact of disability on the lives of children with cerebral palsy and their families.
Child Care Health Dev 1998;24(6):473–86
Marra CA, Levine M, McKerrow R, Carleton BC. Overview of health-related quality-of-life 
Review
measures for pediatric patients: application in the assessment of pharmacotherapeutic and 
pharmacoeconomic outcomes. Pharmacotherapy 1996;16(5):879–88
McGee HM. Quality of life: assessment issues for children with chronic illness and their families.
Review
In: Christie MJ, French DJ, editors.The assessment of quality of life in children with asthma.
Chur: Harwood; 1994
Meijboom F, Szatmari A, Deckers JW, Utens EM, Roelandt JR, Bos E, et al. Cardiac status and 
Exercise capacity
health-related quality of life in the long term after surgical repair of tetralogy of Fallot in 
infancy and childhood. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1995;110(4 Pt 1):883–91
Miller JJ. Long term outcomes and quality of life in juvenile RA [letter; comment].
Letter
J Rheumatol 1998;25(6):1244
Miller JR, Colbert AP, Osberg JS.Ventilator dependency: decision-making, daily functioning and 
No psychometric data
quality of life for patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Dev Med Child Neurol 
1990;32(12):1078–86
Morel P,Almond PS, Matas AJ, Gillingham KJ, Chau C, Brown A, et al. Long-term quality of life 
No psychometric data
after kidney transplantation in childhood. Transplantation 1991;52(1):47–53
Mostow EN, Byrne J, Connelly RR, Mulvihill JJ. Quality of life in long-term survivors of CNS 
Adult survivors
tumors of childhood and adolescence. J Clin Oncol 1991;9(4):592–9
Mulhern RK, Heideman RL, Khatib ZA, Kovnar EH, Sanford RA, Kun LE. Quality of survival 
Quality of survival;
among children treated for brain stem glioma. Pediatr Neurosurg 1994;20(4):226–32
neurological and
behavioural measures
Mulhern RK, Horowitz ME, Ochs J, Friedman AG.Assessment of quality of life among pediatric 
Review
patients with cancer. Psychol Assess 1989;1(2):130–8
Murray KJ, Passo MHA. Functional measures in children with rheumatic diseases.
Review
Pediatr Clin N Am 1995;42(5):1127–54
Myatt HM, Myatt RA.The development of a paediatric quality of life questionnaire to measure 
Surgery
post-operative pain following tonsillectomy. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1998;44(2):115–23
Neff EJ, Dale JC.Assessment of quality of life in school-aged children: a method – Phase 1.
No psychometric data
Matern Child Nurs J 1990;19(4):313–20
Ottenbacher KJ, Msall ME, Lyon NR, Duffy LC, Granger CV, Braun S. Interrater agreement and 
Disabilities
stability of the Functional Independence Measure for Children (WeeFIM): use in children with 
developmental disabilities. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1997;78(12):1309–15
continued

----- Page 134 (native) -----
TABLE 11 contd
Appendix 3
124
Study 
Excluded studies
Pal DK. Quality of life assessment in children: a review of conceptual and methodological issues 
Review
in multidimensional health status measures. J Epidemiol Community Health 1996;50(4):391–6
Parsons SK, Brown AP. Evaluation of quality of life of childhood cancer survivors: l 
Review
a methodologica conundrum. Med Pediatr Oncol 1998;Suppl 1:46–53
Price K. Quality of life for terminally ill children. Soc Work 1989;34(1):53–4
Review
Rose MA, Clark-Alexander B. Caregivers of children with HIV/AIDS: quality of life and 
Parent QoL
coping styles. J Assoc Nurses AIDS Care 1998;9(1):58–65
Rosenfeld RM, Goldsmith AJ, Madell JR. How accurate is parent rating of hearing for children 
QoL not assessed
with otitis media? Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998;124(9):989–92
Ruperto N, Ravelli A, Levinson JE, Shear ES, Murray K, Link TB, et al. Long-term health outcomes 
Predominantly adult 
and quality of life in American and Italian inception cohorts of patients with juvenile rheumatoid 
sample
arthritis. II. Early predictors of outcome. J Rheumatol 1997;24(5):952–8
Rutishauser C, Sawyer SM, Bowes G. Quality-of-life assessment in children and adolescents with 
Review
asthma. Eur Respir J 1998;12(2):486–94
Saigal S, Rosenbaum P, Hoult L, Furlong W, Feeny D, Burrows E, et al. Conceptual and 
Review
methodological issues in assessing health-related quality of life in children and adolescents:
illustration from studies of extremely low birthweight survivors. In: Drotar D, editor. Measuring 
health-related quality of life in children and adolescents. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum; 1998
Sanders J, Sullivan K,Witherspoon R, Doney K,Anasetti C, Beatty P, et al. Long term effects and 
Clinical and 
quality of life in children and adults after marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 
neuropsychological 
1989;4(S4):27–9
functioning
Schor EL. Children’s health and the assessment of health-related quality of life. In: Drotar D,
Review
editor. Measuring health-related quality of life in children and adolescents. New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum; 1998
Schulz RM, Dye J, Jolicoeur L, Cafferty T,Watson J. Quality-of-life factors for parents of children 
Parent QoL
with asthma. J Asthma 1994;31(3):209–19
Sejima H, Ito M, Shiraishi H, Kobayashi A, Kishi K, Mori CA. Quality of life in schoolchildren and 
No psychometric 
students with epilepsy: a survey by questionnaire for nurse-teachers in Shimane prefecture.
properties
Jpn J Psychiatry Neurol 1993;47(2):359–60
Singh G,Athreya BH, Fries JF, Goldsmith DP. Measurement of health status in children with 
Function
juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 1994;37(12):1761–9
Sjbu LAB. Parents of children with cerebral palsy in Nordland (county in the north of Norway);
Parent QoL
factors connected to their quality of life and coping of the circumstances around the handicapped 
child. Arctic Med Res 1994;53(S1):30–1
Skuse D, Elgar K, Morris E A B S. Quality of life in Turner syndrome is related to chromosomal 
Social and educational 
constitution: implications for genetic counselling and management. Acta Paediatr Suppl 
adjustment
1999;88(428):110–13
Skuse DH, Cave S, O’Herlihy A, South R. Quality of life in children with Turner syndrome:
Adjustment
parent, teacher, and individual perspectives. In: Drotar D, editor. Measuring health-related
quality of life in children and adolescents. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum; 1998
Slavc I, Salchegger C, Hauer C, Urban C, Oberbauer R, Pakisch B, et al. Follow-up and quality of 
Survival and neurological 
survival of 67 consecutive children with CNS tumors. Childs Nerv Syst 1994;10(7):433–43
sequelae
Sokal EM. Quality of life after orthotopic liver transplantation in children.An overview of 
Review
physical, psychological and social outcome. Eur J Pediatr 1995;154(3):171–5
Spieth LE, Harris CV.Assessment of health-related quality of life in children and adolescents:
Review
an integrative review. J Pediatr Psychol 1996;21(2):175–93
continued

----- Page 135 (native) -----
TABLE 11 contd
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
125
Study 
Excluded studies
Staab D,Wenninger K, Gebert N, Rupprath K, Bisson S,Trettin M, et al. Quality of life in patients 
Parent QoL
with cystic fibrosis and their parents: what is important besides disease severity? Thorax
1998;53(9):727–31
Stabler B, Frank NC. Quality of life and the psychiatric status of individuals treated with GH in 
Review
childhood. In: Drotar D, editor. Measuring health-related quality of life in children and adolescents.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum; 1998
Stone RD, Beasley PJ,Treacy SJ,Twente AW,Vacanti JP. Children and families can achieve normal 
Qualitative
psychological adjustment and a good quality of life following pediatric liver transplantation:
a long-term study. Transplant Proc 1997;29(1-2):1571–2
Takei S, Hokonohara M. Quality of life and daily management of children with rheumatic disease.
Review
Acta Paediatr Jpn 1993;35(5):454–63
Testa MA, Simonson DC.“Assessment of quality of life”: Reply. N Engl J Med 1996;335(7):521–2
Comment
Townsend M, Feeny DH, Guyatt GH, Furlong WJ, Seip AE, Dolovich JA. Evaluation of the burden 
Burden of illness
of illness for pediatric asthmatic patients and their parents. Ann Allergy 1991;67(4):403–8
van der Sluis CK, Kingma J, Eisma WH, Duis HJ. Pediatric polytrauma: short-term and long-term 
Older than 18 years of 
outcomes. J Trauma 1997;43(3):501–6
age at follow-up
Vivier PM, Bernier JA, Starfield B. Current approaches to measuring health outcomes in pediatric Review
research. Curr Opin Pediatr 1994;6(5):530–7
Weber TR,Tracy TJ, Connors RH. Short-bowel syndrome in children. Quality of life in an era of 
Survival and descriptive 
improved survival. Arch Surg 1991;126(7):841–6
characteristics
West A. Methodological issues in the assessment of quality of life in childhood asthma: what 
Review
educational research has to offer. In: Christie MJ, French DJ, editors.The assessment of quality of 
life in children with asthma. Chur: Harwood; 1994
Wiklund I, Erling A,Albertsson-Wikland K. Critical review of measurement issues in quality of life Review
assessment for children with growth problems. In: Drotar D, editor. Measuring health-related 
quality of life in children and adolescents. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum; 1998
Wray J, Radley-Smith R,Yacoub M. Effect of cardiac or heart-lung transplantation on the quality 
Development and 
of life of the paediatric patient. Qual Life Res 1992;1(1):41–6
cognitive function
Wright PS. Parents’ perceptions of their quality of life. J Pediatr Oncol Nurs 1993;10(4):139–45
Parent QoL
Yang TF,Wong TT, Kwan SY, Chang KP, Lee YC, Hsu TC. Quality of life and life satisfaction in 
Family QoL
families after a child has undergone corpus callostomy. Epilepsia 1996;37(1):76–80
Yu VY, Manlapaz ML,Tobin J, Carse EA, Charlton MP, Gore JR. Improving health status in extremely Clinical indicators
low birthweight children between two and five years. Early Hum Dev 1992;30(3):229–39
Zamberlan KE. Quality of life in school-age children following liver transplantation.
No psychometric data
Matern Child Nurs J 1992;20(3-4):167–229

----- Page 136 (ocr) -----


----- Page 137 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
127
The Child Heath and Illness Profile – Adolescent Edition
(CHIP-AE: Riley et al., 1998;107,108 Starfield et al., 1993,109 1995,110 1996111)
Description
A taxonomy of health profile-types for describing adolescent health
Age range
11 to 17 years
Number of domains
6 domains (20 subdomains); conceptually derived and supported by factor analysis
Name of domains
Discomfort, satisfaction, disorders, achievement, resilience, and risks
Number of items
107 items plus an additional 46 items that are specific to disease or injury
Rating scale
3 to 5 point Likert scales
Report
Self-report only
Time to complete
30 minutes (approx)
Example item:
SELF ESTEEM
Completely agree
Mostly agree
Agree a little
Do not agree
I have a lot of good qualities
Reliability
Test–retest: good stability (1 week) Pearson correlation greater than 0.60 for 
19 of the 20 subdomains (exception was ‘home safety and health’ subdomain in 
Resilience domain)
Internal consistency: Cronbach’s alphas exceeded 0.70 for all subdomains (except 
Academic Performance) in at least two out of four samples assessed
Validity
Criterion: parent–adolescent correspondence on the CHIP-AE was examined using 
chance-corrected measures of agreement on more observable measures of health
Convergent validity: demonstrated for the subdomains of Emotional Discomfort and 
Family Involvement by comparing them with known measures of these constructs
(correlations ranged between 0.59 and 0.68)
Hypothesised age, gender, and socio-economic differences were found in virtually 
every case, taken as evidence of construct validity of the CHIP-AE
Child Health Questionnaire
(CHQ: Landgraf & Abetz, 1997;19 Landgraf et al., 1998112)
Description
Developed to fulfil the same role as the SF-36, the CHQ is a generic health status measure
Age range
4 to 18 years
Number of domains
14
Name of domains
Physical functioning, role/social functioning (physical), role/social functioning 
(emotional), role/social  (behavioural), general health perceptions, bodily pain/
discomfort, general behaviour, mental health, self-esteem, parental impact (emotional),
parental impact (time), family functioning (family activities – family cohesion), 
global item, change in health
Number of items
Parent form PF-98, PF-50, PF-28; child form CF-87
Respondent
Parent or child 11 years and above (but not parallel versions)
Time to complete
20 minutes (approx)
Appendix 4
Summary of generic QoL measures identified 
for use with children

----- Page 138 (native) -----
Appendix 4
128
Example item:
“Your child’s physical activities”
During the past 4 weeks, had your child been limited in any of the following activities due to health problems?
Doing things that take a lot of energy, such as playing soccer or running.
Yes, limited
Yes, limited
Yes, limited
No, not
a lot
some
a little
limited
Reliability
Internal consistency: Cronbach’s alpha range between 0.62 and 0.91 (across 3 samples using
the CHQ-CF87)19
Validity
Concurrent: See Landraf et al., or further developments112
The Child Quality of Life questionnaire
(CQOL: Graham et al., 1997113)
Description
Multidimensional questionnaire, in which each domain is assessed using one item 
with multiple choice
Age range
9 to 15 years
Number of domains
15
Name of domains
Getting about and using hands, doing things for self, soiling or wetting, school, out of school
activities, friends, family relationships, discomfort due to bodily symptoms, worries,
depression, seeing, communication, eating, sleep, appearance
Number of items
15 (each with 3 levels)
Rating scale
7-point Likert scale
Report
Child and parent versions
Time to complete
10 to 15 minutes
Example item:
Possible problems 
include:
Clumsy; difficulty running; difficulty walking; unable to control movements; uses a 
wheel chair; confined to bed.
Over the past month how well have you been in these ways?
As well as any other
.....................................
Confined to bed 
child the same age
How upset have you been in these ways?
Extremely upset
.....................................
Not at all upset
How satisfied have you been by how you are in these ways?
Very satisfied
.....................................
Not at all satisfied
Reliability
Test–retest: Good 
Validity
Convergent: 0.63, p = 0.01 with Child Global Assessment Scale
Dartmouth Picture and word COOP charts for assessing adolescent health
(COOPS: Wasson et al., 1994,114 1995115)
Description
Based on the adult COOP charts. Items are presented on illustrated cards
Age range
Adolescent

----- Page 139 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
129
Number of domains
6
Name of domains
Physical fitness, emotional feelings, school work, social support, family communications,
health habits
Number of items
6
Rating scale
5-point Likert scale
Respondent
Adolescent
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item:
FAMILY COMMUNICATIONS
During the past month, how often did you talk about your problems, feelings or opinions with someone in 
your family?
1. All of the time
2. Most of the time
3. Some of the time
4. A little of the time
5. None of the time
Reliability
Test–retest: 0.77
Validity
Construct: Correlations between COOPS and longer measures was 0.62
Exeter Health-Related Quality of Life measure
(EHRQL: Eiser et al., 2000116 1999117)
Description
Based on self-discrepancy theory, it is computer administered with the aid of an interviewer
Age range
6 to 11
Number of domains
Single scale
Name of domains
Not applicable
Number of items
16 (reduced to 12 in a later version)
Rating scale
Two VAS (‘very much like me’ to ‘not very much like me’; ‘don’t want to be like that’ to
‘want to be like that’)
Respondent
Child
Time to complete
20 minutes
Example item:
“This is Joe doing P.E. Joe is very fit and healthy and likes doing P.E./games at school”.
“Are you like Joe?”
Not at all like me
...................................
Exactly like me
“Do you want to be like Joe?”
Don’t want to be like that
...........................................
Want to be like that
Reliability
Internal consistency: satisfactory (actual self = 0.62; ideal self = 0.69; discrepancy = 0.50)
Validity
Clinical: distinguished between children with asthma and healthy children
Functional Status II(R)
(FSIIR: Stein & Jessop, 199014)
Description
Developed for the measurement of individual child health status and characterising
populations. Modelled on the SIP
Age range
0 to 16 years
Number of domains
8
Name of domains
Communication, mobility, mood, energy, play, sleep, eating, and toileting
Number of items
Long (43-item) and short (14-item) version

----- Page 140 (native) -----
Appendix 4
130
Rating scale
Two 3-point Likert scale: ‘never or rarely’ ‘some of the time’ or ‘almost always’. 
Dysfunction is assessed by whether it is due ‘fully’, ‘partly’ or ‘not at all’ to a health problem
Respondent
Parent
Administration
Interviewer
Time to complete
Less than 30 minutes
Example items
Not given
Reliability
Internal consistency: All alpha’s > 0.80
Validity
Construct: total scales correlated with the criterion variable in every case
Generic Health Questionnaire
(Collier, 1997118)
Description
Children are asked to relate to the responses of children in a story. QoL is assessed by
measuring satisfaction with how life is compared to how one might expect it to be.  The sum
of the discrepancies provides the QoL score
Age range
6 to 14 years
Number of domains
5 (preliminary)
Name of domains
General affect, peer relationships, attainments, relationships with parents, and general
satisfaction
Number of items
25
Rating scale
5-point Likert scale
Respondent
Self-completed
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item:
Having fun – [the boys] find out that one boy always has fun, one often has fun, one sometimes has fun, another
hardly ever has fun and one boy never has fun. Tick the boy most like you.
Always
Often
Sometimes
Hardly ever
Never
Reliability
Internal consistency: Cronbach’s alpha 0.75
Test–retest: not reported
Validity
Concurrent: good (correlations were conducted between overall QoL and the general life
satisfaction question)
How Are You?
(HAY: Bruil, 1999119)
Description
Measures general as well as disease-specific aspects of QoL
Age range
7 to 13
Number of domains
6 generic; 2 chronic illness; 2 disease-specific
Name of domains
Generic section: physical activities, cognitive tasks, social activities, social problems, physical
complaints, treatment. Chronic illness section: concerns, feelings of inferiority.  Disease-
specific section: physical complaints, treatment tasks
Number of items
80
Rating scale
4-point Likert scale
Respondent
Child or proxy
Time to complete
30 minutes

----- Page 141 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
131
Example item:
Have you remembered what you learned at school during the past seven days?
No, never
Yes, sometimes
Yes, often
Yes, very often
Reliability
Internal consistency: Cronbach’s alphas in the child version ranged from 0.77 to 0.86, and in
the parent version 0.86 to 0.93 for the generic section
Validity
Construct: correlations with the child version of the HAY scales measuring ‘concerns’ and
‘feelings of inferiority’ and a revised version of the Child Attitude to Illness scale were 0.53
and 0.59
KINDL
(Ravens-Sieberer et al., 1999120)
Description
Generic measure assessing 4 domains of QoL
Age range
10 to 16 years
Number of domains
4
Name of domains
Psychological well-being, social relationships, physical functioning, and every-day life activities
Number of items
40
Rating scale
5-point Likert (1 = never to 5 = always)
Respondent
Child
Time to complete
12 minutes (approx)
Example item:
During the last week I enjoyed
Never
Rarely
Sometimes
Often
Always
being with my friends
Reliability
Internal consistency: each subscale reached a Cronbach’s alpha > 0.75, total scale 0.95
Test–retest: very good (0.80)
Validity
Convergent: very good
Clinical: poor (no differences between healthy and ill children)
Concurrent: moderate to strong correlations with SF-36 subscales and a life satisfaction measure
Nordic Quality of Life Questionnaire for Children
(Lindstrom et al.,1991,4 1993,121 1994122)
Description
Generic questionnaire intended to measure all aspects of children’s lives
Age range
2 to 18 years
Number of domains
4 life spheres, each with 5 dimensions
Name of domains
Life spheres: Global, External, Inter-personal, Personal each with the following domains
(Physical, Mental, Spiritual, Social, Economic)
Number of items
74
Rating scale
Not reported
Respondent
Child and parent
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item
Not given
Reliability
Under evaluation
Validity
Under evaluation

----- Page 142 (native) -----
Appendix 4
132
Pediatric Quality of Life Questionnaire
(PedsQL: Varni et al., 1999,123 (submitted)124)
Description
Derived from data collected for measurement  of QoL in children with cancer.  This measure
consists of a generic core and disease specific modules
Age range
2 to 18 years
Number of domains
3 
Name of domains
Physical functioning, psychological functioning, social functioning
Number of items
15 (core)
Rating scale
3-point Likert scale (for 5 to 7-year-olds); 5-point Likert scale for 8 to 18-year-olds
Report
Parent or child 5 years and above
Time to complete
5 to 10 minutes
Example item:
[child report ages 5–7] Social functioning
Not at all
Sometimes
A lot
It is hard for you to get along with other kids
Reliability
Internal consistency: Cronbach’s alpha ranged between 0.70 to 0.89 for self-report. Total scale
0.93 (child) and 0.93 (parent)
Validity
Construct: the psychological and social functioning scales correlated with standardised scales
of emotional distress, perceived competence, and social functioning
Clinical validity: cancer patients on- versus off-treatment (p < 0.004)
Perceived Illness Experience
(PIE: Eiser et al., 1999125 1995126)
Description
This scale was initially developed to assess perceived illness experience in young people with
cancer, but may be used with other groups of children/young people with chronic illness
Age range
8 to 18
Number of domains
8
Name of domains
Perceived impact on physical appearance, interference with activity, disclosure, integration in
school, peer rejection, parental behaviour, manipulation, and preoccupation with illness
Number of items
34
Rating scale
5-point likert scale 
Respondent
Self or parent completed
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item:
Because of my illness I am not always able to join in with what my friends are doing (1 = disagree to 5 = agree)
Reliability
Test–retest: acceptable (r = 0.92 for total score)
Internal consistency: adequate
Validity
Construct: total PIE scores correlated with established measures of physical and psychological
functioning
Quality of Life Profile – Adolescent Version
(QOLP-AV: Raphael et al., 1996127)
Description
Emerging concepts of adolescent health considered within a broadened QoL perspective
Age range
Adolescent (14 to 20 years)

----- Page 143 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
133
Number of domains
3
Name of domains
Being, Belonging, Becoming
Number of items
54
Rating scale
Importance and enjoyment ratings on a 5-point scale
Respondent
Self-complete
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item
Not given
Reliability
Internal consistency: all alphas > 0.70
Validity
Construct: QoL scores were correlated with self-esteem, life satisfaction, social support and 
life chances
TACQOL 
(Theunissen et al., 1998;129 Vogels et al., 1998130)
Description
Generic measure assessing 7 domains of QoL. Incorporates both health status and QoL
Age range
6 to 15 years
Number of domains
7
Name of domains
Pain and symptoms, basic motor functioning, autonomy, cognitive functioning, social
functioning, global positive emotional functioning, and global negative, emotional
functioning
Number of items
108
Rating scale
3 and 4 point Likert
Respondent
Parent and child (parallel forms)
Time to complete
10 minutes (parents)
Example item:
[Parents/carers of children aged 6 to 15] Dealings with other children and with you in recent weeks
40. Other children asked my child: to play with them
Yes
Too little 
Never
At that time my child felt:            Fine
Not so good
Quite bad
Bad
Reliability
Internal consistency: Cronbach’s alpha 0.71 to 0.89 for the parent version; 0.59 to 0.86 for the
child’s version
Validity
Convergent: completely confirmed using multi-trait multi-method analysis
Clinical: mostly confirmed according to authors predictions
Warwick Child Health and Morbidity Profile
(WCHMP: Spencer & Coe, 1996131)
Description
Presents a single summary of a child’s health and illness experience
Age range
0 to 5 years
Number of items
16
Number of domains
10
Name of domains
General health status, acute minor illness status, behavioural status, accident status, acute
significant illness status, hospital administration status, immunisation status, chronic illness
status, functional health status, and health-related quality of life
Rating scale
Four categories of response
Respondent
Parent
Administration
Interview
Time to complete
10 minutes

----- Page 144 (native) -----
Appendix 4
134
Reliability
Test–retest: kappa range 0.41 to > 0.80
Inter-rater: perfect on 6 domains; > 0.76 for remaining domains
Validity
Construct: validation against clinic records kappa values range from 0.70 to 0.85
The Multiattribute System for Classifying Health Status:
i) Heath Utilities Index Mark 2 (HUI2: Feeny et al., 199278)
Description
This multi-attribute system focuses on function rather than performance. The HUI system
permits the integration of mortality and morbidity, allows broad comparisons, and facilitates
the conduct of cost–utility analysis. The levels of each attribute are meant to be interpreted
as developmentally appropriate for age. There are three systems (HUI Mark 1, 2 and 3). The
HUI1 is rarely used now
Age range
2 to 18 years
Number of domains
7 
Name of domains
Sensation, emotion, self-care, mobility, cognition, pain, fertility
Rating scale
3 to 5 levels of functioning
Respondent
Clinician, parent, (self-complete > 8 years)
Time to complete
A few minutes
Example item:
HUI Mark 2: Cognition domain
1. Learns and remembers school work normally for age
2. Learns and remembers school work more slowly than classmates as judged by parents and/or teachers
3. Learns and remembers very slowly and usually requires special educational assistance
4. Unable to learn and remember
Reliability
Test–retest: intra-class correlation = 0.77
Internal consistency: not relevant
Validity
Clinical: discriminates on (n = 20) and off therapy (n = 8) 
Also brain tumours compared with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL), Wilms 
and neuroblastoma78
Survivors of ALL lower scores than normal population355
ii) Health Utilities Index Mark 3 (HUI3: Boyle et al., 1995132)
Description
A utility-based scoring system is being developed for the HUI3. The HUI2 and HUI3 provide
complementary sets of information. Together the two systems include 10 dimensions of
health status
Age range
Birth to old age
Number of domains
8
Name of domains
Vision, hearing, speech, ambulation, dexterity, emotion, cognition and pain/discomfort
Number of items
8
Rating scale
Each attribute consists of 5 or 6 levels of functioning
Respondent
Parent report for children; self-report for adults
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item:
Cognition
1. Able to remember most things, think clearly and solve day to day problems
2. Able to remember most things, but has a little difficulty when trying to think and solve day to day problems
3. Somewhat forgetful, but able to think clearly and solve day to day problems
4. Somewhat forgetful, and has a little difficulty when trying to thing or solve day to day problems.
5. Very forgetful, and has great difficulty when trying to think or solve day to day problems
6. Unable to remember anything at all, and unable to think or solve day to day problems

----- Page 145 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
135
Reliability
Test–retest: estimates based on kappa ranged from 0.137 (speech) to 0.728 (vision)
Validity
See Feeny et al.349
16 Dimensions 
(16D: Apajasalo et al., 1996133)
Description
Derived from the 15D adult measure.170 The 16D consists of 16 multiple choice questions
each representing one health-related dimension.  Importance weights and within-dimension
desirability can also be calculated
Age range
12 to 15 years
Number of domains
16
Name of domains
Mobility, vision, hearing, breathing, sleeping, eating, elimination, speech, mental function,
discomfort and symptoms, school and hobbies, friends, physical appearance, depression,
distress, and vitality
Number of items
16
Rating scale
Select the level of functioning on a scale of 1 to 5
Respondent
Self-completed only 
Time to complete
5 to 10 minutes
Example item:
The levels of the ‘friends’ dimension
1. My state of health has no influence on my getting friends or being with friends
2. My state of health makes getting friends or being with friends a little difficult
3. My state of health makes getting friends or being with friends quite difficult
4. My state of health makes getting friends or being with friends almost impossible
5. My state of health makes getting friends or being with friends totally impossible
Reliability
Test–retest: poor
Validity
Clinical: discriminated between patients waiting an organ transplant and controls
17 Dimensions
(17D: Apajasalo et al., 1996134)
Description
Based on the 15D adult version and the 16D adolescent version (see above)
Age range
8 to 11 years
Number of domains
17
Name of domains
Mobility, vision, hearing, speech, breathing, sleeping, eating, elimination, discomfort and
symptoms, school and hobbies, friends, physical appearance, depression, anxiety, vitality,
ability to concentrate, and learning ability and memory
Number of items
17
Rating scale 
Select the level of functioning on a scale of 1–5
Respondent
Self-completed (interviewer administered)
Time to complete
20 to 30 minutes
Example item:
The levels of the ‘friends’ dimension
Does your state of health make it more difficult for you to get friends or to be with friends?
1. Not at all
2. A little
3. Quite a lot
4. My state of of health makes getting friends or being with friends almost impossible
5. My state of health makes getting or being with friends totally impossible

----- Page 146 (native) -----
Appendix 4
136
Reliability
Test–retest: poor
Validity
Clinical: patient scores were significantly lower than that of the controls.  In addition the 17D
discriminated between transplant survivors and  children with genetic skeletal dysplasias.
Quality of Well-Being scale
(QWB: Bradlyn et al., 1993;135 Kaplan, 1989279)
Description
The QWB enables the computation of QALYs. Children are classified according to objective
levels of functioning
Age range
4 to 16 years
Number of domains
3 domains and a list of 27 symptom-problem complexes
Name of domains
Physical functioning, social/role functioning and mobility
Number of items
3 and 27 symptom complexes
Rating scale
Level of functioning
Respondent
Interviewer administered to parent or adolescent
Time to complete
15 to 20 minutes
Example item:
Mobility scale
•  No limitations for health reasons
•  Did not ride in a car, or had more help than usual to use public transportation than usual, for age
•  In hospital, health related
Reliability
Test–retest: not reported for children
Internal consistency: not reported for children
Validity
Clinical validity: distinguishes children with cancer differing in ‘treatment toxicity’135

----- Page 147 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
137
Asthma
About My Asthma
(AMA: Mishoe et al., 1998136)
Description
The AMA assesses stressors affecting QoL in children with asthma. It was developed by a
multidisciplinary panel of experts
Age range
6 to 12 years
Number of domains
Total score only
Name of domains
Total score only
Number of items
44
Time to complete
15 to 20 minutes
Scale
4-point Likert scales (1 = child never thinks about the stressor; 4 = child thinks about the
stressor all the time)
Time frame
None given
Respondent
Child
Administration
Interviewer
Example item:
As a result of my asthma, I think about:
7. Not being able to do what I want to do in life          1          2          3          4
(1 = Never 2 = Once in a while 3 = Most of the time 4 = All the time)
Reliability
Not reported
Validity
Internal consistency: Cronbach’s alpha = 0.93
Concurrent: moderate, negative correlation between AMA total score and PAQLQ emotional
function domain (r = –0.41, p < 0.05) and PAQLQ overall score (r = –0.51, p < 0.05)
Childhood Asthma Questionnaires
(CAQ: Christie et al., 1993;138 French et al., 1994139)
Description
Examines children’s perceptions of both active and passive aspects of living with asthma,
together with their perceptions of its severity and any associated distress. There are three 
age-specific versions
Age range
4 to 7 years (CAQ A); 8 to 11 years (CAQ B); 12 to 16 years (CAQ C)
Number of domains
CAQ A:2; CAQ B: 4; CAQ C: 5
Name of domains
CAQ A: QoL, distress; CAQ B: active QoL, passive QoL, distress, severity; CAQ C: active QoL,
teenage QoL, distress, severity, reactivity (derived from Principle axis factor analysis)
Number of items
CAQ A: 14; CAQ B: 22; CAQ C: 31
Rating scale
Smiley faces: CAQ A: 4 point; CAQ B: 4 point; CAQ C: 5 point
Respondent
Child completed
Time to complete
10–15 minutes
Example item:
11a Do you wheeze (get a whistling noise in your chest)?
Colour one box
Yes                                   No
11b. Which face is you when you wheeze? Colour one face
Appendix 5
Disease-specific measures of QoL

----- Page 148 (native) -----
Appendix 5
138
Reliability
Internal consistency: CAQ B subscales had Cronbach alpha values of 0.78 (Active QoL), 0.57
(Passive QoL), 0.84 (Severity), 0.67 (Distress). Not reported for other versions
Test–retest: good
Validity
Clinical: distinguishes between asthmatic and non-asthmatic children
Pediatric Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire
(PAQLQ: Juniper et al., 1996140)
Development
The PAQLQ was developed to reflect the areas of function that are important to children
with asthma. In addition to standardised questions, this measure includes three items
concerning activities/hobbies that are individualised
Age range
7 to 17 years
Number of domains
3
Name of domains
Activity limitations, symptoms, and emotional function
Number of items
23
Rating scale
7-point Likert scale (1 maximum impairment – 7 no impairment)
Respondent
Child
Time to complete
10 to 15 minutes
Example item:
How much did asthma make you feel FRUSTRATED during the past week?
Response options – [Green Card]
1. All the time
2. Most of the time
3. A bit of the time
4. Some of the time
5. A little of the time
6. Hardly any of the time
7. None of the Time
Reliability
Test–retest: ICC = 0.95 for stable patients
Validity
Construct: significant correlations between domains and clinical measures (FEV1. PEFR, B-
agonist use) and domains and feeling thermometer scores
Cancer
Behavioural Affective and Somatic Experiences Scale
(BASES: Phipps et al., 1994,141 1999142)
Description
A biopsychosocial model forms the theoretical basis of this measure. Items were generated as
a result of a search through the literature and from a group of BMT nurses
Age range
2 to 20 years
Number of domains
5
Name of domains
Somatic distress, compliance, mood disturbance, quality of interactions, and activity
Number of items
BASES-Parent 38, Nurse 38, Child 14
Rating scale
5-point Likert
Respondent
3 versions suitable for child, parent and nurse report
Time to complete
5 to 10 minutes (parent and nurse version); 2 to 5 minutes (child version)
Example item:
BASES – PATIENT REPORT
not at all 
a little bit 
somewhat 
quite a bit 
very much
Feeling scared or worried
1
2
3
4
5

----- Page 149 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
139
Reliability
Internal consistency: nurse report – Cronbach’s alphas for the subscales ranged from 
0.74 to 0.90141
Child report – total scale was 0.77142
Inter-rater: using paired nurse observations was excellent (median r = 0.866). Parent–nurse
comparisons median r = 0.56 (range 0.11 to 0.93)
Validity
Clinical: parent and nurse reports discriminated between patients undergoing allogeneic
bone marrow transplantation (BMT) versus autologous BMT
Detects differences in BMT outcomes by age, but not gender
The Miami Pediatric Quality of Life Questionnaire
(MPQOLQ: Armstrong et al., 199994)
Description
Items were derived from interviews with families of children (aged 1 to 18) undergoing or
within one year of completed therapy
Age range
1 to 18 years
Number of domains
3 (factors)
Name of domains
Social competence, emotional stability, and self-competence (derived from factor analysis)
Number of items
56
Rating scale
5-point Likert
Report
Parent (child version under development)
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item:
Sometimes has problems getting along with others his/her same age
Reliability
Test–retest: (approx 1 month) acceptable for total QoL index (r = 0.94) and for self-
competence (r = 0.82); and moderate for social competence (r = 0.43) and emotional
stability (r = 0.38)
Internal consistency: Cronbach’s alpha ranged from 0.76 to 0.88 for the subscales and was 0.89
for the overall scale. Internal consistency of all individual items exceeded the criteria of
Cronbach’s alpha > 0.70
Validity
Clinical: there were significant differences between children with brain tumours versus
leukaemia/lymphomas on social competence and self-competence, but not on the emotional
stability scale. Also discriminated between children who had received cranial radiation versus
no cranial radiation
Pediatric Cancer Quality of Life Inventory
(PCQL-32: Varni et al., 1998143,144) 
Description
The PCQL is based on a definition of QoL as “the impact of disease and treatment on an
individual’s physical, social, and psychological and cognitive functioning”. Items were
generated from a search of the literature and open-ended interviews with patients and their
families and discussions with healthcare professionals
Age range
8 to18 
Number of domains
5 
Name of domains
Physical functioning, disease-related and treatment symptoms, psychological functioning,
social functioning, cognitive functioning
Number of items
32
Rating scale
4-point Likert scale (“never a problem” = 0 to “always a problem” = 3)
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item:
Psychological functioning
Never 
Sometimes 
Often 
Always
I feel afraid
0
1
2
3

----- Page 150 (native) -----
Appendix 5
140
Reliability
Internal consistency: 0.91 patient form and 0.92 for the parent form
Validity
Construct: pattern of correlations between the PCQL-32 and the parent and patient-report
standardised measures support the multidimensional conceptualisation of QoL
Clinical: significant differences between patients on and off treatment on the total scale, as
well as for the disease/treatment symptoms and physical functioning scales for both patient
and parent report
Pediatric Oncology Quality of Life Scale
(POQOL:Goodwin et al., 1994145)
Description
Items were generated by health professionals, parents of cancer patients, and patients. The
POQOL provides a total score and 3 factor scores
Age range
Preschool to adolescence (5 to 17 years)
Number of domains
3 
Name of domains
Physical functioning and restriction from normal activity (Factor 1), emotional distress
(Factor 2), response to active medical treatment (Factor 3) (derived from factor analysis)
Number of items
21
Rating scale
7-point Likert scale (1 = Never to 7 = Very frequently)
Respondent
Parent
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item:
IN THE PAST TWO WEEKS
never          rarely
sometimes          often          very freq.
8. My child has been embarrassed
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
about physical changes (hair loss,
weight change etc.)
Reliability
Internal consistency: good for total scale (Cronbach’s alpha = 0.85)and three subscales 
(0.87, 0.79, 0.68)
Inter-rater: mother-father (15 pairs) reliability for total scale r = 0.87, and subscales r = 0.91,
0.87, 0.75
Validity
Concurrent: subscale scores correlate as expected with PPSC, (0.60)
CBCL (0.67), but not with the Reynolds Adolescent Depression Scale (0.60; p > 0.05)
Clinical: total score and Factors 1 and 3 discriminated between two groups differing on time
since diagnosis
Play Performance Scale for Children
(PPSC: Lansky et al., 1985,11 198712)
Description
Based on the adult scale of global functional status used to assess QoL in adult cancer
patients.172 The PPSC allows for rapid assessment of performance in childhood
Age range
6 months to 16 years
Number of domains
1
Name of domains
Performance status (play)
Number of items
1
Rating scale
11-point scale: fully active, normal (100) to unresponsive (0)
Respondent
Parent
Time to complete
Not reported 
Example item:
100
fully active, normal
90
minor restrictions in physically strenuous activity
80
active, but tires more quickly
70 
both greater restriction of, and less time spent in active play
60 
up and around, but minimal active play; keeps busier with quieter activities

----- Page 151 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
141
50 
gets dressed, but lies around much of the day; no active play; able to participate in all quiet play and activities
40 
mostly in bed; participates in quiet activities
30
in bed; needs assistance even for quiet play
20 
often sleeping; play entirely limited to very passive activities
10 
no play; does not get out of bed
0
unresponsive
Reliability
Inter-rater: Pearson correlation coefficient between mothers and fathers reports (r = 0.71;
Lansky et al., 1987)
Validity
Construct: correlations between parent rating and nurses’ global rating (r = 0.75); and
between parent and clinician’s global rating (r = 0.92)
Clinical: significant differences between inpatients and normal children, and inpatients and
outpatients (Lansky et al., 1987)
Epilepsy
Impact of Child Illness Scale
(Hoare & Russell, 1995146)
Description
Measures the impact of epilepsy on the child and family. Parents are asked to answer each
question in terms of frequency and importance
Age range
6 to 17 years
Number of domains
4
Name of domains
Impact of epilepsy and its treatment, impact on child’s development and adjustment, impact
on parents, and impact on the family
Number of items
30
Rating scale
3-point Likert to rate frequency and importance
Report
Parent
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item:
6. My child is more moody because of his illness    0      1      2      A      B      C
(The first part refers to how frequently the problem occurs: never or rarely true = 0; sometimes true = 1; often or
really true = 2. The second part refers to how much concern it causes: A = a lot of concern; B = a bit of concern; 
and C = not much concern)
Reliability
Not reported
Validity
Only face validity reported
Quality of Life in Epilepsy – Adolescent Version
(QOLIE-AD-48: Cramer et al., 1999149)
Description
Items were derived from several sources, including adolescents themselves. The measure
consists of items that tap generic and epilepsy-specific issues
Age range
11 to 17 years
Number of domains
8
Name of domains
Epilepsy impact, memory/concentration, attitudes, physical function, stigma, social support,
school behaviour, and health perceptions
Number of items
48
Rating scale
5-point Likert scale
Respondent
Adolescent
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item:

----- Page 152 (native) -----
Appendix 5
142
In the past 4 weeks, how often did you:
29. Feel embarrassed or “different” because you had to take medications?
(Very often = 1, Often = 2; Sometimes = 3; Not often = 4; Never = 5)
Reliability
Internal consistency: satisfactory (all subscales > 0.70 except for health perceptions)
Test–retest: 0.83 for the total score
Validity
Construct: the total score correlated moderately to strongly with self-esteem and self-efficacy
scales
Arthritis
The Juvenile Arthritis Quality of Life Questionnaire
(JAQLQ: Duffy et al., 1997150)
Description
The JAQLQ measures physical and psychosocial function and an array of general symptoms
Age range
2 to 18
Number of domains
4
Name of domains
Gross motor function, fine motor function, psychosocial function, and general symptoms
Number of items
74
Rating scale
7-point Likert scale
Respondent
Child report (9 years and above)
Time to complete
5 minutes
Example item:
How often have you/your child, over the past 2 weeks, had difficulty with the following activities as a
result of arthritis or its treatment? (e.g. getting out of bed)
0 = does not apply to 7 = all of the time
Reliability
Not reported
Validity
Construct: moderate correlations between JAQLQ and active joint count; stronger correlations
were observed with measures of pain
Responsiveness: discriminated among patients based on physician global assessment 
of change
Crohn’s disease
Quality of Life in Children with Crohn’s Disease
(Rabbett et al., 1996151)
Description
Multidimensional measure of QoL. Requires further work before it can be widely used
Age range
8 to 17
Number of domains
6
Name of domains
Disease and its treatment, social, emotional, family, education, and future aspects
Number of items
88
Rating scale
Not reported
Report
Child report
Administration
Interviewer
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item
Not given
Reliability
Not reported
Validity
Parents views of the severity of symptoms significantly correlated with their children’s views
regarding rectal bleeding, poor growth, lack of energy and poor appetite

----- Page 153 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
143
Dermatology
Children’s Dermatology Life Quality Index
(CDLQI: Lewis-Jones & Finlay, 1995152)
Description
Based on the adult Dermatology Life Quality Index,173 the CDLQI was designed to be of
practical use within a busy clinic
Age range
3 to 16 years
Number of domains
6
Name of domains
Symptoms and feelings, leisure, school holidays, personal relationships, sleep and treatment
Number of items
10
Rating scale
4-point Likert (0 = not at all; 3 = very much)
Report
Self report (parental help with younger children)
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item:
1. Over the last week, how embarrassed or self conscious,     Very much      Quite a lot      Only a little      Not at all
or upset or sad have you been because of your skin?
Reliability
Test–retest: 0.86
Validity
Not assessed
Diabetes
Diabetes Quality of Life for Youths
(DQOL-Y: Ingersoll & Marrero, 1991153)
Description
The DQOL was developed to assess perceptions of the impact of an intensified regimen on
general satisfaction with life and concerns over social and vocational issues related to
diabetes. The version for youths was derived from the DQOL for adults
Age range
11 to 18 years
Number of domains
3 (scales)
Name of domains
Disease impact, disease-related worries, and satisfaction with life
Number of items
52
Rating scale
5-point Likert
Report
Self
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item:
8. How often do you feel good about yourself?           1               2                3                4                 5
(1 = never; 2 = very seldom; 3 = sometimes; 4 = often; 5 = all the time)
Reliability
Internal consistency: Cronbach’s alpha = 0.85
Test–retest: not reported
Validity
Not reported
Headache
Quality of Life Headache in Youth
(QLH-Y: Langeveld et al., 1997,154 1999155)
Description
Derived from existing measurement scales and interviews with migraine patients. This
measure was developed for adolescents with migraine or severe headache. Many of the
subscales have a generic character, which enables comparisons with other groups
Age range
12 to 18 years

----- Page 154 (native) -----
Appendix 5
144
Number of domains
4
Name of domains
Physical functioning, functional status, psychological functioning, and social functioning
Number of items
71
Rating scale
4-point Likert scale and visual analogue (100 mm) to cover the QoL subdomains: ‘completely
satisfied’ to ‘completely dissatisfied’
Report
Parent or adolescent 
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item:
My headache bothered me while doing my homework
Rarely/never = 0, sometimes = 1, often = 2, very often = 3
Reliability
Test–retest: acceptable: 0.60 (one week interval); 0.47 (6 month interval)
Internal consistency: satisfactory Cronbach’s alpha > 0.70
Validity
Clinical: all subscales, except two of the three social functioning subscales discriminated
between the headache group and the control group
Neuromuscular disorders
Life Satisfaction Index for Adolescents
(LSIA: Reid & Renwick, 1994156)
Description
The LSIA is a multidimensional measure of life satisfaction for adolescents with
neuromuscular disorders
Age range
12 to 19 years
Number of domains
5
Name of domains
General well being, interpersonal relationships, personal development, personal fulfilment,
leisure and recreation
Number of items
35
Rating scale
5-point rating scale (1 = strongly agree to 5 = strongly disagree)
Respondent
Child
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item:
I am satisfied with the chances I have to try new things
Strongly disagree      Disagree      Neither agree nor disagree      Agree      Strongly agree      Not applicable
Reliability
Internal consistency: Cronbach’s alpha = 0.52 to 0.88 for the 5 domains
Validity
Construct: correlated significantly with the a measure of self-esteem (r = –0.078)
Otitis media
Quality of Life for Children with Otitis Media
(OM-6: Rosenfeld et al., 1997157)
Development
The OM-6 is brief and easy to administer multidimensional measure. Content was based on
interviews with caregivers and experts in the area
Age range
6 months to 12 years
Number of domains
6
Name of domains
Physical suffering, hearing loss, speech impairment, emotional distress, activity limitations,
caregiver concerns
Number of items
6
Rating scale
7-point Likert (and 10-point overall QoL scale)
Respondent
Parent
Time to complete
30 seconds – 3 minutes

----- Page 155 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
145
Example item:
Emotional distress: Irritable, frustrated, sad, restless, poor appetite. How much of a problem for your child during 
the past 4 weeks as a result of ear infections or fluid?
[ ] Not present/no problem   [ ] Hardly a problem at all   [ ] Somewhat of a problem   [ ] Moderate problem   
[ ] Quite a bit of a problem   [ ] Very much a problem   [ ] Extreme problem
Reliability
Internal consistency: not reported
Test–retest: good (>0.70 for all items)
Validity
Construct: good correlation between the survey score and a global ear-related QoL rating
Sensitivity: large sensitivity to clinical change for all OM-6 items after bilateral insertion of
tympanostomy tubes
Rhinoconjunctivitis
Paediatric Rhinoconjunctivitis Quality of Life Questionnaire
(PRQLQ: Juniper et al., 1994158)
Description
Based on the adult rhinoconjunctivitis QoL Questionnaire. There are two versions: one for
children and one for adolescents. It is interviewer administered
Age range
Child version: 6 to 12 years; adolescent version: 12 to 17 years
Number of domains
Child version: 5; adolescent version: 6
Name of domains
Child version: nose symptoms, eye symptoms, practical problems, other symptoms, and
activity limitations
Adolescent version: Practical problems, non-hay fever symptoms, nose symptoms, eye
symptoms, patient specific activities, and emotions
Number of items
Child: 23; adolescent: 25
Rating scale
7-point Likert scale
Report
Parent or adolescent
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item:
(Child version)
How often did your allergies make you feel IRRITABLE (cranky/grouchy) during the past week?
Green response card
1. All the time
2. Most of the time
3. Quite often
4. Some of the time
5. Once in a while
6. Hardly any of the time
7. None of the time
Reliability
Internal: ICC = 0.93
Test–retest: the PRQLQ picked up no change in QoL in those with stable rhinoconjunctivitis,
but did detect change in those children whose rhinoconjunctivitis changed between visits177
Validity
The Pearson correlation coefficients between the QoL domains and diary symptom scores
were very close to those predicted158
QoL scores improved with treatment158

----- Page 156 (native) -----
Appendix 5
146
Short stature
Quality of Life in Children with Short Stature
(Pilpel et al., 1995159)
Description
Developed to assess QoL in short stature children who are on growth hormone therapy
(GHT) with or without underlying disease, and short stature children who are not on GHT
Age range
8 to 18
Number of domains
5
Name of domains
Academic achievement level, leisure activities, physical self esteem, emotional self esteem,
relationships with peers and family members
Number of items
45
Rating scale
4-point Likert scale
Report
Child
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item:
Are you a good student?
Response on a scale from 1 (very good student) to 4 (very bad student)
Reliability
Not reported
Validity
Not reported
Spina bifida
Quality of Life in Spina Bifida Questionnaire
(Parkin et al., 1997160)
Description
Developed from the viewpoint of the children and their parents
Age range
5 to 12 and 13 to 20
Number of domains
10
Name of domains
Social, emotional, intellectual, financial, medical, independence, environmental, physical,
recreational, and vocational
Number of items
44 items (5–12 years); 47 items (13–20 years)
Rating scale
5-point Likert
Report
5 to 12, parent 13 to 20, self-report
Time to complete
Not reported
Example item:
How much do you feel your child:
Has the opportunity to do everything the other children do at school          1          2           3          4          5
Reliability
Test–retest: (2 weeks) ICC 0.78 (child) 0.96 (adolescent)
Internal consistency: Cronbach’s alpha demonstrated good internal consistency for the 
5–12-year-olds (0.93) and for the 13–20-year-olds (0.94)
Validity
Construct validity: for children HRQOL and global question of child’s well-being was r = 0.63
(p = 0.0001). For the 13 to 20 year age group the correlation between HRQOL and the
global question was r = 0.37 (p = 0.0001)

----- Page 157 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
147
Spine deformities
Quality of Life Profile for Spine Deformities
(QLPSD: Climent et al., 1995161)
Description
The QLPSD conceptualises QoL in terms of psychosocial dimensions, pain and function. It
was based, in part, on interviews with patients
Age range
10 to 20 years
Number of domains
5
Name of domains
Psychosocial functioning, sleep disturbances, body image, back flexibility, and back pain
Number of items
21
Rating scale
5-point Likert (‘strongly agree’ to ‘strongly disagree’; ‘very satisfied’ to ‘very dissatisfied’)
Report
Self
Time to complete
10 minutes (average)
Example item:
I worry a lot that my back will affect my life in the future
Reliability
Test–retest: 0.91 (10 days)
Internal consistency: 0.88 (0.70 to 0.84 for subscales)
Validity
Varimax loadings for the 5 components of the QLPSD revealed a unifactorial domain of QoL
(variance = 51.6%)

----- Page 158 (ocr) -----


----- Page 159 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
155
Methodology Group
continued
Current and past membership details of all HTA ‘committees’ are available from the HTA website (see inside front cover for details)
Methodology Programme
Director
Professor Richard Lilford
Director of Research 
and Development
NHS Executive – West
Midlands, Birmingham
Chair
Professor Martin Buxton
Director, Health Economics
Research Group
Brunel University, Uxbridge
Professor Douglas Altman
Professor of Statistics 
in Medicine
University of Oxford
Dr David Armstrong
Reader in Sociology as 
Applied to Medicine
King’s College, London
Professor Nicholas Black
Professor of 
Health Services Research
London School of Hygiene 
& Tropical Medicine
Professor Ann Bowling
Professor of 
Health Services Research
University College London
Medical School
Professor David Chadwick
Professor of Neurology
The Walton Centre for
Neurology & Neurosurgery
Liverpool
Dr Mike Clarke
Associate Director (Research)
UK Cochrane Centre, Oxford
Professor Paul Dieppe
Director, MRC Health Services
Research Centre
University of Bristol
Professor Michael Drummond
Director, Centre for 
Health Economics
University of York
Dr Vikki Entwistle
Senior Research Fellow, 
Health Services Research Unit
University of Aberdeen
Professor Ewan B Ferlie
Professor of Public Services
Management
Imperial College, London
Professor Ray Fitzpatrick
Professor of Public Health 
& Primary Care
University of Oxford
Dr Naomi Fulop
Deputy Director, 
Service Delivery & 
Organisation Programme
London School of Hygiene 
& Tropical Medicine
Mrs Jenny Griffin
Head, Policy Research
Programme
Department of Health 
London
Professor Jeremy Grimshaw
Programme Director
Health Services Research Unit
University of Aberdeen
Professor Stephen Harrison
Professor of Social Policy
University of Manchester
Mr John Henderson
Economic Advisor
Department of Health, London
Professor Theresa Marteau
Director, Psychology &
Genetics Research Group
Guy’s, King’s & St Thomas’s
School of Medicine, London
Dr Henry McQuay
Clinical Reader in Pain Relief
University of Oxford
Dr Nick Payne
Consultant Senior Lecturer 
in Public Health Medicine
ScHARR
University of Sheffield
Professor Joy Townsend
Director, Centre for Research
in Primary & Community Care
University of Hertfordshire
Professor Kent Woods
Director, NHS HTA
Programme, & Professor 
of Therapeutics
University of Leicester
Members

----- Page 160 (native) -----
156
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
Programme Director
Professor Kent Woods
Director, NHS HTA
Programme, &
Professor of Therapeutics
University of Leicester
Chair
Professor Shah Ebrahim
Professor of Epidemiology 
of Ageing
University of Bristol
Deputy Chair
Professor Jon Nicholl
Director, Medical Care
Research Unit
University of Sheffield
Professor Douglas Altman
Director, ICRF Medical
Statistics Group
University of Oxford
Professor John Bond
Director, Centre for Health 
Services Research
University of Newcastle-
upon-Tyne
Ms Christine Clark
Freelance Medical Writer
Bury, Lancs
Professor Martin Eccles
Professor of 
Clinical Effectiveness
University of Newcastle-
upon-Tyne
Dr Andrew Farmer
General Practitioner & 
NHS R&D 
Clinical Scientist
Institute of Health Sciences
University of Oxford
Professor Adrian Grant
Director, Health Services
Research Unit
University of Aberdeen
Dr Alastair Gray
Director, Health Economics 
Research Centre
Institute of Health Sciences
University of Oxford
Professor Mark Haggard
Director, MRC Institute 
of Hearing Research
University of Nottingham
Professor Jenny Hewison
Senior Lecturer
School of Psychology
University of Leeds
Professor Alison Kitson
Director, Royal College of
Nursing Institute, London
Dr Donna Lamping
Head, Health Services
Research Unit
London School of Hygiene 
& Tropical Medicine
Professor David Neal
Professor of Surgery
University of Newcastle-
upon-Tyne
Professor Gillian Parker
Nuffield Professor of
Community Care
University of Leicester
Dr Tim Peters
Reader in Medical Statistics
University of Bristol
Professor Martin Severs
Professor in Elderly 
Health Care
University of Portsmouth
Dr Sarah Stewart-Brown
Director, Health Services
Research Unit
University of Oxford
Professor Ala Szczepura
Director, Centre for Health
Services Studies
University of Warwick
Dr Gillian Vivian
Consultant in Nuclear
Medicine & Radiology
Royal Cornwall Hospitals Trust
Truro
Professor Graham Watt
Department of 
General Practice
University of Glasgow
Dr Jeremy Wyatt
Senior Fellow
Health Knowledge
Management Centre
University College London
Members
HTA Commissioning Board
Current and past membership details of all HTA ‘committees’ are available from the HTA website (see inside front cover for details)

----- Page 161 (ocr) -----


----- Page 162 (native) -----
Health Technology Assessment 2001; Vol. 5: No. 4
Quality-of-life measures in chronic diseases of childhood
Copies of this report can be obtained from:
The National Coordinating Centre for Health Technology Assessment,
Mailpoint 728, Boldrewood,
University of Southampton,
Southampton, SO16 7PX, UK.
Fax: +44 (0) 23 8059 5639     Email: hta@soton.ac.uk
http://www.ncchta.org
ISSN 1366-5278
Feedback
The HTA programme and the authors would like to know 
your views about this report.
The Correspondence Page on the HTA website
(http://www.ncchta.org) is a convenient way to publish 
your comments. If you prefer, you can send your comments 
to the address below, telling us whether you would like 
us to transfer them to the website.
We look forward to hearing from you.