

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Review Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-017-0054-4
1Laboratory for Social and Neural Systems Research (SNS-Lab), Department of Economics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. 2Leibniz Research 
Center for Working Environment and Human Factors, Department of Psychology and Neurosciences, TU Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany. 3Department of 
Neurology, University Medical Hospital Bergmannsheil, Bochum, Germany. *e-mail: rafael.polania@econ.uzh.ch; christian.ruff@econ.uzh.ch
S
ome of the main goals of neuroscience are to understand how 
the brain controls cognition, emotion and behavior. With the 
advent of neuroimaging technologies in the last century, it 
became possible to study the structural and functional brain cor-
relates of behavior and underlying cognitive functions. Establishing 
these correlations, at various levels of description (cells, circuits 
and system), continues to teach us much about brain–behavior 
relationships. However, there is increasing awareness that correla-
tive links alone cannot establish that a measured brain process is 
indeed necessary or sufficient for a behavior or mental process to 
occur. This limitation may be particularly relevant in applied set-
tings, where the possible diagnostic and therapeutic usefulness of a 
neural measure depends on whether it reflects mechanisms that are 
causally involved in pathological disruption and treatment-induced 
improvements of behavior. Progress on these questions therefore 
requires methods that allow researchers to directly assess how 
experimentally induced changes in neural processes affect behavior 
and the underlying mental operations.
In animal models, such assessments are usually performed with 
invasive methods such as pharmacological interventions1, revers-
ible cooling deactivation2, targeted microstimulation3 and, more 
recently, optogenetics4. These approaches can provide detailed 
demonstrations of brain–function relations with high degrees of 
spatial precision, encompassing even cell-type-specific effects. 
Unfortunately, many of these methods cannot be applied in a rou-
tine fashion in healthy humans. Most human studies on the cau-
sality of brain–behavior relationships therefore employ purely 
non-invasive brain stimulation techniques. These methods origi-
nated over 30 years ago, when Merton and Morton demonstrated 
that running brief electrical currents through the human scalp can 
activate the underlying cortex and thereby affect behaviors corre-
sponding to the activated brain areas5. This demonstration was a 
breakthrough, as it established that human brain function can be 
electrically influenced without opening the skull. The protocol did 
not catch on widely as it was painful to the participants (currents 
with intensities of ~20 A were applied through the scalp5), but it 
paved the way for the development of more comfortable methods of 
transcranial brain stimulation. Since then, two such methods have 
emerged as mainstays of NIBS in both basic and clinical contexts: 
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), which is based on prin-
ciples of electromagnetism, and transcranial electrical stimulation 
(tES), which harnesses weak, painless electrical currents applied to 
the scalp (current intensities of ~1–2 mA).
The number of publications using these methods (and varia-
tions thereof) is growing exponentially (Fig. 1b), perhaps reflect-
ing the field’s recognition that solid knowledge of brain–behavior 
relations needs converging evidence from neuroimaging and causal 
demonstrations. However, the growing popularity of these methods 
is accompanied by increasingly critical debates about their putative 
physiological mechanisms of action, proper application, and poten-
tial for clinical or applied use. These debates are important, since 
they indicate that NIBS methods may have come of age enough to 
warrant more detailed investigations of their potential and possible 
limitations. At the same time, some of these debates may reflect a 
lack of widely accepted standards for guiding, evaluating, and inter-
preting methodological aspects of NIBS studies on brain–behavior 
relations (guidelines mainly exist for the physiologically safe appli-
cation of these methods6,7).
In this review article, we outline the possibilities and limitations 
of NIBS methods for investigations of brain–behavior relation-
ships. In the first part, we present a concise overview of the spatio-
temporal properties of NIBS effects and the implications of these 
properties for the use of these methods. In the second part, we will 
summarize and discuss recent debates about the use of NIBS meth-
ods and provide recommendations for how these debates may be 
addressed productively. Finally, we provide guidelines that may help 
to increase both the conclusiveness of NIBS studies of brain–behav-
ior relations and the potential usefulness of NIBS protocols for pos-
sible translational applications.
Establishing brain–behavior relations with NIBS
While the evidence provided by brain imaging methods is purely 
correlative, it is invaluable for identifying neural processes that may 
be targeted with causal manipulation methods. In general, methods 
Studying and modifying brain function with  
non-invasive brain stimulation
Rafael Polanía   1*, Michael A. Nitsche2,3 and Christian C. Ruff   1*
In the past three decades, our understanding of brain–behavior relationships has been significantly shaped by research using 
non-invasive brain stimulation (NIBS) techniques. These methods allow non-invasive and safe modulation of neural processes 
in the healthy brain, enabling researchers to directly study how experimentally altered neural activity causally affects behavior. 
This unique property of NIBS methods has, on the one hand, led to groundbreaking findings on the brain basis of various aspects 
of behavior and has raised interest in possible clinical and practical applications of these methods. On the other hand, it has also 
triggered increasingly critical debates about the properties and possible limitations of these methods. In this review, we discuss 
these issues, clarify the challenges associated with the use of currently available NIBS techniques for basic research and practi-
cal applications, and provide recommendations for studies using NIBS techniques to establish brain–behavior relationships.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Review Article
Nature Neuroscience
to causally manipulate neural activity can operate at different levels 
of spatial specificity (micro-, meso- and large-scale) and temporal 
resolution (from milliseconds to days or even longer). In both these 
dimensions, NIBS methods generally cover the middle ground, but 
specific ways of applying these methods differ in their precise prop-
erties (Fig. 1a). In terms of spatial resolution, the two most popular 
methods (TMS and tES) lead to electric fields that span relatively 
large areas of tissue compared to the effects of other, invasive meth-
ods (Fig. 1a and Box 1). Therefore, claims about the spatial focality 
of the effects need to be interpreted with care and should, whenever 
possible, be validated with combinations of neuroimaging methods 
and computational modeling (we discuss this in more detail in the 
recommendations section, below). Despite the relatively wide spa-
tial spread of the electric fields across large numbers of neurons, the 
effective spatial resolution for modulating various types of behaviors 
is thought to be somewhat higher (Box 1). This may reflect the pos-
sibility that the behaviorally critical neural processes affected by the 
stimulation can themselves be restricted to a relatively small num-
ber of cell groups within larger brain regions, and that the stimula-
tion can have different effects on neurons that are at rest or activated 
by ongoing behavior8,9. The functionally relevant spatial resolution 
of NIBS methods may therefore differ across different task contexts 
and may depend on the spatial extent of the task-related ongoing 
neural processing. Moreover, different ways of applying the same 
NIBS method can differ in their precise physical properties, which 
can set different limits on their mechanism of action, physiological 
effects, and spatial and temporal specificity. Different ways of apply-
ing NIBS methods are therefore suited to testing different types of 
hypotheses regarding interactions between physiology and behavior 
or cognition.
For instance, online application of TMS (i.e., single- or double-
pulse TMS, or short bursts of TMS10) elicits temporally restricted 
bursts of action potentials. The application of such TMS pulses 
during task performance can be used to selectively interfere with 
ongoing neuronal processes to study the temporal dynamics of 
brain function with high temporal resolution (on the order of mil-
liseconds). For examples, TMS pulses applied over V1 at a specific 
latency from the onset of a visual stimulus can induce suppression 
of conscious visual perception of this stimulus11 and TMS pulses 
applied over cortical language production areas can produce speech 
arrest within a specific timeframe12. Additionally, simultaneous 
application of TMS pulses over different interconnected brain areas13 
or during concurrent neuroimaging14,15 (Fig. 2c) allows tests of how 
action potentials elicited in one brain area influence processing in 
interconnected areas in a top-down and/or context-sensitive man-
ner; this makes it possible to study how brain networks dynamically 
operate at high temporal resolution and to stimulate deep cortical or 
subcortical areas indirectly via interconnected areas14,15. Moreover, 
online TMS protocols that apply pulses at specific frequencies may 
facilitate corresponding oscillations, thus allowing tests of the causal 
link between brain rhythms and behavior16–18. Taken together, these 
studies demonstrate that online TMS protocols exert influences on 
neural processing in a highly task-, context- and time-dependent 
manner; these protocols can therefore be tailored to affect specific 
aspects of neural activity.
Other applications of TMS have focused on neuromodula-
tory after-effects following repetitive TMS protocols10 (rTMS). 
Depending on their specific frequency and/or patterning, different 
rTMS protocols result in excitatory or inhibitory after-effects last-
ing several minutes, which have been linked to long-term potentia-
tion or long-term depression (LTP or LTD, respectively; see Box 2). 
These after-effects are thought to reflect rTMS influences on the 
strength of glutamatergic synapses via NMDA receptor, AMPA 
receptor and calcium channel effects10,19–21. Other possible media-
tors of these effects may reflect nonlinear time-dependent influ-
ences on inhibitory GABAergic neurons, nonsynaptic mechanisms 
Microscale
(specific cell types)
Mesoscale
(cortical tissue, gyri)
Large scale
(large brain areas)
Spatial resolution
Temporal resolution
1 ms
1 s
1 h
1 min
>1 d
Opto-
genetics
Micro-
stimulation
Local 
pharmacological
inactivation
Drug
manipulation
tDCS
tACS
Single-
pulse
TMS
rTMS
tRNS
tFUS
TMS coil
tDCS electrode
Stimulated cortical area
Task-relevant neural population
activated/inhibited by the stimulation 
Task-relevant neural population 
unaffected by the stimulation
Task-irrelevant neural population 
NIBS methods
Other methods
b
a
Lesion
Publication count
Year
2010
2000
1990
0
250
500
750
TMS
tDCS
tACS
Technique
Fig. 1 | Overview of NIBS methods. a, The temporal and spatial resolution at which different causal brain interventions work. NIBS methods work at the 
mesoscale level, and the temporal resolution varies between high and low depending on the specific NIBS protocol. NIBS necessarily involves the relatively 
indiscriminate activation of large numbers of neurons; the apparent temporal and spatial specificity seen in NIBS studies is thus unlikely to reflect the 
anatomical and temporal specificity of the stimulation. Instead, it may indicate disruption of behaviorally relevant operations that are carried out by a 
relatively small number of cell groups107 within larger brain regions. b, The exponentially growing number of citations per year for TMS, tDCS and tACS 
(source: http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/; search dates from 1980 to 2016).
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Review Article
Nature Neuroscience
Box 1 | Which aspects of neural processing are influenced by NIBS methods?
The results of research on basic neurophysiological NIBS effects have 
inspired many researchers to use NIBS techniques to investigate 
brain–behavior relationships. While the corresponding studies 
have led to a general consensus on the basic biophysical principles 
underlying each NIBS method, there is an ongoing debate about 
the precise neurophysiological processes that are stimulated by 
these techniques. Most studies on these issues have been con-
ducted in primary motor cortex, so caution must be used when 
extrapolating this knowledge to other cortical areas. For instance, 
it was originally suggested that TMS primarily excites the axons of 
superficial cortical interneurons, which then activate cortical out-
put neurons141. However, this notion may not apply to all cortical 
areas because which neurons are activated by an electrical current 
depends on the direction of the electrical field relative to the neu-
ron, the sensitivity of a given type of neuron, the intensity of stim-
ulation, the depth of penetration into excitable tissue and other 
factors142. The situation is further complicated by the fact that the 
gyrification of the human brain can vary between individuals and 
even within the same functionally defined area.
One strategy that has been proposed to address these issues 
is to estimate computational models of the most likely induced 
electric fields, which has led to the development of novel electrode 
configurations137 that may help to predict NIBS-induced effects 
with greater accuracy106,111 (see figure a,b,c). For instance, modeling 
work suggests that conventional electrode montages might induce 
effects not only under the electrodes but also between them, with 
the strongest fields for some montages predicted to actually not lie 
directly under the electrodes (a, top). While these efforts at modeling 
tES-induced electric fields and effects on neurons may ultimately 
prove crucial for optimizing the efficiency of NIBS protocols, such 
models do need to be physiologically validated9,36,106 and will need 
to be able to fully account for the well-established effects induced 
by more traditional protocols36. For instance, neurophysiological 
work shows that both classic and novel electrode montages shown 
in panel a reliably induce cortical excitability that depends on the 
stimulation polarity, with the conventional electrode montage 
inducing stronger effects immediately after stimulation but the 
ring electrode configuration effects being more prominent 30 
min after the end of stimulation36. Moreover, while the modeling 
sometimes suggests that the peak electric field in the classic 
montage may lie between rather than under the electrodes (a), the 
physiological data show that the induced effect is in fact maximal 
Box Fig. 1 | Spatial focality of NIBS methods estimated by electric field (EF) models. a, Conventional tDCS electrode montage for anodal stimulation 
of M1 with the cathodal electrode over the contralateral orbit (top left) and a newly proposed 4 ×​ 1 ring electrode configuration designed to improve 
the focality of the induced cortical EF (bottom left). EF simulations based on a finite-element model of the human head predict that the conventional 
electrode montage induces maximum EF mainly between the two electrodes, while the 4 ×​ 1 ring electrode configuration induces more focalized 
effects over the target area137. Adapted with permission from ref. 137, Elsevier. b, The predicted EF induced by a TMS coil positioned above left M1 with 
an orientation relative to central sulcus of 45°. The induced EF is relatively focal, but comparable to the EF induced by the tDCS 4 ×​ 1 ring electrode 
configuration138. Adapted with permission from ref. 138, Elsevier. c, The acoustic intensity field (AIF) of a transcranial focused ultrasound stimulation 
(tFUS) beam projected from above the primary somatosensory cortex. The AIF calculations suggest that tFUS should be much more focal than both 
TMS and tDCS as its effects are expressed in less than 1 cubic centimeter139. Adapted with permission from ref. 139, Springer Nature. d, Frequency 
response of intracranially measured voltages differ across different tACS frequencies between in vivo (blue) and ex vivo (red, green, and black) 
states140. Notably, any tACS frequency dependency is largely absent for the ex vivo measurements several days after death (green and black dots). 
Adapted with permission from ref. 140, National Academy of Sciences.
CS
S1
M1
7 mm
5.90
Intensity (W/cm2)
2.95
4.43
Electric field/current density
peak
0.8
Magnitude
2.5
7 days
6 days
Ex vivo
In vivo
Log frequency Hz
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0.9
1
1.1
1
E/Emax
0.5
0.75
66%
33%
0
a
c
b
d
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

----- Page 4 (native) -----
Review Article
Nature Neuroscience
mPFC
PPC
V1
DLPFC
TMS
coil
FFA
PPA
Phase difference (∆φ)
∆φ
0
Accuracy
Optimal ∆φ
Noise amplitude (mA)
Discriminability
Low
Medium
High
Optimal
noise amplitude
Low
Mid.
High
BOLD signal change (a.u.)
House target
Face absent
House target
Face distracter
Face target
House distracter
Face target
House distracter
*
*
a
b
c
PPA activity
FFA activity
16
π
26
π
36
π
46
π
56
π
–
0
2
π–
2π
π
2
π–
–
–
–
–
–
Fig. 2 | Examples of NIBS methods to study brain–function relationships. a, tACS applied with multi-electrode setups can be used to investigate how 
oscillatory coherence between spatially distinct nodes of functional networks underlies behavior. In the example experiment presented in this panel, tACS 
electrodes were mounted over the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and posterior parietal cortex (PPC), two brain regions identified in an EEG experiment 
to show phase-coupling that was related to the consistency of preference-based decisions136. In a subsequent tACS experiment48, tACS was applied over 
the mPFC and PPC at the frequencies identified in the EEG experiment at six different lags (Δ​φ). This showed that full anti-phase stimulation leads to 
poorer performance compared to tACS applied at full in-phase stimulation. Crucially, the optimal phase difference for task performance indicated that 
information may flow from frontal to parietal cortex (right panel), illustrating that tACS can be used to make inferences about the direction of information 
flow between segregated nodes of functional brain networks. b, tRNS may be useful for investigating the stochastic dynamics of neuronal processing. In 
the example presented in this panel14, tRNS was applied over the primary visual cortex (V1, left) at different noise amplitudes (middle) to investigate the 
stochastic resonance phenomenon (see Box 2). Consistent with the assumption that there are optimal noise levels for neural processing, only intermediate 
(but not high or low) levels of noise led to higher discriminability in a signal detection task (right). This illustrates how tRNS can elucidate stochastic 
dynamics of neural circuits in the intact human brain. c, TMS can be combined with fMRI to reveal functional influences in brain networks underlying 
behavior. In the example study presented in this panel, the investigators tested different theories about the role of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) 
in stabilizing working memory during external distraction14. Subjects had to memorize face or house stimuli that activated the fusiform face area (FFA; 
for faces) and parahippocampal place area (PPA; for houses) while distractor stimuli from the opposite category were present or not. TMS pulses given 
to DLPFC during fMRI led to increased BOLD signals (a.u., arbitrary units) in FFA and PPA only when distracters were present. Critically, these influences 
were only observed in regions representing the current memory targets (right), thus providing causal evidence that neural signals from DLPFC can enhance 
working memory representations in posterior brain areas during external distraction.
under the stimulating electrode36. This puzzling discrepancy will 
need to be resolved and shows that, while modeling will be useful 
to help optimizing NIBS protocols, physiological validation is 
crucial before jumping to conclusions about the spatial specificity 
and effectiveness of any NIBS protocol143,144.
Another promising route to deal with the relatively low degree 
of spatial focality offered by tDCS (a) and TMS (b) focuses on the 
development of new methods with improved spatial resolution. 
One such promising technology may be transcranial focused 
ultrasound stimulation (tFUS), which can induce cortical 
excitability changes with a resolution of millimeters as suggested 
by theoretical modeling and empirical work145 (c). However, the 
neurophysiological underpinnings of these tFUS-induced changes 
of cortical excitability still need to be understood in much more 
detail before this method can be put to safe routine use.
In an attempt to answer the question “which aspects of neural 
processing are influenced by NIBS?”, researchers have tried 
to measure the neurophysiological influences of NIBS using 
a variety of methods, including in vitro144, in vivo9,40,143 and 
ex vivo preparations146. However, the results of these studies 
are variable. Therefore, it is crucial to investigate to what extent 
the results obtained from different approaches (for example, in 
vitro and ex vivo) can be directly extrapolated to NIBS-induced 
effects in the healthy living human brain. In a recent study, 
researchers measured electric fields in the brain of nonhuman 
primates during tDCS/tACS both in vivo and ex vivo140. They 
found significant differences in electrical field strength between 
in vivo and ex vivo measurements (d), which may relate to 
biophysical changes of brain and head tissues that naturally 
accompany death. These results provide crucial evidence that 
accurate evaluation of the biophysical properties of NIBS 
techniques critically depend on in vivo measurements9,140,143 and 
that conclusions derived from ex vivo experiments need to be 
interpreted with care.
Box 1 | Which aspects of neural processing are influenced by NIBS methods? (Continued)
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

----- Page 5 (native) -----
Review Article
Nature Neuroscience
including alterations of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF; 
see Box  2) and even neurogenesis22. Given these modulatory 
impacts of rTMS protocols on brain physiology, their effects by 
definition critically depend on brain state during the stimulation23. 
The duration of the physiological aftereffects makes these ‘offline’ 
rTMS protocols well-suited to studying the causal contributions 
of cortical regions to behavior in both health24–26 and disease27–29. 
Studies employing this approach measure behavioral alterations in 
the immediate aftermath of the rTMS protocol, thereby testing the 
functional consequences of the temporary excitability modulation 
for behavior.
The second family of methods, tES, produces its neuromodu-
latory effects not via magnetic fields (as TMS does) but rather by 
means of weak electrical currents applied to the scalp. The most 
popular variant is transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), 
introduced about two decades ago (Fig. 1b). This method applies a 
weak tonic direct current between electrodes mounted on the head, 
which partially passes through the cortical tissue and affects rela-
tively large cortical areas (on the order of centimeters; see Box 1). 
This current de- or hyperpolarizes neuronal resting membrane 
potentials and thereby alters cortical excitability30,31. The primary 
effects of tDCS do not include synaptic mechanisms but instead 
involve voltage-dependent ion channels32. However, stimulation 
extending over a few minutes leads to LTP- or LTD-like plasticity32,33 
that can extend to interconnected cortical and subcortical struc-
tures34,35. The temporal resolution of this technique is low, as the 
online neuromodulatory effects start to take place a few seconds 
after the start of the stimulation and continue throughout current 
application, whereas the physiological aftereffects can last for sev-
eral hours and even days if accompanied by pharmacological inter-
ventions32. Thus, considering the physiology and neuromodulatory 
characteristics of tDCS, the functional specificity of the interven-
tion largely relates to its capability to modulate task-related neural 
processing rather than to the spatial and temporal specificity of the 
electric fields produced by the stimulation itself36.
While tDCS has low temporal resolution and is indiscriminate 
as to which aspects of neural processing are modulated, other vari-
ants of tES methodology can be used to target more specific aspects 
of neural function at higher temporal scales. One such method was 
specifically developed to investigate the role of neural oscillations in 
designated frequency bands for behavior37. This technique, known as 
transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACS), employs oscilla-
tory electrical stimulation with the aim of facilitating neuronal activ-
ity in specific frequency bands38–40, thereby allowing study of causal 
links between brain rhythms and specific aspects of behavior41–44. For 
instance, tACS can be used to study the causal role of theta–gamma 
cross-frequency coupling for working memory performance45, the 
contributions of beta and gamma oscillations to motor behavior41,43, 
the role of frontal gamma oscillations during high-level cognitive 
tasks46 or the causal contributions of alpha oscillations to the genera-
tion of visual and cross-modal perceptual illusions42,44.
tACS can also be used to investigate how oscillatory coherence 
between spatially distinct nodes of functional networks contributes 
to behavior47–50, by simultaneously applying oscillatory currents 
over distinct regions at the same frequency but using different oscil-
latory phases to facilitate or hamper synchronization in the func-
tional networks (Fig. 2a). As mentioned before, the link between 
rhythmic oscillations and behavior can also be investigated using 
rTMS protocols that apply pulses at specific frequencies to facilitate 
corresponding oscillations16–18. Crucially, emerging work is starting 
to suggest that TMS pulses may have very different effects if they 
are applied at different phases of ongoing neural oscillations51. This 
shows directly that some of the variability of neural NIBS effects 
may relate to the precise temporal relation between the NIBS pro-
tocol and ongoing neural activity, suggesting that this information 
could be used to design more efficient stimulation protocols in the 
context of closed-loop systems52–54.
A limitation of the frequency-specific protocols mentioned above 
(and tES methods in general) is that they can only directly affect 
activity in cortical regions. Direct stimulation of deeper structures 
typically requires invasive procedures—for example, deep brain 
stimulation. However, there are attempts to develop specific TMS 
hardware, such as the TMS H-coil55, to modulate the excitability of 
brain areas lying further away from the cortical surface (possibly up 
to 6 cm)56. Moreover, a recent study showed in mice that a new NIBS 
protocol, termed temporal interference (TI), allows entrainment of 
oscillatory neuronal activity in subcortical structures (such as the 
hippocampus) without recruiting neurons of the overlying cortex57. 
Future extension of this TI-NIBS protocol to humans, if at all pos-
sible, may therefore overcome the constraint that only superficial 
structures may be directly affected.
While numerous studies have demonstrated selective and 
frequency-specific effects of tACS on behavior, it is debated how 
Box 2 | Definitions of NIBS-relevant terminology
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF): A protein encoded 
by the BDNF gene that is highly relevant for NIBS research as it 
is known to be involved in various forms of synaptic plasticity, 
including LTP and LTD (see below). Crucially, NIBS-induced 
neuroplasticity has been shown to depend on secretion of this 
protein in animal studies147. In humans, BDNF gene polymor-
phisms have been shown to have an impact on NIBS-induced 
plasticity148. Thus, BDNF is one of the many factors that should 
be taken into account when considering potential sources of be-
havioral and physiological variability in NIBS-induced effects 
(Fig. 3).
Long-term potentiation (LTP): A facilitation of synaptic 
transmission that is considered to be one of the main 
mechanisms underlying learning and memory formation. The 
opposite phenomenon, long-term depression (LTD), refers 
to inhibition of synaptic transmission. LTP and LTD might be 
expressed at every synapse in the mammalian brain149. Long-
lasting neurophysiological facilitation or inhibition induced 
by NIBS (for example, depending on the method and protocol 
used and other factors such as brain state and cognitive task) is 
believed to relate to LTP- or LTD-like changes.
Motor-evoked potentials (MEPs): Electrical potentials 
recorded from peripheral muscles in response to single-pulse 
electrical or magnetic stimulation of M1. MEP amplitudes are 
typically used to assess the level of cortico-spinal excitability 
induced by NIBS protocols. Excitatory or inhibitory NIBS 
protocols increase or decrease MEP amplitudes, respectively.
Phosphene: Transient visual percept resembling light flashes 
that can be induced by suprathreshold TMS pulses over V126 or 
by tACS in the ~8–35 Hz range, depending on the amount of 
light in the environment130. For tACS in this frequency range, 
such phosphenes need to be properly controlled for as they 
are difficult to differentiate from genuine neural entrainment. 
Moreover, whether the origin of tACS-induced phosphenes is 
cortical or retinal remains a matter of debate8,150.
Stochastic resonance: A phenomenon referring to a situation 
in which a signal that is too weak to be detected by a sensor is 
enhanced by adding an optimal level of noise. For instance, it has 
been shown that visual detection performance can be increased 
by adding the right amount of noise to the visual stimulus; too 
much or too little noise results in poor detection performance 
or misperception of the visual stimulus. Recent studies have 
suggested that tRNS can be used as a tool to investigate the 
stochastic resonance principle in the human cortex63.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Review Article
Nature Neuroscience
exactly these protocols affect oscillatory activity. Work in anes-
thetized animals and computational modeling suggest that direct 
neural entrainment is possible39,40, but there is little evidence in 
humans that this is indeed the case. However, studies are starting to 
investigate the neural consequences of tACS in vivo. For instance, 
10-Hz tACS applied over the motion-sensitive area (MT) attenuates 
visual motion adaptation in humans8 and reduces spike-frequency 
adaptation of MT neurons in macaques9. These findings provide a 
direct demonstration that weak alternating electric fields applied to 
the scalp, which change motion adaptation behaviorally, in fact sig-
nificantly affect neural processing in a frequency-specific manner. 
However, this study could not directly demonstrate neural entrain-
ment due to technical complications with recording during exter-
nally applied electrical fields. Thus, the investigation into how tACS 
entrains or modulates oscillatory activity in the human brain will 
require the development of multimodal NIBS-recording techniques 
and well-validated artifact rejection methods capable of identifying 
neural oscillations during stimulation58,59.
Another related tES technique called transcranial random noise 
stimulation (tRNS) focuses on the link between behavior and fre-
quency-specific noise inherent in neural processing60. Compared 
to other stimulation methods, relatively little is known about the 
physiological impact of this method. However, only 10 min of tRNS 
applied over primary motor cortex (M1) can enhance motor cortex 
excitability for about 60 min after the end of stimulation, suggest-
ing that this method may induce neuroplastic effects60 of similar 
strength as those induced by anodal tDCS. Applied in conjunction 
with cognitive tasks, tRNS protocols may enhance learning perfor-
mance even more strongly than anodal tDCS does61,62. Interestingly, 
the effects of tRNS are strongest when used at intensities thought to 
induce optimal noise levels63 (Fig. 2b), consistent with the stochastic 
resonance principle (see Box 2). tRNS may thus prove useful for 
investigating the stochastic dynamics of neuronal processing in the 
intact human brain64.
Standard NIBS studies using the approaches mentioned 
above typically apply these protocols in purely behavioral set-
tings, targeting brain areas identified by previous neuroimaging 
research and assuming that the NIBS methods exert uniform 
and clearly interpretable physiological effects on these areas. 
This standard approach has been used for studying causal brain−​
function relationships in numerous domains, including vision65, 
audition66, motor67–69, somatosensation70, language71,72, attention73,74, 
memory75,76, reasoning46,77, decision making78–80 and social 
behavior81–83. While this approach continues to yield very inter-
esting demonstrations that specific aspects of behavior can be 
changed by stimulation and therefore causally relate to the affected 
neural processes, it has also triggered critical debates about the 
properties and possible limitations of these methods. We will 
discuss these in the following section.
Current controversies associated with the use of NIBS
Over the past few years, critical discussions have arisen about the 
replicability of effects reported in various scientific fields84,85. For 
studies using NIBS, this discussion has focused on both physiologi-
cal and behavioral effects of these techniques. However, this general 
discussion often has not explicitly differentiated between determin-
istic and neuromodulatory NIBS approaches. The former meth-
ods—for example, single- or double-pulse TMS, or short bursts of 
TMS10—directly elicit action potentials that may have relatively uni-
form physiological and behavioral effects (even though some intra- 
and interindividual variability can be observed86). The latter—for 
example, offline rTMS or tES methods—mainly operate by modu-
lating ongoing brain activity, so that the effects of these methods will 
by definition depend critically on brain state and task context. This 
state-dependency of neuromodulatory NIBS effects is confirmed by 
animal studies showing, for instance, that the ability to induce LTP 
and LTD is critically shaped by the previous learning experience of 
the targeted cortical area87. Indeed, in humans, the effects of rTMS 
and tES on cortical excitability (as monitored by TMS-generated 
motor evoked potentials (MEPs)) varies between individuals, as do 
stimulation effects on other physiological and cognitive-behavioral 
variables88–92. However, precise estimates of this variability are so far 
lacking, as the objectives and methodological procedures of NIBS 
applications differ considerably between studies. This severely com-
plicates the use of meta-analytic procedures to estimate effect sizes 
associated with NIBS applications: Such procedures can only val-
idly be applied to logically coherent sets of effects generated with 
the same well-defined methodological procedures in the same task 
Intrinsic factors
External or
methodological factors
Factors applying to all
life-science interventions
Arousal level
Attentional
states
Ceiling or floor
effects
Sample size
Experimental
environment 
Genetic
polymorphisms:
e.g. BDNF
Individual cortical
(gyrus) geometry
Stimulation
intensity
Electrode/coil
sizes and shapes
Blinding
strategies
Electrode/coil montage
or positioning
NIBS-specific
factors
Participants:
Age and gender
Participants:
Healthy or patients
Physiological state, e.g.:
in vivo, in vitro, ex vivo,
anesthetized
Factors determining variability of
neurophysiological and behavioral effects in NIBS research
Fig. 3 | Example factors determining the variability of neurophysiological and behavioral NIBS effects. Many sources of variability in NIBS effects reflect 
factors that similarly affect the variability of other experimental interventions in the life sciences. However, there are NIBS-specific factors that should be 
taken into account in both experimental studies and studies employing meta-analytic techniques. The latter also need to ensure that studies are selected 
for inclusion based on overlap in conceptual aims and well-defined methodological criteria93,104.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Review Article
Nature Neuroscience
contexts. Preliminary attempts at quantifying effect sizes associated 
with NIBS methods per se93,94 have therefore been inconclusive, as 
they have mostly pooled many different studies using this research 
method in very different ways.
The sources of the reported variability of NIBS effects have 
hardly been explored systematically, but include brain-intrinsic, 
task-related and methodological factors. Relevant brain-intrinsic 
factors may include trait and state variables such as sex, age, diurnal 
variations, genetic polymorphisms, attention, pharmacology and 
synaptic history95 (Fig. 3). For example, NIBS-induced plasticity has 
been shown to be related to BDNF polymorphisms96 and is altered by 
enhancement or reduction of dopaminergic neuromodulation in a 
nonlinear, dosage- and receptor-dependent manner97–99. Therefore, 
the individual variability of NIBS effects is not surprising, as NIBS 
protocols induce plasticity by affecting glutamatergic, calcium-
dependent mechanisms that are affected by various neuromodula-
tory agents. By definition, these effects will therefore vary between 
different tasks and brain regions (see below). As for methodological 
aspects, variations of NIBS protocols in terms of intensity, duration, 
electrode position and coil orientation can alter stimulation effects, 
even in a nonlinear fashion100,101 (see also Box 1). Additionally, the 
physiological effect of NIBS methods can strongly depend on char-
acteristics of the testing situation, as clearly illustrated by the fact 
that even MEPs elicited from motor cortex following modulatory 
NIBS protocols can differ in strength depending on what partici-
pants were doing at the time of stimulation (for example, whether 
they were engaged in motor behavior or not102). Finally, subject-
specific aspects can also play a role. These include differences in 
arousal or attentional state, ceiling or floor effects with regard to 
task performance, or differences in group size, just to name a few103. 
However, it is important to note that many of these sources of vari-
ability are not unique to NIBS studies and equally apply to many 
other research approaches attempting to relate physiology and 
behavior in the biological and social sciences104 (Fig. 3).
The variability of reported NIBS effects need not be disadvanta-
geous, but may instead provide important information about how 
interventions may be personalized and optimized105,106. Moreover, 
this natural variability may help to identify factors that affect nat-
urally-occurring plasticity, thereby further elucidating the brain 
physiology underlying cognitive processes. Future meta-analyses 
of NIBS effects should therefore attempt to systematically identify 
the factors that determine the variability of NIBS effects; at the very 
least, these analyses should only pool studies that indeed investi-
gated the same specific brain–behavior relationship with closely 
comparable NIBS procedures93,104.
The sources of physiological variability discussed above show 
that one cannot assume that protocols known to result in enhance-
ment or reduction of primary motor cortex excitability—the most 
frequently used assay of physiological NIBS effects—will have 
the same physiological effect when applied to another brain area. 
Another factor that may affect the variability of NIBS effects relates 
to possible nonlinear interactions with task-related neural pro-
cessing. For instance, if NIBS methods and task performance have 
synergistic effects on the same neuronal populations, neurons may 
be activated too strongly, thereby resulting in antagonistic NIBS 
effects101,107. Finally, the link between behavioral performance and 
physiological measures, such as TMS-generated excitability mea-
sures or cerebral activation monitored by functional imaging, may 
in itself not always be straightforward. For instance, improved 
performance during motor learning is known to result in activity 
reductions in motor cortex networks108,109. However, these reduc-
tions obviously do not indicate that the functional relevance of this 
network has decreased; instead, they may reflect an increase in the 
selectivity of task-relevant networks43. NIBS protocols may there-
fore affect performance in opposite ways during different stages of 
learning, as shown, for example, for visuo-motor coordination110.
One crucial unresolved issue is the question whether tES proto-
cols always elicit their strongest effects under the electrodes, since 
computational models suggest that the peak of the electric field may 
lie between the electrodes for some montages (Box 1). Such compu-
tational models of tES-induced electric fields may ultimately prove 
important for optimizing the efficiency of NIBS protocols106,111, but it 
will be crucial to validate their computational predictions both phys-
iologically and behaviorally and to fully account for well-established 
Exploratory:
Mechanistically
agnostic
Conclusive:
Mechanistically
informed
Methodological effort
Strength of evidence for brain–behavior relation
Low
High
Neuro-
navigation
Variable
stimulation
site
Target and
control
region(s)  
No regional
specificity of
NIBS effect
NIBS and
neuroimaging
No validation of
neural NIBS effect
(local or network)
Mechanistic model
Less precise
definition of NIBS-
affected
mechanism
Control task or
behavioral measures
No behavioral
specificity of
NIBS effect
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
Fig. 4 | The conclusiveness of NIBS results on brain–behavior relations depends on the degree of methodological effort. Here we show an example 
decision tree to illustrate how the successive inclusion of methodological procedures in a given study can lead to increasingly conclusive and mechanistically 
informed evidence for the relationship between behavior and a well-defined neural process (for examples, such a scheme was followed in refs 18,117,118; see 
also Fig. 5). It is important to note that the scheme is illustrative rather than fully prescriptive, as the precise order of these procedures is not necessarily the 
same for all studies and as one or several of the illustrated procedures may not apply or be available in particular contexts. Moreover, it should be noted that 
clinical or translational studies may not necessarily need to employ these procedures if they follow well-validated protocols. However, the more of these 
methodological procedures that can be included in a given study, the more conclusive and mechanistically informed the resulting evidence.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Review Article
Nature Neuroscience
effects on areas under the electrodes as induced by traditional pro-
tocols36 (Box 1).
Another focus of recent debate is the application of NIBS 
techniques in a do-it-yourself manner, mainly for the purpose of 
neuro-enhancement. Several companies have begun to produce 
stimulators specifically for this type of application; for technical 
and financial reasons, such stimulators are more widely available 
for tDCS than TMS. It is questionable whether the effects of NIBS 
approaches are sufficiently uniform and understood to be read-
ily applied for neuro-enhancement purposes in everyday life112. 
Critics believe that it may be too early to employ NIBS methods 
as routine neuro-enhancement tools because the physiological 
effects vary between individuals (see above) and because impor-
tant translational questions that would need to be answered for 
everyday use of NIBS remain unaddressed. Most of the existing 
NIBS studies were conducted in controlled laboratory settings, did 
not specifically aim for maximal and homogeneous effects, did not 
explore long-term (and possibly performance-reducing) effects, 
and did not focus on possible late-occurring side effects or side 
effects that might be caused by intensified use. Obviously, this cau-
tionary statement does not mean that NIBS will never be suitable 
for neuro-enhancement purposes; future translational approaches 
of the basic laboratory studies may offer this possibility if they take 
state- and task-dependent effects into account, possibly as closed-
loop systems52.
Apart from these methodological issues, NIBS and all other 
kinds of neuro-enhancement techniques are subject to ethical con-
siderations. These comprise the question of how the techniques 
need to be applied in order to be appropriate and safe, the prob-
lem that there is only limited knowledge about the effects of NIBS 
on the developing brain113 and the fact that it is difficult to detect 
NIBS-related “neuro-doping”114 in contexts in which this may be 
critical (for example, standardized exams or sports competitions). 
More generally, there is considerable debate about whether neuro-
enhancement techniques compromise the autonomy of users, either 
neurophysiologically or by societal means—for instance, if people 
are pressured into their use or if the associated expense widens the 
gap between economically divergent groups115. The discussion also 
encompasses the question whether specific communication strate-
gies116 may be necessary to ensure sufficient transparency so that 
potential users and policy makers can make informed decisions 
about the use of NIBS methods. Finally, it is debated how these 
methods should be regulated116 to prevent the widespread use of 
insufficiently tested interventions while avoiding unnecessary 
restrictions on the development of promising interventional tools 
in the scientific domain.
Concurrent TMS and EEG
Concurrent rhythmic TMS and EEG
fMRI, behavior and computational modeling
+ ΔV = α(R – V )
Main task
Control task
Target rhythm
Control rhythm
Localize region
using fMRI
Neuronavigation based on
fMRI-MVPA analyses
Localize region and
rhythm using MEG
Neuronavigation based on
individual MEG source maps
Neuronavigation based
on previous study
Neuromodulatory TMS
+
a
b
c
+
+
Target region
Control region
Fig. 5 | Example workflows of studies employing NIBS methods in a multimethods approach to establish brain–behavior relations. a, This study 
tested the hypothesis that working memory information is temporarily stored via ‘activity-silent’ synaptic mechanisms118. The authors first used fMRI 
to precisely localize cortical areas that represent category-specific working memory contents. Afterwards, they used EEG in order to characterize the 
temporal dynamics of the hypothesized memory reactivation via single pulse TMS at the locations identified in the fMRI experiment. They observed 
that a TMS pulse during the retention period re-expressed latent working memories of unattended memory items. b, This study tested the causal role of 
theta oscillations (~6 Hz) for working memory maintenance. The authors first identified, for each individual, the cortical generators of theta oscillations 
related to memory maintenance via magnetoencephalography (MEG). Then the authors replicated their findings in a new experiment using EEG, which 
conveniently allows tracking of oscillatory neural entrainment via rhythmic TMS120. Using this multi-method approach, the investigators demonstrated 
that by artificially entraining theta oscillations via TMS, it was possible to augment working memory performance. c, This study investigated how the 
human brain represents beliefs about how our choices will influence those of others with whom we interact117. The authors first identified the region of 
interest using fMRI and computational modeling. They then used rTMS to inhibit the activity of the right temporoparietal junction (rTPJ), which was 
hypothesized to implement the social influence signal. They also used a remote control region (vertex) to test the regional specificity. After rTMS, 
participants performed the social task during fMRI and used computational modeling to study how mechanistic latent variables of behavior where affected 
by the inhibitory rTMS protocol to the rTPJ compared to the control region. This multi-method approach thus allowed the authors to reveal a regional and 
functional specific causal role of the rTPJ in computing social influence signals.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Review Article
Nature Neuroscience
Overcoming NIBS limitations
Some of the problems discussed in the previous section might relate 
to the variability of methodological procedures employed in NIBS 
studies. This variability may reflect a lack of clear guidelines on how 
conclusive NIBS evidence can be, given the details of how the spe-
cific NIBS method was employed and how the resulting effects are 
interpreted. In this section, we propose some tentative guidelines 
that may help in both assessing the strength of evidence for brain–
behavior relations in NIBS studies and for designing and conduct-
ing NIBS studies. These guidelines may provide a starting point for 
overcoming some of the limitations discussed in the previous sec-
tion. Note that we focus these guidelines on studies of brain–behav-
ior relations; our recommendations may be neither sufficient nor 
necessary for basic neurophysiology research using NIBS methods.
Overcoming the limitations of NIBS methods will require both 
specific methodology as well as combinations of NIBS procedures 
with other research methods. In our eyes, the more these two strate-
gies are adhered to in a given NIBS study, the more conclusive the 
evidence for a specific brain–behavior relation can be (Fig. 4). For 
instance, the most exploratory and least conclusive may be those 
studies that acquire only behavioral measures in combination with 
NIBS application over a target site that is defined purely based on 
scalp measurements (using, for instance, the 10-20 system). We 
expect this type of study to result in the highest level of variability 
in effect size. By contrast, most conclusive (and least exploratory) 
may be studies that incorporate the following methodology: First, 
they include neuronavigation in order to more precisely locate the 
NIBS region of interest in each participant—for example, based 
on functional neuroimaging evidence or based on clearly defined 
anatomical criteria. This is arguably more critical for TMS stud-
ies than for studies employing tES, with its coarser spatial resolu-
tion. However, tES studies may also benefit from this step since it 
ensures more homogenous positioning of the areas of interest in the 
induced fields, in particular for emergent tES protocols that offer 
higher spatial resolutions (Box  1). Second, they include control 
tasks or behavioral measures that ascertain that the NIBS effects are 
indeed specific for the behavior under study. Third, they include 
stimulation of control regions or frequencies in order to test the 
functional specificity of the target area or neural process of interest. 
Fourth, they include combination with neuroimaging in order to 
directly quantify the strength of the NIBS effect on the local neu-
ral effect of interest and to measure how connected brain networks 
are affected by the application of the stimulation. Fifth, they include 
characterization of the NIBS-induced changes with theory-driven 
models whose mechanistic latent variables can capture changes in 
both behavioral and brain activity modulations.
The multi-method approach we propose here may be impracti-
cal for clinical use and may have poor ecological validity for stan-
dard clinical settings. However, we think it may be decisive for basic 
research in order to provide conclusive evidence for the effectiveness 
of a given NIBS protocol. This step appears essential to inform sub-
sequent translational and/or applied clinical use of these methods, 
which would not have to employ the demanding research pipeline 
described in Fig. 4 but could either apply other neuroimaging meth-
ods or just follow the exact protocol established in prior studies.
Adopting the type of multi-method strategies mentioned above 
is labor-intensive and challenging, but this approach is increasingly 
seen and therefore feasible18,117–119. One example study118 that used 
much of the methodology suggested in Fig. 4 tested the hypoth-
esis that working memory information is temporarily stored via 
‘activity-silent’ synaptic mechanisms (Fig.  5a). This study used 
fMRI to localize cortical areas that represent category-specific 
working memory contents, along with TMS combined with elec-
troencephalography (EEG) to characterize the temporal dynamics 
of the hypothesized memory reactivation. Another study18 using 
similar procedures investigated the causal role of theta oscillations 
(~6 Hz) on the dorsal stream for working memory maintenance 
(Fig. 5b). The authors used magnetoencephalography to identify for 
each individual the cortical generators of theta oscillations related 
to memory maintenance and then tested the causal role of these 
Design
1.  Process model and hypotheses
Mechanistic or computational
model?
Behavioral specificity:
Control task?
Regional specificity:
Control NIBS region?
Sample size and
preregistration125–127
Experiment
2.  Expected physiological effect
Enhancement or disruption?
Local or network effects?
tACS: Target and control
frequencies?
Online or offline?
Within- or between-subject?
Implementation
1. Optimizing NIBS application
Neuro-navigation:
Structural criteria?
Functional criteria:
Group peak?
Individual coordinates?
Blinding strategy:
Sham NIBS protocol?
Single-or double-blind?
2. Combining NIBS with neuroimaging
If concurrent:
Artifact-free imaging?
Control for peripheral effects?
Control for serial effects?
If offline:
Control for group differences and
order effects
Analysis/report
1. Validate expected NIBS effects
If mechanistic or
computational model:
expected mechanism or
parameter affected?
Statistical comparison with
control task and region
Relation between neural and
behavioral NIBS effects:
Trial-by-trial?
Across subjects?
2.  Publication:
Methods checklist132,133
tRNS: Frequency range and
noise propertics?
3.  Appropriate NIBS protocol
°
°
°
°
°
°
°
°
Fig. 6 | Methodical considerations during different stages of NIBS experiments.  Multi-method approaches can be used to gain fundamental and more 
reliable insights on brain–behavior relations via NIBS. To carry out such studies involving high methodological effort (see Fig. 4), it is crucial to have a clear 
work plan beforehand. This scheme shows an example of important aspects to consider in such a work plan before, during and after the execution of NIBS 
studies. Not all of these points necessarily apply to all studies, as some studies may have scientific aims that do not require comparisons with control tasks 
or control sites. However, considering all of the points listed in the figure before running the study will always be beneficial.
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Review Article
Nature Neuroscience
temporal-spatial oscillatory signatures supporting working mem-
ory maintenance with combinations of rhythmic TMS and EEG that 
can test for neural entrainment120. A third example study117 dem-
onstrated a causal role for the temporoparietal junction in guiding 
strategic social behavior, by combining computational modeling 
of behavior, neural activity recording with fMRI and transcranial 
magnetic stimulation (TMS) guided by neuronavigation (Fig. 5c). 
Notably, in all these studies, the documented effects were shown 
to be specific for a given task context, brain region or stimulation 
frequency. Thus, these example studies demonstrate that NIBS 
studies can deliver conclusive evidence for a specific, mechanisti-
cally defined brain behavior relationship (rather than being purely 
exploratory) if researchers employ a methodological framework 
similar to the one illustrated in Fig. 4.
Combining NIBS methods with other imaging techniques such 
as magnetic resonance spectroscopy can also provide insight into 
the specific neurophysiological mechanisms of stimulation effects 
that go beyond those acquired with pharmacological interven-
tions121 and that can be linked to cognitive processes122. For instance, 
it has been shown that anodal tDCS over M1 reduces the concen-
tration of GABA, whereas cathodal stimulation results in a signifi-
cant decrease in the concentrations of both glutamate and GABA123. 
This is consistent with the notion that LTP-like plasticity in the 
neocortex—thought to be affected by tDCS—critically depends 
on GABA modulation124. Based on these findings, a recent study 
employed tDCS to test for cortical rebalancing of excitatory and 
inhibitory influences during associative learning119. The research-
ers administered anodal tDCS to induce a local reduction in corti-
cal GABA while using fMRI to track the representational overlap 
between learned associations over time. As hypothesized, the new 
experiment revealed that cortical memories were re-exposed dur-
ing anodal tDCS, thereby illustrating how NIBS in combination 
with different neuroimaging modalities (magnetic resonance spec-
troscopy and fMRI) can be used to reveal a more comprehensive 
picture of the neurophysiological mechanisms underlying cognitive 
processes.
Shifting the field from more exploratory behavioral demonstra-
tions to the multi-method approaches illustrated above requires 
careful planning of all stages of a NIBS study (Fig. 6). During the 
design stage of the experiments, the researchers must clearly define 
the area that should be stimulated, the cognitive process that should 
be modulated, and how this NIBS influence on behavior can be mea-
sured conclusively. This last step requires a-priori considerations of 
including a control task or behavioral measure to establish context 
specificity and selecting a control brain region to test the spatial 
selectivity of the intervention effect. Additionally, to reduce prob-
lems with type I errors and improve reproducibility125, NIBS studies 
(and all other studies) should employ adequate sample sizes126. This 
may be achieved by power analyses126 and the guideline that studies 
of standard behavioral tasks aiming at threshold significance levels 
with sample sizes n <​ 20 are likely to be irreproducible127. Finally, 
during the planning stage, investigators usually have a clear hypoth-
esis of the neural process they want to affect with their protocol. 
NIBS studies are therefore ideal candidates for pre-registration and 
we encourage the community to adopt this scientific practice.
During the execution stage of the experiments, the researchers 
should try to maximize the reliability of the NIBS-induced mod-
ulations—for example, by using neuronavigation techniques to 
identify in each individual the target regions of interest based on 
prior functional and/or structural neuroimaging (but see the caveat 
about clinical studies described above). Moreover, given that most 
NIBS methods induce somatosensory effects (for example, in TMS, 
auditory effects of the coil click128; in tDCS, skin sensations due to 
the current flow over the scalp129; in tACS, the perception of phos-
phenes130 (see Box 2)), it is crucial that the authors take care to blind 
the NIBS intervention and to properly control for placebo effects.
Finally, in the analysis and reporting stage, the investigators 
should have a clear plan for the statistical analyses used to evaluate 
whether the targeted cognitive process was specifically affected by 
the NIBS intervention. This analysis plan should include statistical 
comparisons with control tasks, brain regions and clearly defined 
neurocomputational latent variables to identify the specificity of 
the hypothesized NIBS-induced effect on behavior and neural 
function. Last but not least, to promote reproducibility in NIBS 
research, we encourage both researchers and journal editors to pro-
vide for every publication involving any type of NIBS intervention 
a methods-reporting checklist. This type of strategy is already used 
for studies employing fMRI131, a research method that has also trig-
gered intense discussions about methodology and reproducibility85. 
Fortunately, corresponding methods-reporting NIBS checklists 
already exist based on recent international consensus studies for 
TMS132 and tES133. Such checklist reports would ensure transparent 
reporting of methodological details concerning NBS application, 
data collection and data analysis, all of which have clear implication 
for interpretation and future use of these data131.
Implications for translational applications
Beyond studies employing NIBS methods to reveal causal brain–
behavior relations, important applications of NIBS protocols have 
attempted to identify and potentially ameliorate pathophysiologi-
cal mechanisms underlying neurological and psychiatric diseases. 
The problems discussed above apply in a similar manner to these 
more clinical and translational applications of NIBS methods. 
While the use of NIBS for therapeutic applications has been exten-
sively investigated, the corresponding treatment effects have been 
moderate and variable in most cases; beyond the use of prefrontal 
rTMS for treatment of major depression, no NIBS protocol has 
developed into a routinely used treatment tool so far134. This does 
not necessarily reflect limited therapeutic potential of NIBS inter-
ventions. However, it does suggest that research strategies in this 
field so far may not have been well suited to developing and iden-
tifying NIBS protocols with optimal efficacy. At least three lines 
of research may advance the field in this respect. First, it will be 
important to base any intervention protocol on solid mechanistic 
knowledge about the causal and specific contribution of brain areas 
and networks to clinical symptoms. In analogy to basic-science 
studies on causal brain–behavior relationships, this knowledge 
would have to be derived with combinations of brain stimula-
tion, neuroimaging, solid experimental designs and modeling 
work (as attempted, for example, in computational psychiatry135). 
Such initial studies in healthy participants should lead to further 
translational treatment-validation studies that should not only 
monitor clinical symptoms but also physiological data, to validate 
the precise neurophysiological mechanisms causally mediating the 
intervention effects. Second, promising treatment protocols iden-
tified with the strategy discussed above should be further opti-
mized by systematic evaluation of the optimal stimulation areas 
and parameter settings for the stimulation; this should initially be 
performed in healthy surrogate populations, but it is important 
that it be directly validated in the target patient groups (to account 
for the state dependency of neuromodulatory NIBS protocols dis-
cussed above). This optimization of intervention protocols may 
not be restricted to the group level, but should include individual 
optimization of the protocols dependent on brain state, lesions, 
clinical symptoms and other factors. Third, the field is currently 
characterized by a multitude of studies with relatively small sam-
ple sizes. While this may be helpful for exploratory and screening 
purposes, it is not sufficient for establishing the clinical relevance 
of an intervention and for decisions about its implementation in 
clinical routine. Thus, larger and preferably multicenter random-
ized clinical trials should be conducted to establish with adequate 
statistical power which protocols may have clinically relevant 
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

----- Page 11 (native) -----
Review Article
Nature Neuroscience
effects, and on whom. All these steps would be important to pro-
vide solid evidence for the usefulness of applying these validated 
protocols in clinical settings.
Conclusions
In the last 30 years, NIBS methods have become indispensable tools 
for elucidating how behavior causally depends on specific aspects 
of neural activity in the healthy human brain. There is presently 
no alternative to these techniques for the study of causal brain–
behavior relationships in humans, but current controversies high-
light the necessity for responsible scientific practice in the use of 
NIBS for research purposes. This may require a shift in focus from 
simplistic assumptions about how NIBS methods generally affect 
the brain toward more physiologically informed multi-method 
approaches that test specific hypotheses about how the influences 
of NIBS on behavior are mediated by modulation of well-defined 
neural processes. These approaches should explicitly consider 
various intrinsic, task-related and methodological factors that can 
potentially influence the variability of behavioral and physiological 
outcomes. Moreover, more attention should be devoted to the pre-
cise reporting of methods, protocols and results to allow more accu-
rate interpretation and future summary of the data. Of course, these 
considerations are important not only for NIBS research but also 
for other experimental sciences. But the current debates show that 
NIBS research in particular may be at a crossroads where the field 
would strongly benefit from coordinated methodological efforts 
to optimize the conclusiveness of findings on brain–behavior rela-
tions. This step appears vital for successful translational applica-
tions of these methods for cognitive enhancement and improved 
mental health.
Received: 24 August 2017; Accepted: 22 November 2017;  
Published: xx xx xxxx
References
	1.	
Katz, L. N., Yates, J. L., Pillow, J. W. & Huk, A. C. Dissociated functional 
significance of decision-related activity in the primate dorsal stream. Nature 
535, 285–288 (2016).
	2.	
Lomber, S. G., Payne, B. R. & Horel, J. A. The cryoloop: an adaptable 
reversible cooling deactivation method for behavioral or 
electrophysiological assessment of neural function. J. Neurosci. Methods 86, 
179–194 (1999).
	3.	
Tehovnik, E. J., Tolias, A. S., Sultan, F., Slocum, W. M. & Logothetis, N. K. 
Direct and indirect activation of cortical neurons by electrical 
microstimulation. J. Neurophysiol. 96, 512–521 (2006).
	4.	
Fenno, L., Yizhar, O. & Deisseroth, K. The development and application of 
optogenetics. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 34, 389–412 (2011).
	5.	
Merton, P. A. & Morton, H. B. Stimulation of the cerebral cortex in the 
intact human subject. Nature 285, 227 (1980).
	6.	
Rossi, S., Hallett, M., Rossini, P. M. & Pascual-Leone, A. Safety, ethical 
considerations, and application guidelines for the use of transcranial 
magnetic stimulation in clinical practice and research. Clin. Neurophysiol. 
120, 2008–2039 (2009).
	7.	
Poreisz, C., Boros, K., Antal, A. & Paulus, W. Safety aspects of transcranial 
direct current stimulation concerning healthy subjects and patients. Brain 
Res. Bull. 72, 208–214 (2007).
	8.	
Kar, K. & Krekelberg, B. Transcranial electrical stimulation over visual 
cortex evokes phosphenes with a retinal origin. J. Neurophysiol. 108, 
2173–2178 (2012).
	9.	
Kar, K., Duijnhouwer, J. & Krekelberg, B. Transcranial alternating current 
stimulation attenuates neuronal adaptation. J. Neurosci. 37, 2325–2335 (2017).
	10.	
Hallett, M. Transcranial magnetic stimulation: a primer. Neuron 55, 
187–199 (2007).
	11.	
Amassian, V. E. et al. Suppression of visual perception by magnetic coil 
stimulation of human occipital cortex. Electroencephalogr. Clin. 
Neurophysiol. 74, 458–462 (1989).
	12.	
Pascual-Leone, A., Gates, J. R. & Dhuna, A. Induction of speech arrest and 
counting errors with rapid-rate transcranial magnetic stimulation. 
Neurology 41, 697–702 (1991).
	13.	
Koch, G. & Rothwell, J. C. TMS investigations into the task-dependent 
functional interplay between human posterior parietal and motor cortex. 
Behav. Brain Res. 202, 147–152 (2009).
	14.	
Feredoes, E., Heinen, K., Weiskopf, N., Ruff, C. & Driver, J. Causal evidence 
for frontal involvement in memory target maintenance by posterior brain 
areas during distracter interference of visual working memory. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 108, 17510–17515 (2011).
	15.	
Blankenburg, F. et al. Studying the role of human parietal cortex in 
visuospatial attention with concurrent TMS-fMRI. Cereb. Cortex 20, 
2702–2711 (2010).
	16.	
Romei, V., Driver, J., Schyns, P. G. & Thut, G. Rhythmic TMS over parietal 
cortex links distinct brain frequencies to global versus local visual 
processing. Curr. Biol. 21, 334–337 (2011).
	17.	
Hanslmayr, S., Matuschek, J. & Fellner, M.-C. Entrainment of prefrontal 
beta oscillations induces an endogenous echo and impairs memory 
formation. Curr. Biol. 24, 904–909 (2014).
	18.	
Albouy, P., Weiss, A., Baillet, S. & Zatorre, R. J. Selective entrainment of 
theta oscillations in the dorsal stream causally enhances auditory working 
memory performance. Neuron 94, 193–206.e5 (2017).
	19.	
Nitsche, M. A., Müller-Dahlhaus, F., Paulus, W. & Ziemann, U. The 
pharmacology of neuroplasticity induced by non-invasive brain stimulation: 
building models for the clinical use of CNS active drugs. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 
590, 4641–4662 (2012).
	20.	
Vlachos, A. et al. Repetitive magnetic stimulation induces functional and 
structural plasticity of excitatory postsynapses in mouse organotypic 
hippocampal slice cultures. J. Neurosci. 32, 17514–17523 (2012).
	21.	
Huang, Y.-Z., Chen, R.-S., Rothwell, J. C. & Wen, H.-Y. The after-effect of 
human theta burst stimulation is NMDA receptor dependent. Clin. 
Neurophysiol. 118, 1028–1032 (2007).
	22.	
Ueyama, E. et al. Chronic repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation 
increases hippocampal neurogenesis in rats. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci 65, 
77–81 (2011).
	23.	
Silvanto, J., Muggleton, N. & Walsh, V. State-dependency in brain 
stimulation studies of perception and cognition. Trends Cogn. Sci. 12, 
447–454 (2008).
	24.	
Gerloff, C., Corwell, B., Chen, R., Hallett, M. & Cohen, L. G. Stimulation 
over the human supplementary motor area interferes with the organization 
of future elements in complex motor sequences. Brain 120,  
1587–1602 (1997).
	25.	
Day, B. L. et al. Delay in the execution of voluntary movement by electrical 
or magnetic brain stimulation in intact man. Evidence for the storage of 
motor programs in the brain. Brain 112, 649–663 (1989).
	26.	
Pascual-Leone, A. & Walsh, V. Fast backprojections from the motion to the 
primary visual area necessary for visual awareness. Science 292,  
510–512 (2001).
	27.	
Hallett, M. Plasticity of the human motor cortex and recovery from stroke. 
Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 36, 169–174 (2001).
	28.	
Chen, R., Cohen, L. G. & Hallett, M. Nervous system reorganization 
following injury. Neuroscience 111, 761–773 (2002).
	29.	
Amedi, A., Floel, A., Knecht, S., Zohary, E. & Cohen, L. G. Transcranial 
magnetic stimulation of the occipital pole interferes with verbal processing 
in blind subjects. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 1266–1270 (2004).
	30.	
Nitsche, M. A. et al. Level of action of cathodal DC polarisation  
induced inhibition of the human motor cortex. Clin. Neurophysiol. 114, 
600–604 (2003).
	31.	
Nitsche, M. A. & Paulus, W. Excitability changes induced in the human 
motor cortex by weak transcranial direct current stimulation. J. Physiol. 
(Lond.) 527, 633–639 (2000).
	32.	
Nitsche, M. A. et al. Pharmacological modulation of cortical excitability 
shifts induced by transcranial direct current stimulation in humans.  
J. Physiol. (Lond.) 553, 293–301 (2003).
	33.	
Nitsche, M. A. & Paulus, W. Sustained excitability elevations induced by 
transcranial DC motor cortex stimulation in humans. Neurology 57, 
1899–1901 (2001).
	34.	
Bolzoni, F., Pettersson, L.-G. & Jankowska, E. Evidence for long-lasting 
subcortical facilitation by transcranial direct current stimulation in the cat. 
J. Physiol. (Lond.) 591, 3381–3399 (2013).
	35.	
Polanía, R., Paulus, W. & Nitsche, M. A. Modulating cortico-striatal and 
thalamo-cortical functional connectivity with transcranial direct current 
stimulation. Hum. Brain Mapp. 33, 2499–2508 (2012).
	36.	
Kuo, H.-I. et al. Comparing cortical plasticity induced by conventional and 
high-definition 4 ×​ 1 ring tDCS: a neurophysiological study. Brain Stimul. 
6, 644–648 (2013).
	37.	
Siegel, M., Donner, T. H. & Engel, A. K. Spectral fingerprints of large-scale 
neuronal interactions. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 121–134 (2012).
	38.	
Antal, A. & Paulus, W. Transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACS). 
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7, 317 (2013).
	39.	
Ali, M. M., Sellers, K. K. & Fröhlich, F. Transcranial alternating current 
stimulation modulates large-scale cortical network activity by network 
resonance. J. Neurosci. 33, 11262–11275 (2013).
	40.	
Ozen, S. et al. Transcranial electric stimulation entrains cortical neuronal 
populations in rats. J. Neurosci. 30, 11476–11485 (2010).
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

----- Page 12 (native) -----
Review Article
Nature Neuroscience
	41.	
Joundi, R. A., Jenkinson, N., Brittain, J.-S., Aziz, T. Z. & Brown, P. Driving 
oscillatory activity in the human cortex enhances motor performance. Curr. 
Biol. 22, 403–407 (2012).
	42.	
Cecere, R., Rees, G. & Romei, V. Individual differences in alpha frequency 
drive crossmodal illusory perception. Curr. Biol. 25, 231–235 (2015).
	43.	
Moisa, M., Polania, R., Grueschow, M. & Ruff, C. C. Brain network 
mechanisms underlying motor enhancement by transcranial entrainment of 
gamma oscillations. J. Neurosci. 36, 12053–12065 (2016).
	44.	
Minami, S. & Amano, K. Illusory jitter perceived at the frequency of alpha 
oscillations. Curr. Biol. 27, 2344–2351.e4 (2017).
	45.	
Alekseichuk, I., Turi, Z., Amador de Lara, G., Antal, A. & Paulus, W. Spatial 
working memory in humans depends on theta and high gamma 
synchronization in the prefrontal cortex. Curr. Biol. 26, 1513–1521 (2016).
	46.	
Santarnecchi, E. et al. Frequency-dependent enhancement of fluid 
intelligence induced by transcranial oscillatory potentials. Curr. Biol. 23, 
1449–1453 (2013).
	47.	
Polanía, R., Nitsche, M. A., Korman, C., Batsikadze, G. & Paulus, W. The 
importance of timing in segregated theta phase-coupling for cognitive 
performance. Curr. Biol. 22, 1314–1318 (2012).
	48.	
Polanía, R., Moisa, M., Opitz, A., Grueschow, M. & Ruff, C. C. The 
precision of value-based choices depends causally on fronto-parietal phase 
coupling. Nat. Commun. 6, 8090 (2015).
	49.	
Violante, I. R. et al. Externally induced frontoparietal synchronization 
modulates network dynamics and enhances working memory performance. 
Elife 6, 91–95 (2017).
	50.	
Bächinger, M. et al. Concurrent tACS-fMRI reveals causal influence of 
power synchronized neural activity on resting state fMRI connectivity. J. 
Neurosci. 37, 4766–4777 (2017).
	51.	
Romei, V., Gross, J. & Thut, G. Sounds reset rhythms of visual cortex and 
corresponding human visual perception. Curr. Biol. 22, 807–813 (2012).
	52.	
Berényi, A., Belluscio, M., Mao, D. & Buzsáki, G. Closed-loop control of 
epilepsy by transcranial electrical stimulation. Science 337, 735–737 (2012).
	53.	
Ngo, H.-V. V., Martinetz, T., Born, J. & Mölle, M. Auditory closed-loop 
stimulation of the sleep slow oscillation enhances memory. Neuron 78, 
545–553 (2013).
	54.	
Lustenberger, C. et al. Feedback-controlled transcranial alternating current 
stimulation reveals a functional role of sleep spindles in motor memory 
consolidation. Curr. Biol. 26, 2127–2136 (2016).
	55.	
Roth, Y., Zangen, A. & Hallett, M. A coil design for transcranial magnetic 
stimulation of deep brain regions. J. Clin. Neurophysiol. 19, 361–370 (2002).
	56.	
Roth, Y., Amir, A., Levkovitz, Y. & Zangen, A. Three-dimensional 
distribution of the electric field induced in the brain by transcranial 
magnetic stimulation using figure-8 and deep H-coils. J. Clin. Neurophysiol. 
24, 31–38 (2007).
	57.	
Grossman, N. et al. Noninvasive deep brain stimulation via temporally 
interfering electric Fields. Cell 169, 1029–1041.e16 (2017).
	58.	
Noury, N. & Siegel, M. Phase properties of transcranial electrical 
stimulation artifacts in electrophysiological recordings. Neuroimage 158, 
406–416 (2017).
	59.	
Noury, N., Hipp, J. F. & Siegel, M. Physiological processes non-linearly 
affect electrophysiological recordings during transcranial electric 
stimulation. Neuroimage 140, 99–109 (2016).
	60.	
Terney, D., Chaieb, L., Moliadze, V., Antal, A. & Paulus, W. Increasing 
human brain excitability by transcranial high-frequency random noise 
stimulation. J. Neurosci. 28, 14147–14155 (2008).
	61.	
Fertonani, A., Pirulli, C. & Miniussi, C. Random noise stimulation improves 
neuroplasticity in perceptual learning. J. Neurosci. 31, 15416–15423 (2011).
	62.	
Saiote, C., Polanía, R., Rosenberger, K., Paulus, W. & Antal, A. High-
frequency TRNS reduces BOLD activity during visuomotor learning. PLoS 
One 8, e59669 (2013).
	63.	
van der Groen, O. & Wenderoth, N. Transcranial random noise stimulation 
of visual cortex: stochastic resonance enhances central mechanisms of 
perception. J. Neurosci. 36, 5289–5298 (2016).
	64.	
Miniussi, C., Harris, J. A. & Ruzzoli, M. Modelling non-invasive brain 
stimulation in cognitive neuroscience. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 37, 
1702–1712 (2013).
	65.	
Silvanto, J., Cowey, A., Lavie, N. & Walsh, V. Striate cortex (V1) activity 
gates awareness of motion. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 143–144 (2005).
	66.	
Plewnia, C. et al. Dose-dependent attenuation of auditory phantom 
perception (tinnitus) by PET-guided repetitive transcranial magnetic 
stimulation. Hum. Brain Mapp. 28, 238–246 (2007).
	67.	
Muellbacher, W. et al. Early consolidation in human primary motor cortex. 
Nature 415, 640–644 (2002).
	68.	
Polanía, R., Nitsche, M. A. & Paulus, W. Modulating functional connectivity 
patterns and topological functional organization of the human brain with 
transcranial direct current stimulation. Hum. Brain Mapp. 32, 1236–1249 (2011).
	69.	
Reis, J. et al. Noninvasive cortical stimulation enhances motor skill 
acquisition over multiple days through an effect on consolidation. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 1590–1595 (2009).
	70.	
Bolognini, N., Rossetti, A., Maravita, A. & Miniussi, C. Seeing touch in the 
somatosensory cortex: a TMS study of the visual perception of touch. Hum. 
Brain Mapp. 32, 2104–2114 (2011).
	71.	
Tarapore, P. E. et al. Language mapping with navigated repetitive TMS: 
proof of technique and validation. Neuroimage 82,  
260–272 (2013).
	72.	
Holland, R. et al. Speech facilitation by left inferior frontal cortex 
stimulation. Curr. Biol. 21, 1403–1407 (2011).
	73.	
Sparing, R. et al. Bidirectional alterations of interhemispheric  
parietal balance by non-invasive cortical stimulation. Brain 132,  
3011–3020 (2009).
	74.	
Ashbridge, E., Walsh, V. & Cowey, A. Temporal aspects of visual search 
studied by transcranial magnetic stimulation. Neuropsychologia 35, 
1121–1131 (1997).
	75.	
Oliveri, M. et al. Parieto-frontal interactions in visual-object and 
visual-spatial working memory: evidence from transcranial magnetic 
stimulation. Cereb. Cortex 11, 606–618 (2001).
	76.	
Wang, J. X. et al. Targeted enhancement of cortical-hippocampal  
brain networks and associative memory. Science 345,  
1054–1057 (2014).
	77.	
Cohen Kadosh, R., Soskic, S., Iuculano, T., Kanai, R. & Walsh, V. 
Modulating neuronal activity produces specific and long-lasting changes in 
numerical competence. Curr. Biol. 20, 2016–2020 (2010).
	78.	
Philiastides, M. G., Auksztulewicz, R., Heekeren, H. R. & Blankenburg, F. 
Causal role of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in human perceptual decision 
making. Curr. Biol. 21, 980–983 (2011).
	79.	
Raja Beharelle, A., Polanía, R., Hare, T. A. & Ruff, C. C. Transcranial 
stimulation over frontopolar cortex elucidates the choice attributes and 
neural mechanisms used to resolve exploration-exploitation trade-offs.  
J. Neurosci. 35, 14544–14556 (2015).
	80.	
Maréchal, M. A., Cohn, A., Ugazio, G. & Ruff, C. C. Increasing honesty in 
humans with noninvasive brain stimulation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114, 
4360–4364 (2017).
	81.	
Strang, S. et al. Be nice if you have to—the neurobiological  
roots of strategic fairness. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 10,  
790–796 (2015).
	82.	
Ruff, C. C., Ugazio, G. & Fehr, E. Changing social norm compliance  
with noninvasive brain stimulation. Science 342,  
482–484 (2013).
	83.	
Knoch, D., Pascual-Leone, A., Meyer, K., Treyer, V. & Fehr, E. Diminishing 
reciprocal fairness by disrupting the right prefrontal cortex. Science 314, 
829–832 (2006).
	84.	
Pashler, H. & Wagenmakers, E.-J. Editors’ introduction to the special 
section on replicability in psychological science: a crisis of confidence? 
Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 7, 528–530 (2012).
	85.	
Eklund, A., Nichols, T. E. & Knutsson, H. Cluster failure: why fMRI 
inferences for spatial extent have inflated false-positive rates. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 113, 7900–7905 (2016).
	86.	
Du, X., Summerfelt, A., Chiappelli, J., Holcomb, H. H. & Hong, L. E. 
Individualized brain inhibition and excitation profile in response to 
paired-pulse TMS. J. Mot. Behav. 46, 39–48 (2014).
	87.	
Rioult-Pedotti, M. S., Friedman, D. & Donoghue, J. P. Learning-induced 
LTP in neocortex. Science 290, 533–536 (2000).
	88.	
Wiethoff, S., Hamada, M. & Rothwell, J. C. Variability in response to 
transcranial direct current stimulation of the motor cortex. Brain Stimul. 7, 
468–475 (2014).
	89.	
Strube, W. et al. Bidirectional variability in motor cortex excitability 
modulation following 1 mA transcranial direct current stimulation in 
healthy participants. Physiol. Rep. 4, e12884 (2016).
	90.	
López-Alonso, V., Cheeran, B., Río-Rodríguez, D. & Fernández-Del-Olmo, 
M. Inter-individual variability in response to non-invasive brain stimulation 
paradigms. Brain Stimul. 7, 372–380 (2014).
	91.	
Horvath, J. C., Forte, J. D. & Carter, O. Quantitative review finds no 
evidence of cognitive effects in healthy populations from single-session 
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS). Brain Stimul. 8,  
535–550 (2015).
	92.	
Horvath, J. C., Forte, J. D. & Carter, O. Evidence that transcranial direct 
current stimulation (tDCS) generates little-to-no reliable neurophysiologic 
effect beyond MEP amplitude modulation in healthy human subjects: a 
systematic review. Neuropsychologia 66, 213–236 (2015).
	93.	
Nitsche, M. A., Bikson, M. & Bestmann, S. On the use of meta-analysis in 
neuromodulatory non-invasive brain stimulation. Brain Stimul. 8,  
666–667 (2015).
	94.	
Antal, A., Keeser, D., Priori, A., Padberg, F. & Nitsche, M. A. Conceptual 
and procedural shortcomings of the systematic review “Evidence that 
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) generates little-to-no reliable 
neurophysiologic effect beyond MEP amplitude modulation in healthy 
human subjects: a systematic review” by Horvath and co-workers. Brain 
Stimul. 8, 846–849 (2015).
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

----- Page 13 (native) -----
Review Article
Nature Neuroscience
	95.	
Ridding, M. C. & Ziemann, U. Determinants of the induction of cortical 
plasticity by non-invasive brain stimulation in healthy subjects. J. Physiol. 
(Lond.) 588, 2291–2304 (2010).
	96.	
Chaieb, L., Antal, A., Ambrus, G. G. & Paulus, W. Brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor: its impact upon neuroplasticity and neuroplasticity 
inducing transcranial brain stimulation protocols. Neurogenetics 15,  
1–11 (2014).
	97.	
Monte-Silva, K. et al. D2 receptor block abolishes θ​ burst stimulation-
induced neuroplasticity in the human motor cortex. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 36, 2097–2102 (2011).
	98.	
Fresnoza, S., Paulus, W., Nitsche, M. A. & Kuo, M.-F. Nonlinear dose-
dependent impact of D1 receptor activation on motor cortex plasticity in 
humans. J. Neurosci. 34, 2744–2753 (2014).
	99.	
Nitsche, M. A. et al. Dopaminergic modulation of long-lasting direct 
current-induced cortical excitability changes in the human motor cortex. 
Eur. J. Neurosci 23, 1651–1657 (2006).
	100.	 Gentner, R., Wankerl, K., Reinsberger, C., Zeller, D. & Classen, J. 
Depression of human corticospinal excitability induced by magnetic 
theta-burst stimulation: evidence of rapid polarity-reversing metaplasticity. 
Cereb. Cortex 18, 2046–2053 (2008).
	101.	 Batsikadze, G., Moliadze, V., Paulus, W., Kuo, M.-F. & Nitsche, M. A. 
Partially non-linear stimulation intensity-dependent effects of direct current 
stimulation on motor cortex excitability in humans. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 591, 
1987–2000 (2013).
	102.	 Thirugnanasambandam, N. et al. Isometric contraction interferes with 
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) induced plasticity: evidence 
of state-dependent neuromodulation in human motor cortex. Restor. Neurol. 
Neurosci. 29, 311–320 (2011).
	103.	 Woods, A. J. et al. A technical guide to tDCS, and related non-invasive 
brain stimulation tools. Clin. Neurophysiol. 127,  
1031–1048 (2016).
	104.	 Schmidt, F.L. & Hunter, J.E. Methods of Meta-analysis: Correcting Error and 
Bias in Research Findings (Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA, USA, 2014).
	105.	 Parazzini, M. et al. A computational model of the electric field distribution 
due to regional personalized or nonpersonalized electrodes to select 
transcranial electric stimulation target. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 64, 
184–195 (2017).
	106.	 Opitz, A. et al. Physiological observations validate finite element models for 
estimating subject-specific electric field distributions induced by 
transcranial magnetic stimulation of the human motor cortex. Neuroimage 
81, 253–264 (2013).
	107.	 Gamboa, O. L., Antal, A., Moliadze, V. & Paulus, W. Simply longer is not 
better: reversal of theta burst after-effect with prolonged stimulation. Exp. 
Brain Res. 204, 181–187 (2010).
	108.	 Lin, C.-H. et al. Age related differences in the neural substrates of motor 
sequence learning after interleaved and repetitive practice. Neuroimage 62, 
2007–2020 (2012).
	109.	 Pascual-Leone, A., Valls-Solé, J., Wassermann, E. M. & Hallett, M. 
Responses to rapid-rate transcranial magnetic stimulation of the human 
motor cortex. Brain 117, 847–858 (1994).
	110.	 Antal, A. et al. Direct current stimulation over V5 enhances visuomotor 
coordination by improving motion perception in humans. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 
16, 521–527 (2004).
	111.	 Saturnino, G. B., Madsen, K. H., Siebner, H. R. & Thielscher, A. How to 
target inter-regional phase synchronization with dual-site transcranial 
alternating current stimulation. Neuroimage 163, 68–80 (2017).
	112.	 Wurzman, R., Hamilton, R. H., Pascual-Leone, A. & Fox, M. D. An open 
letter concerning do-it-yourself users of transcranial direct current 
stimulation. Ann. Neurol. 80, 1–4 (2016).
	113.	 Cohen Kadosh, R., Levy, N., O’Shea, J., Shea, N. & Savulescu, J. The neuroethics 
of non-invasive brain stimulation. Curr. Biol. 22, R108–R111 (2012).
	114.	 Reardon, S. ‘Brain doping’ may improve athletes’ performance. Nature 531, 
283–284 (2016).
	115.	 Cabrera, L. Y., Evans, E. L. & Hamilton, R. H. Ethics of the electrified mind: 
defining issues and perspectives on the principled use of brain stimulation 
in medical research and clinical care. Brain Topogr. 27, 33–45 (2014).
	116.	 Fitz, N. S. & Reiner, P. B. The challenge of crafting policy for do-it-yourself 
brain stimulation. J. Med. Ethics 41, 410–412 (2015).
	117.	 Hill, C. A. et al. A causal account of the brain network computations 
underlying strategic social behavior. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 1142–1149 (2017).
	118.	 Rose, N. S. et al. Reactivation of latent working memories with transcranial 
magnetic stimulation. Science 354, 1136–1139 (2016).
	119.	 Barron, H. C. et al. Unmasking latent inhibitory connections in human 
cortex to reveal dormant cortical memories. Neuron 90, 191–203 (2016).
	120.	 Thut, G. et al. Rhythmic TMS causes local entrainment of natural 
oscillatory signatures. Curr. Biol. 21, 1176–1185 (2011).
	121.	 Monte-Silva, K. et al. Induction of late LTP-like plasticity in the human 
motor cortex by repeated non-invasive brain stimulation. Brain Stimul. 6, 
424–432 (2013).
	122.	 Stagg, C. J., Bachtiar, V. & Johansen-Berg, H. The role of GABA in human 
motor learning. Curr. Biol. 21, 480–484 (2011).
	123.	 Stagg, C. J. et al. Polarity-sensitive modulation of cortical neurotransmitters 
by transcranial stimulation. J. Neurosci. 29, 5202–5206 (2009).
	124.	 Trepel, C. & Racine, R. J. GABAergic modulation of neocortical  
long-term potentiation in the freely moving rat. Synapse 35,  
120–128 (2000).
	125.	 Open Science Collaboration. Estimating the reproducibility of psychological 
science. Science 349, aac4716 (2015).
	126.	 Button, K. S. et al. Power failure: why small sample size undermines  
the reliability of neuroscience. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 14,  
365–376 (2013).
	127.	 Simonsohn, U., Nelson, L. D. & Simmons, J. P. p-Curve and effect size: 
correcting for publication bias using only significant results. Perspect. 
Psychol. Sci. 9, 666–681 (2014).
	128.	 Morbidi, F. et al. Off-line removal of TMS-induced artifacts on human 
electroencephalography by Kalman filter. J. Neurosci. Methods 162,  
293–302 (2007).
	129.	 Gandiga, P. C., Hummel, F. C. & Cohen, L. G. Transcranial DC stimulation 
(tDCS): a tool for double-blind sham-controlled clinical studies in brain 
stimulation. Clin. Neurophysiol. 117, 845–850 (2006).
	130.	 Kanai, R., Chaieb, L., Antal, A., Walsh, V. & Paulus, W. Frequency-
dependent electrical stimulation of the visual cortex. Curr. Biol. 18, 
1839–1843 (2008).
	131.	 Fostering reproducible fMRI research. Nat. Commun. 8, 14748 (2017).
	132.	 Chipchase, L. et al. A checklist for assessing the methodological quality of 
studies using transcranial magnetic stimulation to study the motor system: 
an international consensus study. Clin. Neurophysiol. 123,  
1698–1704 (2012).
	133.	 Buch, E. R. et al. Effects of tDCS on motor learning and memory 
formation: A consensus and critical position paper. Clin. Neurophysiol. 128, 
589–603 (2017).
	134.	 Lefaucheur, J.-P. et al. Evidence-based guidelines on the therapeutic use of 
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS). Clin. Neurophysiol. 128, 
56–92 (2017).
	135.	 Huys, Q. J. M., Maia, T. V. & Frank, M. J. Computational psychiatry as a 
bridge from neuroscience to clinical applications. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 
404–413 (2016).
	136.	 Polanía, R., Krajbich, I., Grueschow, M. & Ruff, C. C. Neural oscillations 
and synchronization differentially support evidence accumulation  
in perceptual and value-based decision making. Neuron 82,  
709–720 (2014).
	137.	 Datta, A. et al. Gyri-precise head model of transcranial direct current 
stimulation: improved spatial focality using a ring electrode versus 
conventional rectangular pad. Brain Stimul. 2,  
201–207.e1 (2009).
	138.	 Thielscher, A., Opitz, A. & Windhoff, M. Impact of the gyral geometry on 
the electric field induced by transcranial magnetic stimulation. Neuroimage 
54, 234–243 (2011).
	139.	 Legon, W. et al. Transcranial focused ultrasound modulates the activity  
of primary somatosensory cortex in humans. Nat. Neurosci. 17,  
322–329 (2014).
	140.	 Opitz, A., Falchier, A., Linn, G. S., Milham, M. P. & Schroeder, C. E. 
Limitations of ex vivo measurements for in vivo neuroscience. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 114, 5243–5246 (2017).
	141.	 Day, B. L. et al. Electric and magnetic stimulation of human motor cortex: 
surface EMG and single motor unit responses. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 412, 
449–473 (1989).
	142.	 Rossini, P. M. et al. Non-invasive electrical and magnetic stimulation of the 
brain, spinal cord, roots and peripheral nerves: basic principles and 
procedures for routine clinical and research application. An updated  
report from an I.F.C.N. Committee. Clin. Neurophysiol. 126,  
1071–1107 (2015).
	143.	 Huang, Y. et al. Measurements and models of electric fields in the in vivo 
human brain during transcranial electric stimulation. Elife 6, e18834 (2017).
	144.	 Rahman, A., Lafon, B., Parra, L. C. & Bikson, M. Direct current stimulation 
boosts synaptic gain and cooperativity in vitro. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 595, 
3535–3547 (2017).
	145.	 Tufail, Y. et al. Transcranial pulsed ultrasound stimulates intact brain 
circuits. Neuron 66, 681–694 (2010).
	146.	 Antal, A. et al. Imaging artifacts induced by electrical stimulation during 
conventional fMRI of the brain. Neuroimage 85, 1040–1047 (2014).
	147.	 Fritsch, B. et al. Direct current stimulation promotes BDNF-dependent 
synaptic plasticity: potential implications for motor learning. Neuron 66, 
198–204 (2010).
	148.	 Cheeran, B. et al. A common polymorphism in the brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor gene (BDNF) modulates human cortical plasticity  
and the response to rTMS. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 586,  
5717–5725 (2008).
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

----- Page 14 (native) -----
Review Article
Nature Neuroscience
(grants 105314_152891 and 100019L_173248) and by an ERC consolidator grant 
(BRAINCODES).
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Additional information
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to R.P. or C.C.R.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
	149.	 Malenka, R. C. & Bear, M. F. LTP and LTD: an embarrassment of riches. 
Neuron 44, 5–21 (2004).
	150.	 Schwiedrzik, C. M. Retina or visual cortex? The site of phosphene  
induction by transcranial alternating current stimulation. Front. Integr. 
Neurosci 3, 6 (2009).
Acknowledgements
Michael A. Nitsche receives support by the EC Horizon 2020 Program, FET 
Grant, 686764-LUMINOUS, grants from the German ministry of Research and 
Education (GCBS grant 01EE1403C, TRAINSTIM grant 01GQ1424E), and by a 
grant from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft - Germany (SFB 1280 Extinction 
Learning). Christian C. Ruff is supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation 
Nature Neuroscience | www.nature.com/natureneuroscience
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.