

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Special Feature
Consensus Statement on Concussion in Sport—The
4th International Conference on Concussion in Sport
Held in Zurich, November 2012
Authors:
Paul McCrory, MBBS, PhD, Willem H. Meeuwisse, MD, PhD, Mark Aubry, MD,
Robert C. Cantu, MD, Jir˘í Dvor˘ák, MD, Ruben J. Echemendia, PhD,
Lars Engebretsen, MD, PhD, Karen M. Johnston, MD, PhD, Jeffrey S. Kutcher, MD,
Martin Raftery, MBBS, Allen Sills, MD, Brian W. Benson, MD, PhD, Gavin A. Davis, MBBS,
Richard Ellenbogen, MD, Kevin M. Guskiewicz, PhD, Stanley A. Herring, MD,
Grant L. Iverson, PhD, Barry D. Jordan, MD, James Kissick, MD, Michael McCrea, PhD,
Andrew S. McIntosh, PhD, David L. Maddocks, LLB, PhD, Michael Makdissi, MBBS, PhD,
Laura Purcell, MD, Margot Putukian, MD, Kathryn Schneider, PhD,
Charles H. Tator, MD, PhD, Michael Turner, MD
PREAMBLE
This paper is a revision and update of the recommendations developed following the 1st
(Vienna 2001), 2nd (Prague 2004), and 3rd (Zurich 2008) International Consensus
Conference on Concussion in Sport, and is based on the deliberations at the 4th
International Conference on Concussion in Sport held in Zurich, November 2012 [1-3].
The new 2012 Zurich Consensus statement is designed to build on the principles
outlined in the previous documents and to develop further conceptual understanding of this
problem by using a formal consensus-based approach. A detailed description of the
consensus process is outlined at the end of this document under the “background” section.
This document is developed for use by physicians and health care professionals who are
involved in the care of injured athletes, whether at the recreational, elite, or professional
level.
While agreement exists pertaining to principal messages conveyed within this document,
the authors acknowledge that the science of concussion is evolving, and therefore manage-
ment and return to play (RTP) decisions remain in the realm of clinical judgment on an
individualized basis. Readers are encouraged to copy and distribute freely the Zurich
Consensus document, the Concussion Recognition Tool (CRT), the Sports Concussion
Assessment Tool version 3 (SCAT3), and/or the Child SCAT3 card, and neither is subject to
any restriction, provided it is not altered in any way or converted to a digital format. The
authors request that the document and/or the accompanying tools be distributed in their full
and complete format.
This consensus paper is broken into a number of sections
1. A summary of concussion and its management, with updates from the previous
meetings.
2. Background information about the consensus meeting process.
3. A summary of the speciﬁc consensus questions discussed at this meeting.
4. The Consensus paper should be read in conjunction with the SCAT3 assessment tool,
the Child SCAT3, and the Concussion Recognition Tool (designed for lay use).
This article will also appear in British Journal
of Sports Medicine, American Journal of
Sports Medicine, Clinical Journal of Sports
Medicine, Journal of Athletic Training, Journal
of Clincal Neuroscience, Journal of Clinical
Sports Medicine (Japanese), Journal of Sci-
ence and Medicine in Sport, Physician and
Sportsmedicine, Neurosurgery, Scandinavian
Journal of Science & Medicine in Sport, South
African Sports Medicine Journal, and Cana-
dian Medical Association Journal.
Author afﬁliations can be found on page 269.
PM&R
© 2013 Concussion in Sport Group
1934-1482/13/$36.00
Vol. 5, 255-279, April 2013
Printed in U.S.A.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pmrj.2013.02.012
255

----- Page 2 (native) -----
SECTION 1: SPORT CONCUSSION AND ITS
MANAGEMENT
The Zurich 2012 document examines sport concussion and
management issues raised in the previous Vienna 2001,
Prague 2004, and Zurich 2008 documents, and applies the
consensus questions from Section 3 to these areas [1-3].
Deﬁnition of Concussion
Panel discussion regarding the deﬁnition of concussion and
its separation from mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI) was
held. There was acknowledgement by the Concussion in
Sport Group (CISG) that, although the terms mTBI and
concussion are often used interchangeably in the sporting
context and particularly in the U.S. literature, others use the
term to refer to different injury constructs. Concussion is
the historical term representing low-velocity injuries that
cause brain “shaking,” resulting in clinical symptoms and
that are not necessarily related to a pathologic injury.
Concussion is a subset of TBI and the term concussion will
be used in this document. It was also noted that the term
commotio cerebri is often used in European and other
countries. Minor revisions were made to the deﬁnition of
concussion, and it is deﬁned as follows:
Concussion is a brain injury and is deﬁned as a
complex pathophysiological process affecting the
brain, induced by biomechanical forces. Several
common features that incorporate clinical, patho-
logic, and biomechanical injury constructs that may
be utilized in deﬁning the nature of a concussive
head injury include
1. Concussion may be caused either by a direct blow
to the head, face, neck, or elsewhere on the body
with an “impulsive” force transmitted to the head.
2. Concussion typically results in the rapid onset of
short-lived impairment of neurologic function that
resolves spontaneously. However, in some cases,
symptoms and signs may evolve over a number of
minutes to hours.
3. Concussion may result in neuropathologic changes,
but the acute clinical symptoms largely reﬂect a
functional disturbance rather than a structural in-
jury, and, as such, no abnormality is seen on stan-
dard structural neuroimaging studies.
4. Concussion results in a graded set of clinical symp-
toms that may or may not involve loss of conscious-
ness. Resolution of the clinical and cognitive symp-
toms typically follows a sequential course. However, it
is important to note that in some cases symptoms may
be prolonged.
Recovery of Concussion
The majority (80%-90%) of concussions resolve in a short
(7-10 day) period, although the recovery time frame may be
longer in children and adolescents. [2].
Symptoms and Signs of Acute Concussion
The diagnosis of acute concussion usually involves the as-
sessment of a range of domains, including clinical symptoms,
physical signs, cognitive impairment, neurobehavioral fea-
tures, and sleep disturbance. Furthermore, a detailed concus-
sion history is an important part of the evaluation, both in the
injured athlete and when conducting a preparticipation ex-
amination. The detailed clinical assessment of concussion is
outlined in the SCAT3 and Child SCAT3 forms, which is an
Appendix to this document.
The suspected diagnosis of concussion can include one or
more of the following clinical domains:
(a) Symptoms—somatic (eg, headache), cognitive (eg,
feeling like in a fog), and/or emotional symptoms (eg,
lability)
(b) Physical signs (eg, loss of consciousness, amnesia)
(c) Behavioral changes (eg, irritability)
(d) Cognitive impairment (eg, slowed reaction times)
(e) Sleep disturbance (eg, insomnia)
If any one or more of these components is present, a concus-
sion should be suspected and the appropriate management
strategy instituted.
On-ﬁeld or Sideline Evaluation of Acute
Concussion
When a player shows ANY features of a concussion:
(a) The player should be evaluated by a physician or other
licensed health care provider onsite by using standard
emergency management principles, and particular at-
tention should be given to excluding a cervical spine
injury.
(b) The appropriate disposition of the player must be deter-
mined by the treating health care provider in a timely
manner. If no health care provider is available, the
player should be safely removed from practice or play
and urgent referral to a physician arranged.
(c) Once the ﬁrst aid issues are addressed, then an assess-
ment of the concussive injury should be made by using
the SCAT3 or other sideline assessment tools.
(d) The player should not be left alone following the injury,
and serial monitoring for deterioration is essential over
the initial few hours following injury.
(e) A player with diagnosed concussion should not be al-
lowed to return to play on the day of injury.
256
McCrory et al
ZURICH CONSENSUS STATEMENT ON CONCUSSION IN SPORT

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Sufﬁcient time for assessment and adequate facilities
should be provided for the appropriate medical assessment,
both on and off the ﬁeld, for all injured athletes. In some
sports, this may require rule change to allow an appropriate
off-ﬁeld medical assessment to occur without affecting the
ﬂow of the game or unduly penalizing the injured player’s
team. The ﬁnal determination regarding concussion diagno-
sis and/or ﬁtness to play is a medical decision based on clinical
judgment.
Sideline evaluation of cognitive function is an essential
component in the assessment of this injury. Brief neuropsy-
chological test batteries that assess attention and memory
function have been shown to be practical and effective. Such
tests include the SCAT3, which incorporates the Maddocks
questions [4,5], and the Standardized Assessment of Concus-
sion (SAC) [6-8]. It is worth noting that standard orientation
questions (eg, time, place, person) have been shown to be
unreliable in the sporting situation when compared with
memory assessment [5,9]. It is recognized, however, that
abbreviated testing paradigms are designed for rapid concus-
sion screening on the sidelines and are not meant to replace
comprehensive neuropsychological testing, which should
ideally be performed by trained neuropsychologists who are
sensitive to subtle deﬁcits that may exist beyond the acute
episode; nor should they be used as a stand-alone tool for the
ongoing management of sports concussions.
It should also be recognized that the appearance of symp-
toms or cognitive deﬁcit might be delayed several hours
following a concussive episode and that concussion should
be seen as an evolving injury in the acute stage.
Evaluation in Emergency Room or Ofﬁce
by Medical Personnel
An athlete with concussion may be evaluated in the emer-
gency room or doctor’s ofﬁce as a point of ﬁrst contact
following injury or may have been referred from another care
provider. In addition to the points outlined above, the key
features of this examination should encompass:
(a) A medical assessment including a comprehensive his-
tory and detailed neurological examination, including a
thorough assessment of mental status, cognitive func-
tioning, gait, and balance.
(b) A determination of the clinical status of the patient,
including whether there has been improvement or de-
terioration since the time of injury. This may involve
seeking additional information from parents, coaches,
teammates, and eyewitness to the injury.
(c) A determination of the need for emergent neuroimaging
in order to exclude a more severe brain injury involving
a structural abnormality.
In large part, these points above are included in the SCAT3
assessment.
Concussion Investigations
A range of additional investigations may be utilized to assist
in the diagnosis and/or exclusion of injury. Conventional
structural neuroimaging is typically normal in concussive
injury. Given that caveat, the following suggestions are made:
Brain CT (or where available MR brain scan) contributes little
to concussion evaluation but should be employed whenever
suspicion of an intracerebral or structural lesion (eg, skull
fracture) exists. Examples of such situations may include
prolonged disturbance of conscious state, focal neurologic
deﬁcit, or worsening symptoms.
Other imaging modalities such as fMRI demonstrate acti-
vation patterns that correlate with symptom severity and
recovery in concussion [10-14]. While not part of routine
assessment at the present time, they nevertheless provide
additional insight to pathophysiological mechanisms. Alter-
native imaging technologies (eg, positron emission tomogra-
phy, diffusion tensor imaging, magnetic resonance spectros-
copy, functional connectivity), while demonstrating some
compelling ﬁndings, are still at early stages of development
and cannot be recommended other than in a research setting.
Published studies, using both sophisticated force plate
technology as well as those using less sophisticated clinical
balance tests (eg, Balance Error Scoring System [BESS]), have
identiﬁed acute postural stability deﬁcits lasting approxi-
mately 72 hours following sport-related concussion. It ap-
pears that postural stability testing provides a useful tool for
objectively assessing the motor domain of neurologic func-
tioning and should be considered a reliable and valid addi-
tion to the assessment of athletes suffering from concussion,
particularly where symptoms or signs indicate a balance
component [15-21].
The signiﬁcance of apolipoprotein (Apo) E4, ApoE pro-
motor gene, tau polymerase, and other genetic markers in the
management of sports concussion risk or injury outcome is
unclear at this time [22,23]. Evidence from human and
animal studies in more severe traumatic brain injury demon-
strate induction of a variety of genetic and cytokine factors,
such as insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), IGF binding
protein-2, ﬁbroblast growth factor, Cu-Zn superoxide dis-
mutase, superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD-1), nerve growth fac-
tor, glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP), and S-100. How
such factors are affected in sporting concussion is not known
at this stage [24-31]. In addition, biochemical serum and
cerebral spinal ﬂuid biomarkers of brain injury (including
S-100, neuron speciﬁc enolase [NSE], myelin basic protein
[MBP], GFAP, tau, etc) have been proposed as means by
which cellular damage may be detected if present [32-38].
There is currently insufﬁcient evidence, however, to justify
the routine use of these biomarkers clinically.
Different electrophysiological recording techniques (eg,
evoked response potential [ERP], cortical magnetic stimula-
tion, and electroencephalography) have demonstrated repro-
ducible abnormalities in the postconcussive state; however,
257
PM&R
Vol. 5, Iss. 4, 2013

----- Page 4 (native) -----
not all studies reliably differentiated concussed athletes from
controls [39-45]. The clinical signiﬁcance of these changes
remains to be established.
Neuropsychological Assessment
The application of neuropsychological (NP) testing in con-
cussion has been shown to be of clinical value and contrib-
utes signiﬁcant information in concussion evaluation [46-
51]. Although in most cases cognitive recovery largely
overlaps with the time course of symptom recovery, it has
been demonstrated that cognitive recovery may occasionally
precede or more commonly follow clinical symptom resolu-
tion, suggesting that the assessment of cognitive function
should be an important component in the overall assessment
of concussion and, in particular, any RTP protocol [52,53]. It
must be emphasized, however, that NP assessment should
not be the sole basis of management decisions. Rather, it
should be seen as an aid to the clinical decision-making
process in conjunction with a range of assessments of differ-
ent clinical domains and investigational results.
It is recommended that all athletes should have a clinical
neurologic assessment (including assessment of their cogni-
tive function) as part of their overall management. This will
normally be done by the treating physician, often in conjunc-
tion with computerized NP screening tools.
Formal NP testing is not required for all athletes, however,
when this is considered necessary, then it should ideally be
performed by a trained neuropsychologist. Although neuro-
psychologists are in the best position to interpret NP tests by
virtue of their background and training, the ultimate return
to play decision should remain a medical one in which a
multidisciplinary approach, when possible, has been taken.
In the absence of NP and other (eg, formal balance assess-
ment) testing, a more conservative RTP approach may be
appropriate.
NP testing may be used to assist RTP decisions and is
typically performed when an athlete is clinically asymptom-
atic; however, NP assessment may add important informa-
tion in the early stages following injury [54,55]. There may be
particular situations where testing is performed early to assist
in determining aspects of management, for example, return
to school for a pediatric athlete. This will normally be best
determined in consultation with a trained neuropsychologist
[56,57].
Baseline NP testing was considered by the panel and was
not felt to be required as a mandatory aspect of every assess-
ment, however, may be helpful or add useful information to
the overall interpretation of these tests. It also provides an
additional educative opportunity for the physician to discuss
the signiﬁcance of this injury with the athlete. At present,
there is insufﬁcient evidence to recommend the widespread
routine use of baseline NP testing.
Concussion Management
The cornerstone of concussion management is physical and
cognitive rest until the acute symptoms resolve and then a
graded program of exertion before medical clearance and
RTP. The current published evidence evaluating the effect of
rest following a sport-related concussion is sparse. An initial
period of rest in the acute symptomatic period following
injury (24-48 hours) may be of beneﬁt. Further research to
evaluate the long-term outcome of rest, and the optimal
amount and type of rest, is needed. In the absence of evi-
dence-based recommendations, a sensible approach involves
the gradual return to school and social activities (before
contact sports) in a manner that does not result in a signiﬁ-
cant exacerbation of symptoms.
Low-level exercise for those who are slow to recover may
be of beneﬁt, although the optimal timing following injury
for initiation of this treatment is currently unknown.
As described above, the majority of injuries will recover
spontaneously over several days. In these situations, it is
expected that an athlete will proceed progressively through a
stepwise RTP strategy [58].
Graduated Return to Play Protocol
RTP protocol following a concussion follows a stepwise pro-
cess, as outlined in Table 1.
With this stepwise progression, the athlete should con-
tinue to proceed to the next level if asymptomatic at the
current level. Generally, each step should take 24 hours so
that an athlete would take approximately 1 week to proceed
through the full rehabilitation protocol once they are asymp-
tomatic at rest and with provocative exercise. If any postcon-
cussion symptoms occur while in the stepwise program, then
the patient should drop back to the previous asymptomatic
level and try to progress again after a further 24-hour period
of rest has passed.
Same-day RTP
It was unanimously agreed that no RTP on the day of con-
cussive injury should occur. There are data demonstrating
that, at the collegiate and high school level, athletes allowed
to RTP on the same day may demonstrate NP deﬁcits postin-
jury that may not be evident on the sidelines and are more
likely to have delayed onset of symptoms [59-65].
The “Difﬁcult” or Persistently Symptomatic
Concussion Patient
Persistent symptoms (10 days) are generally reported in
10%-15% of concussions. In general, symptoms are not
speciﬁc to concussion, and it is important to consider other
pathologies. Cases of concussion in sport where clinical
recovery falls outside the expected window (ie, 10 days)
258
McCrory et al
ZURICH CONSENSUS STATEMENT ON CONCUSSION IN SPORT

----- Page 5 (native) -----
should be managed in a multidisciplinary manner by health
care providers with experience in sports-related concussion.
Psychological Management and Mental
Health Issues
Psychological approaches may have potential application in
this injury, particularly with the modiﬁers listed below
[66,67]. Physicians are also encouraged to evaluate the con-
cussed athlete for affective symptoms, such as depression and
anxiety, because these symptoms are common in all forms of
traumatic brain injury [58].
The Role of Pharmacologic Therapy
Pharmacologic therapy in sports concussion may be applied
in 2 distinct situations. The ﬁrst of these situations is the
management of speciﬁc and/or prolonged symptoms (eg,
sleep disturbance, anxiety). The second situation is where
drug therapy is used to modify the underlying pathophysiol-
ogy of the condition with the aim of shortening the duration
of the concussion symptoms [68]. In broad terms, this ap-
proach to management should be only considered by clini-
cians experienced in concussion management.
An important consideration in RTP is that concussed
athletes should not only be symptom free but also should not
be taking any pharmacologic agents or medications that may
mask or modify the symptoms of concussion. Where antide-
pressant therapy may be commenced during the manage-
ment of a concussion, the decision to return to play while still
on such medication must be considered carefully by the
treating clinician.
The Role of Preparticipation Concussion
Evaluation
In recognizing the importance of a concussion history and
appreciating the fact that many athletes will not recognize all
the concussions they may have suffered in the past, a detailed
concussion history is of value [69-72]. Such a history may
pre-identify athletes who ﬁt into a high-risk category and
provides an opportunity for the health care provider to
educate the athlete in regard to the signiﬁcance of concussive
injury. A structured concussion history should include spe-
ciﬁc questions as to previous symptoms of a concussion and
length of recovery, not just the perceived number of past
concussions. It is also worth noting that dependence upon
the recall of concussive injuries by teammates or coaches has
been demonstrated to be unreliable [69]. The clinical history
should also include information about all previous head,
face, or cervical spine injuries because these may also have
clinical relevance. It is worth emphasizing that, in the setting
of maxillofacial and cervical spine injuries, coexistent con-
cussive injuries may be missed unless speciﬁcally assessed.
Questions pertaining to disproportionate impact versus
symptom severity matching may alert the clinician to a pro-
gressively increasing vulnerability to injury. As part of the
clinical history, it is advised that details regarding protective
equipment employed at time of injury be sought, both for
recent and remote injuries.
There is an additional and often unrecognized beneﬁt of
the preparticipation physical examination insofar as the eval-
uation allows for an educative opportunity with the player
concerned as well as consideration of modiﬁcation of playing
behavior if required.
Modifying Factors in Concussion
Management
A range of “modifying” factors may inﬂuence the investiga-
tion and management of concussion and, in some cases, may
predict the potential for prolonged or persistent symptoms.
However, in some cases, the evidence for their efﬁcacy is
limited. These modiﬁers would be important to consider in a
detailed concussion history and are outlined in Table 2.
Female Gender. The role of female gender as a possible
modiﬁer in the management of concussion was discussed at
Table 1. Graduated return to play protocol
Rehabilitation Stage
Functional Exercise at Each Stage of
Rehabilitation
Objective of Each Stage
1. No activity
Symptom limited physical and cognitive rest.
Recovery
2. Light aerobic exercise
Walking, swimming, or stationary cycling
keeping intensity 70% maximum permitted
heart rate. No resistance training.
Increase heart rate
3. Sport-speciﬁc exercise
Skating drills in ice hockey, running drills in
soccer. No head impact activities.
Add movement
4. Non-contact training drills
Progression to more complex training drills,
eg, passing drills in football and ice hockey.
May start progressive resistance training.
Exercise, coordination, and cognitive
load
5. Full contact practice
Following medical clearance participate in
normal training activities.
Restore conﬁdence and assess
functional skills by coaching staff
6. Return to play
Normal game play.
259
PM&R
Vol. 5, Iss. 4, 2013

----- Page 6 (native) -----
length by the panel. There was not unanimous agreement
that the current published research evidence is conclusive
enough for this to be included as a modifying factor, although
it was accepted that gender may be a risk factor for injury
and/or inﬂuence injury severity [73-75].
The Signiﬁcance of Loss of Consciousness (LOC). In
the overall management of moderate-to-severe traumatic
brain injury, duration of LOC is an acknowledged predictor
of outcome [76]. While published ﬁndings in concussion
describe LOC associated with speciﬁc early cognitive deﬁcits,
it has not been noted as a measure of injury severity [77,78].
Consensus discussion determined that prolonged (1 min-
ute duration) LOC would be considered as a factor that may
modify management.
The Signiﬁcance of Amnesia and Other Symptoms.
There is renewed interest in the role of posttraumatic amnesia
and its role as a surrogate measure of injury severity
[64,79,80]. Published evidence suggests that the nature,
burden, and duration of the clinical postconcussive symp-
toms may be more important than the presence or duration of
amnesia alone [77,81,82]. Further, it must be noted that
retrograde amnesia varies with the time of measurement
postinjury and hence is poorly reﬂective of injury severity
[83,84].
Motor and Convulsive Phenomena. A variety of
immediate motor phenomena (eg, tonic posturing) or con-
vulsive movements may accompany a concussion. Although
dramatic, these clinical features are generally benign and
require no speciﬁc management beyond the standard treat-
ment of the underlying concussive injury [85,86].
Depression. Mental health issues (such as depression)
have been reported as a consequence of all levels of traumatic
brain injury, including sports-related concussion. Neuroim-
aging studies with use of fMRI suggest that a depressed mood
following concussion may reﬂect an underlying pathophysi-
ological abnormality consistent with a limbic-frontal model
of depression [34,87-97]. While such mental health issues
may be multifactorial in nature, it is recommended that the
treating physician consider these issues in the management of
concussed patients.
Special Populations
The Child and Adolescent Athlete. The evaluation
and management recommendations contained herein can be
applied to children and adolescents down to the age of 13
years. Below that age, children report concussion symptoms
different from adults and would require age-appropriate
symptom checklists as a component of assessment. An addi-
tional consideration in assessing the child or adolescent
athlete with a concussion is that the clinical evaluation by the
health care professional may need to include both patient and
parent input, and possibly teacher and school input when
appropriate [98-104]. A child SCAT3 has been developed to
assess concussion (see Appendix) for subjects aged 5-12
years.
The decision to use NP testing is broadly the same as the
adult assessment paradigm, although there are some differ-
ences. Timing of testing may differ in order to assist planning
in school and home management. If cognitive testing is
performed, then it must be developmentally sensitive until
late teen years due to the ongoing cognitive maturation that
occurs during this period, which, in turn, makes the utility of
comparison to either the person’s own baseline performance
or to population norms limited [20]. In this age group, it is
more important to consider the use of trained pediatric
neuropsychologists to interpret assessment data, particularly
in children with learning disorders and/or ADHD who may
need more sophisticated assessment strategies [56,57,98].
It was agreed by the panel that no return to sport or
activity should occur before the child/adolescent athlete has
managed to return to school successfully. In addition, the
concept of “cognitive rest” was highlighted with special ref-
erence to a child’s need to limit exertion with activities of
daily living that may exacerbate symptoms. School atten-
Table 2. Concussion modiﬁers
Factors
Modiﬁer
Symptoms
Number
Duration ( 10 d)
Severity
Signs
Prolonged loss of
consciousness (1 min),
amnesia
Sequelae
Concussive convulsions
Temporal
Frequency—repeated
concussions over time
Timing—injuries close
together in time
“Recency”—recent
concussion or TBI
Threshold
Repeated concussions
occurring with progressively
less impact force or slower
recovery after each
successive concussion.
Age
Child and adolescent (18 y
old)
Co- and pre-morbidities
Migraine, depression or other
mental health disorders,
attention deﬁcit
hyperactivity disorder,
learning disabilities, sleep
disorders
Medication
Psychoactive drugs,
anticoagulants
Behavior
Dangerous style of play
Sport
High-risk activity, contact
and collision sport, high
sporting level
260
McCrory et al
ZURICH CONSENSUS STATEMENT ON CONCUSSION IN SPORT

----- Page 7 (native) -----
dance and activities may also need to be modiﬁed to avoid
provocation of symptoms. Children should not be returned
to sport until clinically completely symptom free, which may
require a longer time frame than for adults.
Because of the different physiological responses and
longer recovery after concussion and speciﬁc risks (eg,
diffuse cerebral swelling) related to head impact during
childhood and adolescence, a more conservative RTP ap-
proach is recommended. It is appropriate to extend the
amount of time of asymptomatic rest and/or the length of
the graded exertion in children and adolescents. It is not
appropriate for a child or adolescent athlete with concus-
sion to RTP on the same day as the injury regardless of the
level of athletic performance. Concussion modiﬁers apply
even more to this population than adults and may mandate
more cautious RTP advice.
Elite Versus Nonelite Athletes
All athletes, regardless of level of participation, should be
managed by using the same treatment and RTP paradigm.
The available resources and expertise in concussion eval-
uation are of more importance in determining manage-
ment than a separation between elite and nonelite athlete
management. Although formal NP testing may be beyond
the resources of many sports or individuals, it is recom-
mended that, in all organized high-risk sports, consider-
ation be given to having this cognitive evaluation, regard-
less of the age or level of performance.
Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy
Clinicians need to be mindful of the potential for long-
term problems in the management of all athletes. How-
ever, it was agreed that CTE represents a distinct tauopa-
thy with an unknown incidence in athletic populations. It
was further agreed that a cause and effect relationship has
not yet been demonstrated between CTE and concussions
or exposure to contact sports [105-114]. At present, the
interpretation of causation in the modern CTE case studies
should proceed cautiously. It was also recognized that it is
important to address the fears of parents and/or athletes
from media pressure related to the possibility of CTE.
Injury Prevention
Protective Equipment: Mouthguards and Helmets.
There is no good clinical evidence that currently available
protective equipment will prevent concussion, although
mouthguards have a deﬁnite role in preventing dental and
orofacial injury. Biomechanical studies have shown a reduc-
tion in impact forces to the brain with the use of head gear
and helmets, but these ﬁndings have not been translated to
show a reduction in concussion incidence. For skiing and
snowboarding, there are a number of studies to suggest that
helmets provide protection against head and facial injury and
hence should be recommended for participants in alpine
sports [115-118]. In speciﬁc sports, such as cycling and
motor and equestrian sports, protective helmets may prevent
other forms of head injury (eg, skull fracture) that are related
to falling on hard surfaces and may be an important injury
prevention issue for those sports [118-130].
Rule Change. Consideration of rule changes to reduce
the head injury incidence or severity may be appropriate
where a clear-cut mechanism is implicated in a particular
sport. An example of this is in football (soccer) where re-
search studies demonstrated that upper limb to head contact
in heading contests accounted for approximately 50% of
concussions [131]. As noted earlier, rule changes also may be
needed in some sports to allow an effective off-ﬁeld medical
assessment to occur without compromising the athlete’s wel-
fare, affecting the ﬂow of the game, or unduly penalizing the
player’s team. It is important to note that rule enforcement
may be a critical aspect of modifying injury risk in these
settings and that referees play an important role in this
regard.
Risk Compensation. An important consideration in the
use of protective equipment is the concept of risk compen-
sation [132]. This is where the use of protective equipment
results in behavioral change such as the adoption of more
dangerous playing techniques, which can result in a paradox-
ical increase in injury rates. This may be a particular concern
in child and adolescent athletes where head injury rates are
often higher than in adult athletes [133-135].
Aggression Versus Violence in Sport. The competi-
tive and/or aggressive nature of sport that makes it fun to play
and watch should not be discouraged. However, sporting
organizations should be encouraged to address violence that
may increase concussion risk [136,137]. Fair play and re-
spect should be supported as key elements of sport.
Knowledge Transfer
Because the ability to treat or reduce the effects of concussive
injury after the event is minimal, education of athletes, col-
leagues, and the general public is a mainstay of progress in
this ﬁeld. Athletes, referees, administrators, parents, coaches,
and health care providers must be educated regarding the
detection of concussion, its clinical features, assessment tech-
niques, and principles of safe RTP. Methods to improve
education, including Web-based resources, educational vid-
eos, and international outreach programs, are important in
delivering the message. In addition, concussion working
groups, plus the support and endorsement of enlightened
sport groups such as Fédération Internationale de Football
Association (FIFA), International Olympic Commission
(IOC), International Rugby Board (IRB), and International
261
PM&R
Vol. 5, Iss. 4, 2013

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF) who initiated this endeavor
have enormous value and must be pursued vigorously. Fair
play and respect for opponents are ethical values that should
be encouraged in all sports and sporting associations. Simi-
larly, coaches, parents, and managers play an important part
in ensuring these values are implemented on the ﬁeld of play
[58,138-150].
SECTION 2: STATEMENT ON BACKGROUND
TO THE CONSENSUS PROCESS
In November 2001, the 1st International Conference on
Concussion in Sport was held in Vienna, Austria. This meet-
ing was organized by the IIHF in partnership with FIFA and
the Medical Commission of the IOC. As part of the resulting
mandate for the future, the need for leadership and future
updates were identiﬁed. The 2nd International Conference
on Concussion in Sport was organized by the same group,
with the additional involvement of the IRB and was held in
Prague, Czech Republic, in November 2004. The original
aims of the symposia were to provide recommendations for
the improvement of safety and health of athletes who suffer
concussive injuries in ice hockey, rugby, football (soccer) as
well as other sports. To this end, a range of experts were
invited to both meetings to address speciﬁc issues of epide-
miology, basic and clinical science, injury grading systems,
cognitive assessment, new research methods, protective
equipment, management, prevention, and long-term out-
come [1,2].
The 3rd International Conference on Concussion in Sport
was held in Zurich, Switzerland, on October 29-30, 2008,
and was designed as a formal consensus meeting following
the organizational guidelines set forth by the U.S. National
Institutes of Health. (Details of the consensus methodology
can be obtained at http://consensus.nih.gov/ABOUTCDP.
htm.) The basic principles governing the conduct of a con-
sensus development conference are summarized below:
1. A broad-based nongovernment, nonadvocacy panel was
assembled to give balanced, objective, and knowledgeable
attention to the topic. Panel members excluded anyone
with scientiﬁc or commercial conﬂicts of interest and
included researchers in clinical medicine, sports medi-
cine, neuroscience, neuroimaging, athletic training, and
sports science.
2. These experts presented data in a public session, followed
by inquiry and discussion. The panel then met in an
executive session to prepare the consensus statement.
3. A number of speciﬁc questions were prepared and posed
in advance to deﬁne the scope and guide the direction of
the conference. The principal task of the panel was to
elucidate responses to these questions. These questions
are outlined below.
4. A systematic literature review was prepared and circu-
lated in advance for use by the panel in addressing the
conference questions.
5. The consensus statement is intended to serve as the sci-
entiﬁc record of the conference.
6. The consensus statement will be widely disseminated to
achieve maximum impact on both current health care
practice and future medical research.
The panel chairperson (W.M.) did not identify with any
advocacy position. The chairperson was responsible for di-
recting the consensus session and guiding the panel’s delib-
erations. Panelists were drawn from clinical practice, aca-
demics,
and
research
in
the
ﬁeld
of
sports-related
concussion. They do not represent organizations per se but
were selected for their expertise, experience, and under-
standing of this ﬁeld.
The 4th International Conference on Concussion in Sport
was held in Zurich, Switzerland, on November 1-3, 2012,
and followed the same outline as for the 3rd meeting. All
speakers, consensus panel members, and abstract authors
were required to sign an ICMJE Form for Disclosure of
Potential Conﬂicts of Interest. Detailed information related to
each author’s afﬁliations and conﬂicts of interests are at the
end of this article.
Medical-Legal Considerations
This consensus document reﬂects the current state of knowl-
edge and will need to be modiﬁed according to the develop-
ment of new knowledge. It provides an overview of issues
that may be of importance to health care providers involved
in the management of sports-related concussion. It is not
intended as a standard of care and should not be interpreted
as such. This document is only a guide and is of a general
nature, consistent with the reasonable practice of a health
care professional. Individual treatment will depend on the
facts and circumstances speciﬁc to each individual case. It is
intended that this document will be formally reviewed and
updated before December 1, 2016.
SECTION 3: ZURICH 2012 CONSENSUS
QUESTIONS
Note that each question is the subject of a separate systematic
review that is published in the British Journal of Sports Medi-
cine (2013;47:5). As such, all citations and details of each
topic will be covered in those reviews.
1. When you assess an athlete acutely and they do not
have concussion, what is it? Is a cognitive injury the key
component of concussion in making a diagnosis?
The consensus panel agreed that concussion is an evolving
injury in the acute phase with rapidly changing clinical signs
262
McCrory et al
ZURICH CONSENSUS STATEMENT ON CONCUSSION IN SPORT

----- Page 9 (native) -----
and symptoms, which may reﬂect the underlying physiolog-
ical injury in the brain. Concussion is considered to be
among the most complex injuries in sports medicine to
diagnose, assess, and manage. The majority of concussions in
sport occur without loss of consciousness or frank neurologic
signs. At present, there is no perfect diagnostic test or marker
that clinicians can rely on for an immediate diagnosis of
concussion in the sporting environment. Because of this
evolving process, it is not possible to rule out concussion
when an injury event occurs associated with a transient
neurological symptom. All such cases should be removed
from the playing ﬁeld and assessed for concussion by the
treating physician or health care provider as discussed below.
It was recognized that a cognitive deﬁcit is not necessary for
acute diagnosis as it either may not be present or detected on
examination.
2. Are the existing tools/examinations sensitive and
reliable enough on the day of injury to make or exclude a
diagnosis of concussion?
Concussion is a clinical diagnosis based largely on the
observed injury mechanism, signs, and symptoms. The
vast majority of sport-related concussions (hereafter, re-
ferred to as concussion) occur without loss of consciousness
or frank neurologic signs [151-154]. In milder forms of
concussion, the athlete might be slightly confused, with-
out clearly identiﬁable amnesia. In addition, most concus-
sions cannot be identiﬁed or diagnosed by neuroimaging
techniques (eg, computed tomography or magnetic reso-
nance imaging). Several well-validated neuropsychologi-
cal tests are appropriate for use in the assessment of acute
concussion in the competitive sporting environment.
These tests provide important data on symptoms and
functional impairments that clinicians can incorporate
into their diagnostic formulation but should not solely be
used to diagnose concussion.
3. What is the best practice for evaluating an adult
athlete with concussion on the “ﬁeld of play” in 2012?
Recognizing and evaluating concussion in the adult
athlete on the ﬁeld is a challenging responsibility for the
health care provider. Performing this task is often a rapid
assessment in the midst of competition with a time con-
straint and the athlete eager to play. A standardized objec-
tive assessment of injury, which includes excluding more
serious injury, is critical in determining disposition deci-
sions for the athlete. The on-ﬁeld evaluation of sport-
related concussion is often a challenge given the elusive-
ness and variability of presentation, difﬁculty in making a
timely diagnosis, speciﬁcity and sensitivity of sideline
assessment tools, and the reliance on symptoms. Despite
these challenges, the sideline evaluation is based on rec-
ognition of injury, assessment of symptoms, cognitive and
cranial nerve function, and balance. Serial assessments are
often necessary. Concussion is often an evolving injury,
and signs and symptoms may be delayed. Therefore, err-
ing on the side of caution (keeping an athlete out of
participation when there is any suspicion for injury) is
important. A standardized assessment of concussion is
useful in the assessment of the athlete with suspected
concussion but should not take the place of clinician
judgment.
4. How can the SCAT2 be improved?
It was agreed that a variety of measures should be
employed as part of the assessment of concussion to
provide a more complete clinical proﬁle for the concussed
athlete. Important clinical information can be ascertained
in a streamlined manner through the use of a multimodal
instrument such as the Sport Concussion Assessment Tool
(SCAT). A baseline assessment is advised wherever possi-
ble. However, it is acknowledged that further validity
studies need to be performed to answer this speciﬁc issue.
A future SCAT test battery (ie, SCAT3) should include
an initial assessment of injury severity using the Glasgow
Coma Scale (GCS), immediately followed by observing
and documenting concussion signs. Once this is complete,
symptom endorsement and symptom severity, neurocog-
nitive function, and balance function should be assessed in
any athlete suspected of sustaining a concussion. It is
recommended that these latter steps be conducted follow-
ing a minimum 15-minute rest period on the sideline to
avoid the inﬂuence of exertion or fatigue on the athlete’s
performance. While it is noted that this time frame is an
arbitrary one, nevertheless, the expert panel agreed that a
period of rest was important prior to assessment. Future
research should consider the efﬁcacy for inclusion of
vision tests such as the King Devick Test and clinical
reaction time tests [155,156]. Recent studies suggest that
these may be useful additions to the sideline assessment of
concussion. However, the need for additional equipment
may make them impractical for sideline use. It was further
agreed that the SCAT3 would be suitable for adults and
youths age 13 years old and over, while a new tool (Child
SCAT3) has been developed for younger children.
5. Advances in neuropsychology: Are computerized
tests sufﬁcient for concussion diagnosis?
Sport-related concussions are frequently associated
with one or more symptoms, impaired balance, and/or
cognitive deﬁcits. These problems can be measured by
using symptom scales, balance testing, and neurocognitive
testing. All 3 modalities can identify signiﬁcant changes in
the ﬁrst few days following injury, generally with normal-
ization over 1-3 weeks. The presentation of symptoms and
the rate of recovery can be variable, which reinforces the
value of assessing all 3 areas as part of a comprehensive
sport concussion program.
Neuropsychological assessment has been described by
the Concussion in Sport Group as a “cornerstone” of
concussion management. Neuropsychologists are uniqu-
263
PM&R
Vol. 5, Iss. 4, 2013

----- Page 10 (native) -----
ely qualiﬁed to interpret neuropsychological tests and can
play an important role within the context of a multifacet-
ed-multimodal and multidisciplinary approach to manag-
ing sport-related concussion. Concussion management
programs that use neuropsychological assessment to assist
in clinical decision making have been instituted in profes-
sional sports, colleges, and high schools. Brief computer-
ized cognitive evaluation tools are the mainstay of these
assessments worldwide given the logistical limitation in
accessing trained neuropsychologists; however, it should
be noted that these are not substitutes for formal neuro-
psychological assessment. At present, there is insufﬁcient
evidence to recommend the widespread routine use of
baseline neuropsychological testing.
7. What evidence exists for new strategies and/or
technologies in the diagnosis of concussion and assess-
ment of recovery?
A number of novel technological platforms exist to
assess concussion, including (but not limited to) iPhone/
smart phone apps, quantitative electroencephalography,
robotics–sensory motor assessment, telemedicine, eye-
tracking technology, functional imaging and/or advanced
neuroimaging, and head impact sensors. At this stage, only
limited evidence exists for their role in this setting, and
none have been validated as diagnostic. It will be impor-
tant to reconsider the role of these technologies once
evidence is developed.
8. Advances in the management of sport concussion:
What is evidence for concussion therapies?
The current evidence evaluating the effect of rest and
treatment following a sport-related concussion is sparse.
An initial period of rest may be of beneﬁt. However,
further research to evaluate the long-term outcome of rest,
and the optimal amount and type of rest, is needed.
Low-level exercise for those who are slow to recover may
be of beneﬁt, although the optimal timing following injury
for initiation of this treatment is currently unknown.
Multimodal physiotherapy treatment for individuals with
clinical evidence of cervical spine and/or vestibular dys-
function may be of beneﬁt. There is a strong need for
high-level studies evaluating the effects of a resting period,
pharmacologic interventions, rehabilitative techniques,
and exercise for individuals who have sustained a sport-
related concussion.
9. The difﬁcult concussion patient: What is the best
approach to investigation and management of persistent
(>10 days) postconcussive symptoms?
Persistent symptoms (10 days) are generally reported
in 10%-15% of concussions. This may be higher in certain
sports (eg, elite ice hockey) and populations (eg, chil-
dren). In general, symptoms are not speciﬁc to concus-
sion, and it is important to consider and manage coexis-
tent
pathologies.
Investigations
may
include
formal
neuropsychological testing and conventional neuroimag-
ing to exclude structural pathology. Currently, there is
insufﬁcient evidence to recommend routine clinical use of
advanced neuroimaging techniques or other investigative
strategies. Cases of concussion in sport where clinical
recovery falls outside the expected window (ie, 10 days)
should be managed in a multidisciplinary manner by
health care providers with experience in sports-related
concussion. Important components of management after
the initial period of physical and cognitive rest include
associated therapies, such as cognitive, vestibular, physi-
cal, and psychological therapy; consideration of assess-
ment of other causes of prolonged symptoms; and consid-
eration of commencement of a graded exercise program at
a level that does not exacerbate symptoms.
10. Revisiting concussion modiﬁers: How should the
evaluation and management of acute concussion differ in
speciﬁc groups?
The literature demonstrates that number and severity of
symptoms and previous concussions are associated with
prolonged recovery and/or increased risk of complications.
Brief loss of consciousness (LOC), duration of posttraumatic
amnesia, and/or impact seizures do not reliably predict out-
come following concussion, although a cautious approach
should be taken in an athlete with prolonged LOC (ie, 1
minute). Children generally take longer to recover from
concussions, and assessment batteries have yet to be vali-
dated in the younger age group. Currently, there are insufﬁ-
cient data on the inﬂuence of genetics and gender on out-
come following concussion. Several modiﬁers are associated
with prolonged recovery or increased risk of complications
following concussion and have important implications for
management. Children with concussion should be managed
conservatively, with the emphasis on return to learn before
return to sport. In cases of concussion managed with limited
resources (eg, nonelite players), a conservative approach
should also be taken such that the athlete does not return to
sport until fully recovered
11. What are the most effective risk-reduction strate-
gies in sport concussion? From protective equipment to
policy?
No new valid evidence was provided to suggest that the
use of current standard headgear in rugby or mouthguards in
American football can signiﬁcantly reduce players’ risk of
concussion. No evidence was provided to suggest an associ-
ation between neck strength increases and concussion risk
reduction. There was evidence to suggest that eliminating
body checking from Pee Wee ice hockey (ages 11-12 years),
and fair-play rules in ice hockey were effective injury preven-
tion strategies. Helmets need to be able to protect from
impacts resulting in a head change in velocity of up to 10 m/s
in professional American football, and up to 7 m/s in profes-
sional Australian football. It also appears that helmets must
be capable of reducing head resultant linear acceleration to
264
McCrory et al
ZURICH CONSENSUS STATEMENT ON CONCUSSION IN SPORT

----- Page 11 (native) -----
below 50 g and angular acceleration components to below
1500 rad/s2 to optimize their effectiveness. Given that a
multifactorial approach is needed for concussion prevention,
well-designed and sport-speciﬁc prospective analytical stud-
ies of sufﬁcient power are warranted for mouthguards, head-
gear and helmets, facial protection, and neck strength. Mea-
suring the effect of rule changes should also be addressed
with future studies, not only assessing new rule changes or
legislation but also alteration or reinforcement to existing
rules.
12. What is the evidence for chronic concussion–
related changes? Behavioral, pathologic, and clinical out-
comes.
It was agreed that CTE represents a distinct tauopathy
with an unknown incidence in athletic populations. It was
further agreed that CTE was not related to concussions
alone or simply exposure to contact sports. At present,
there are no published epidemiologic, cohort, or prospec-
tive studies relating to modern CTE. Due to the nature of
the case reports and pathologic case series that have been
published, it is not possible to determine the causality or
risk factors with any certainty. As such, the speculation
that repeated concussion or subconcussive impacts cause
CTE remains unproven. The extent to which age-related
changes, psychiatric or mental health illness, alcohol or
drug use, or coexisting medical or dementing illnesses
contribute to this process is largely unaccounted for in the
published literature. At present, the interpretation of cau-
sation in the modern CTE case studies should proceed
cautiously. It was also recognized that it is important to
address the fears of parents and/or athletes from media
pressure related to the possibility of CTE.
13. From consensus to action: How do we optimize
knowledge transfer, education, and ability to inﬂuence
policy?
The value of knowledge transfer (KT) as part of concus-
sion education is increasingly becoming recognized. Target
audiences beneﬁt from speciﬁc learning strategies. Concus-
sion tools exist, but their effectiveness and impact require
further evaluation. The media are valuable in drawing atten-
tion to concussion, but efforts need to ensure that the public
is aware of the right information. Social media as a concus-
sion education tool are becoming more prominent. Imple-
mentation of KT models is one approach that organizations
can use to assess knowledge gaps; identify, develop, and
evaluate education strategies; and use the outcomes to facil-
itate decision making. Implementing KT strategies requires a
deﬁned plan. Identifying the needs, learning styles, and pre-
ferred learning strategies of target audiences, coupled with
evaluation, should be a piece of the overall concussion edu-
cation puzzle to have an impact on enhancing knowledge and
awareness.
REFERENCES
1. Aubry M, Cantu R, Dvorak J, et al. Summary and agreement statement
of the 1st International Symposium on Concussion in Sport, Vienna
2001. Clin J Sport Med 2002;12:6-11.
2. McCrory P, Johnston K, Meeuwisse W, et al. Summary and agreement
statement of the 2nd International Conference on Concussion in
Sport, Prague 2004. Br J Sports Med 2005;39:196-204.
3. McCrory P, Meeuwisse W, Johnston K, et al. Consensus Statement on
Concussion in Sport: The Third International Conference on Concus-
sion in Sport held in Zurich, November 2008. Phys Sportsmed 2009;
37:141-159.
4. Maddocks D, Dicker G. An objective measure of recovery from
concussion in Australian rules footballers. Sport Health 1989;
7(Suppl):6-7.
5. Maddocks DL, Dicker GD, Saling MM. The assessment of orientation
following concussion in athletes. Clin J Sport Med 1995;5:32-35.
6. McCrea M. Standardized mental status assessment of sports concus-
sion. Clin J Sport Med 2001;11:176-181.
7. McCrea M, Kelly J, Randolph C, et al. Standardised assessment of
concussion (SAC): On site mental status evaluation of the athlete.
J Head Trauma Rehab. 1998;13:27-36.
8. McCrea M, Randolph C, Kelly J. The Standardized Assessment of
Concussion (SAC): Manual for Administration, Scoring and Interpre-
tation. 2nd ed. Waukesha, WI: 2000, 22-45
9. McCrea M, Kelly JP, Kluge J, Ackley B, Randolph C. Standardized
assessment of concussion in football players. Neurology 1997;48:586-
588.
10. Chen J, Johnston K, Collie A, McCrory P, Ptito A. A validation of the
post concussion symptom scale in the assessment of complex concus-
sion using cognitive testing and functional MRI. J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry 2007;78:1231-1238.
11. Chen J, Johnston K, Frey S, Petrides M, Worsley K, Ptito A. Functional
abnormalities in symptomatic concussed athletes: An fMRI study.
Neuroimage 2004;22:68-82.
12. Chen JK, Johnston KM, Collie A, McCrory P, Ptito A. (14) Association
between symptom severity, cogsport tests results, and functional MRI
activation in symptomatic concussed athletes. Clin J Sport Med 2004;
14:379.
13. Chen JK, Johnston KM, Collie A, McCrory P, Ptito A. behavioural
and functional imaging outcomes in symptomatic concussed ath-
letes measured with cogsport and functional MRI. Br J Sport Med
2004;38:659.
14. Ptito A, Chen JK, Johnston KM. Contributions of functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) to sport concussion evaluation. NeuroRe-
habilitation 2007;22:217-227.
15. Guskiewicz K. Postural stability assessment following concussion.
Clin J Sport Med 2001;11:182-190.
16. Guskiewicz KM. Assessment of postural stability following sport-
related concussion. Curr Sports Med Rep 2003;2:24-30.
17. Guskiewicz KM, Ross SE, Marshall SW. Postural stability and neuro-
psychological deﬁcits after concussion in collegiate athletes. J Athl
Train 2001;36:263-273.
18. Cavanaugh JT, Guskiewicz KM, Giuliani C, Marshall S, Mercer V,
Stergiou N. Detecting altered postural control after cerebral concus-
sion in athletes with normal postural stability. Br J Sports Med
2005;39:805-811.
19. Cavanaugh JT, Guskiewicz KM, Giuliani C, Marshall S, Mercer VS,
Stergiou N. Recovery of postural control after cerebral concussion:
New insights using approximate entropy. J Athl Train 2006;41:305-
313.
20. Cavanaugh JT, Guskiewicz KM, Stergiou N. A nonlinear dynamic
approach for evaluating postural control: New directions for the
management of sport-related cerebral concussion. Sports Med 2005;
35:935-950.
265
PM&R
Vol. 5, Iss. 4, 2013

----- Page 12 (native) -----
21. Fox ZG, Mihalik JP, Blackburn JT, Battaglini CL, Guskiewicz KM.
Return of postural control to baseline after anaerobic and aerobic
exercise protocols. J Athl Train 2008;43:456-463.
22. Kristman VL, Tator CH, Kreiger N, et al. Does the apolipoprotein
epsilon 4 allele predispose varsity athletes to concussion? A prospec-
tive cohort study. Clin J Sport Med 2008;18:322-328.
23. Terrell TR, Bostick RM, Abramson R, et al. APOE, APOE promoter,
and Tau genotypes and risk for concussion in college athletes. Clin
J Sport Med 2008;18:10-17.
24. Vagnozzi R, Tavazzi B, Signoretti S, et al. Temporal window of
metabolic brain vulnerability to concussions: Mitochondrial-re-
lated impairment—Part I. Neurosurgery 2007;61:379-388; dis-
cussion 88-89.
25. Hang CH, Chen G, Shi JX, Zhang X, Li JS. Cortical expression of
nuclear factor kappaB after human brain contusion. Brain Res 2006;
1109:14-21.
26. Peng RY, Gao YB, Xiao XY, et al. Study on the expressions of basic
ﬁbroblast growth factor and nervous growth factor genes in rat cere-
bral concussion [in Chinese, with English abstract]. Zhongguo Wei
Zhong Bing Ji Jiu Yi Xue 2003;15:213-216.
27. Yunoki M, Kawauchi M, Ukita N, et al. Effects of lecithinized SOD on
sequential change in SOD activity after cerebral contusion in rats. Acta
Neurochir Suppl 1998;71:142-145.
28. Hinkle DA, Baldwin SA, Scheff SW, Wise PM. GFAP and S100beta
expression in the cortex and hippocampus in response to mild cortical
contusion. J Neurotrauma 1997;14:729-738.
29. Holmin S, Schalling M, Hojeberg B, Nordqvist AC, Skeftruna AK,
Mathiesen T. Delayed cytokine expression in rat brain following
experimental contusion. J Neurosurg 1997;86:493-504.
30. Sandberg Nordqvist AC, von Holst H, Holmin S, Sara VR, Bellander
BM, Schalling M. Increase of insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1, IGF
binding protein-2 and -4 mRNAs following cerebral contusion. Brain
Res Mol Brain Res 1996;38:285-293.
31. Fukuhara T, Nishio S, Ono Y, Kawauchi M, Asari S, Ohmoto T.
Induction of Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase after cortical contusion
injury during hypothermia. Brain Res 1994;657:333-336.
32. Begaz T, Kyriacou DN, Segal J, Bazarian JJ. Serum biochemical mark-
ers for post-concussion syndrome in patients with mild traumatic
brain injury. J Neurotrauma 2006;23:1201-1210.
33. de Boussard CN, Lundin A, Karlstedt D, Edman G, Bartfai A, Borg J.
S100 and cognitive impairment after mild traumatic brain injury. J
Rehabil Med 2005;37:53-57.
34. Lima DP, Simao Filho C, Abib Sde C, de Figueiredo LF. Quality of life
and neuropsychological changes in mild head trauma. Late analysis
and correlation with S100B protein and cranial CT scan performed at
hospital admission. Injury 2008;39:604-611.
35. Ma M, Lindsell CJ, Rosenberry CM, Shaw GJ, Zemlan FP. Serum
cleaved tau does not predict postconcussion syndrome after mild
traumatic brain injury. Am J Emerg Med 2008;26:763-768.
36. Stalnacke BM, Tegner Y, Sojka P. Playing ice hockey and basketball
increases serum levels of S-100B in elite players: A pilot study. Clin
J Sport Med 2003;13:292-302.
37. Stalnacke BM, Tegner Y, Sojka P. Playing soccer increases serum
concentrations of the biochemical markers of brain damage S-100B
and neuron-speciﬁc enolase in elite players: A pilot study. Brain Inj
2004;18:899-909.
38. Townend W, Ingebrigtsen T. Head injury outcome prediction: A role
for protein S-100B? Injury 2006;37:1098-1108.
39. Boutin D, Lassonde M, Robert M, Vanassing P, Ellemberg D. Neuro-
physiological assessment prior to and following sports-related con-
cussion during childhood: A case study. Neurocase 2008;14:239-
248.
40. De Beaumont L, Brisson B, Lassonde M, Jolicoeur P. Long-term
electrophysiological changes in athletes with a history of multiple
concussions. Brain Inj 2007;21:631-644.
41. De Beaumont L, Lassonde M, Leclerc S, Theoret H. Long-term and
cumulative effects of sports concussion on motor cortex inhibition.
Neurosurgery 2007;61:329-336; discussion 36-37.
42. Gaetz M, Weinberg H. Electrophysiological indices of persistent post-
concussion symptoms. Brain Inj 2000;14:815-832.
43. Gosselin N, Theriault M, Leclerc S, Montplaisir J, Lassonde M.
Neurophysiological anomalies in symptomatic and asymptomatic
concussed athletes. Neurosurgery 2006;58:1151-1161; discussion
1161.
44. Lavoie ME, Dupuis F, Johnston KM, Leclerc S, Lassonde M. Visual
p300 effects beyond symptoms in concussed college athletes. J Clin
Exp Neuropsychol 2004;26:55-73.
45. Rousseff RT, Tzvetanov P, Atanassova PA, Volkov I, Hristova I. Cor-
relation between cognitive P300 changes and the grade of closed head
injury. Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol 2006;46:275-277.
46. Collie A, Darby D, Maruff P. Computerised cognitive assessment of
athletes with sports related head injury. Br J Sports Med 2001;35:297-
302.
47. Collie A, Maruff P. Computerised neuropsychological testing. Br J
Sports Med 2003;37:2-3.
48. Collie A, Maruff P, McStephen M, Darby DG. Psychometric issues
associated with computerised neuropsychological assessment of con-
cussed athletes. Br J Sports Med 2003;37:556-559.
49. Collins MW, Grindel SH, Lovell MR, et al. Relationship between
concussion and neuropsychological performance in college football
players [see comments]. JAMA 1999;282:964-970.
50. Lovell MR. The relevance of neuropsychologic testing for sports-
related head injuries. Curr Sports Med Rep 2002;1:7-11.
51. Lovell MR, Collins MW. Neuropsychological assessment of the college
football player. J Head Trauma Rehabil 1998;13:9-26.
52. Bleiberg J, Cernich AN, Cameron K, et al. Duration of cognitive
impairment after sports concussion. Neurosurgery 2004;54:1073-
1078; discussion 8-80.
53. Bleiberg J, Warden D. Duration of cognitive impairment after sports
concussion. Neurosurgery 2005;56:E1166.
54. Broglio SP, Macciocchi SN, Ferrara MS. Neurocognitive performance
of concussed athletes when symptom free. J Athl Train 2007;42:504-
508.
55. Broglio SP, Macciocchi SN, Ferrara MS. Sensitivity of the concus-
sion assessment battery. Neurosurgery 2007;60:1050-1057; dis-
cussion 7-8.
56. Gioia G, Janusz J, Gilstein K, Iverson GL. Neuropsychological man-
agement of consussion in children and adolescents: Effects of age and
gender on ImPact. [abstract]. Br J Sp Med 2004;38:657.
57. McCrory P, Collie A, Anderson V, Davis G. Can we manage sport
related concussion in children the same as in adults? Br J Sports Med
2004;38:516-519.
58. Johnston K, Bloom G, Ramsay J, et al. Current Concepts in Concus-
sion Rehabilitation. Curr Sports Med Rep 2004;3:316-323.
59. Guskiewicz KM, McCrea M, Marshall SW, et al. Cumulative effects
associated with recurrent concussion in collegiate football players.
JAMA 2003;290:2549-2555.
60. Lovell M, Collins M, Bradley J. Return to play following sports-related
concussion. Clin Sports Med 2004;23:421-441, ix.
61. Collins M, Field M, Lovell M, GI, et al. Relationship between postcon-
cussion headache and neuropsychological test performance in high
school athletes. Am J Sports Med 2003;31:168-173.
62. Collins M, Grindel S, Lovell M, et al. Relationship between concussion
and neuropsychological performance in college football players.
JAMA 1999;282:964-970.
63. Collins MW, Lovell MR, Iverson GL, Cantu RC, Maroon JC, Field M.
Cumulative effects of concussion in high school athletes. Neurosur-
gery 2002;51:1175-1179; discussion 80-1.
266
McCrory et al
ZURICH CONSENSUS STATEMENT ON CONCUSSION IN SPORT

----- Page 13 (native) -----
64. McCrea M, Guskiewicz KM, Marshall SW, et al. Acute effects and
recovery time following concussion in collegiate football players.
JAMA 2003;290:2556-2563.
65. McCrea M, Hammeke T, Olsen G, Leo P, Guskiewicz K. Unreported
concussion in high school football players: Implications for preven-
tion. Clin J Sport Med 2004;14:13-17.
66. Bloom G, Horton A, McCrory P, Johnston K. Sport psychology and
concussion: New impacts to explore. Br J Sports Med 2004;38:519-
521.
67. Weiss MR, Gill DL. What goes around comes around: Re-emerging
themes in sport and exercise psychology. Res Q Exerc Sport 2005;
76(Suppl):S71-S87.
68. McCrory P. Should we treat concussion pharmacologically? The need
for evidence based pharmacological treatment for the concussed ath-
lete. Br J Sports Med 2002;36:3-5.
69. McCrory P. Preparticipation assessment for head injury. Clin J Sport
Med 2004;14:139-144.
70. Johnston KM, Lassonde M, Ptito A. A contemporary neurosurgical
approach to sport-related head injury: The McGill Concussion Proto-
col. J Am Coll Surg 2001;192:515-524.
71. Delaney J, Lacroix V, Leclerc S, Johnston K. Concussions during
the 1997 Canadian Football League Season. Clin J Sport Med
2000;10:9-14.
72. Delaney J, Lacroix V, Leclerc S, Johnston K. Concussions among
university football and soccer players. Clin J Sport Med 2002;12:331-
338.
73. Gessel LM, Fields SK, Collins CL, Dick RW, Comstock RD. Concus-
sions among United States high school and collegiate athletes. J Athl
Train 2007;42:495-503.
74. Dvorak J, Junge A, Fuller C, McCrory P. Medical issues in women’s
football. Br J Sports Med 2007;41(Suppl 1):i1.
75. Dvorak J, McCrory P, Kirkendall DT. Head injuries in the female
football player: Incidence, mechanisms, risk factors and management.
Br J Sports Med 2007;41 (Suppl 1): i44-i46.
76. Jennett B, Bond M. Assessment of outcome after severe brain damage:
A practical scale. Lancet 1975;1:480-484.
77. Leninger B, Gramling S, Farrell A, Kreutzer J, Peck E. Neuropsycho-
logical deﬁcits in symptomatic minor head injury patients after con-
cussion and mild concussion. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1990;
53:293-296.
78. Lovell M, Iverson G, Collins M, McKeag D, Maroon J. Does loss of
consciousness predict neuropsychological decrements after concus-
sion. Clin J Sport Med 1999;9:193-199.
79. McCrea M, Kelly J, Randolph C, Cisler R, Berger L. Immediate
neurocognitive effects of concussion. Neurosurgery 2002;50:1032-
1042.
80. Cantu RC. Posttraumatic retrograde and anterograde amnesia: Patho-
physiology and implications in grading and safe return to play. J Athl
Train 2001;36:244-248.
81. Lovell MR, Collins MW, Iverson GL, et al. Recovery from mild
concussion in high school atheltes. J Neurosurg 2003;98:296-301.
82. McCrory PR, Ariens T, Berkovic SF. The nature and duration of acute
concussive symptoms in Australian football. Clin J Sport Med 2000;
10:235-238.
83. Yarnell P, Lynch S. The ‘ding’: amnestic state in football trauma.
Neurology 1973;23:196-197.
84. Yarnell PR, Lynch S. Retrograde memory immediately after concus-
sion. Lancet 1970;I:863-864.
85. McCrory PR, Berkovic SF. Video analysis of acute motor and convul-
sive manifestations in sport-related concussion. Neurology 2000;54:
1488-1491.
86. McCrory PR, Bladin PF, Berkovic SF. Retrospective study of con-
cussive convulsions in elite Australian rules and rugby league
footballers: Phenomenology, aetiology, and outcome. BMJ 1997;
314:171-174.
87. Fleminger S. Long-term psychiatric disorders after traumatic brain
injury. Eur J Anaesthesiol Suppl 2008;42:123-130.
88. Chen JK, Johnston KM, Petrides M, Ptito A. Neural substrates of
symptoms of depression following concussion in male athletes with
persisting postconcussion symptoms. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2008;65:
81-89.
89. Bryant RA. Disentangling mild traumatic brain injury and stress
reactions. N Engl J Med 2008;358:525-527.
90. Vanderploeg RD, Curtiss G, Luis CA, Salazar AM. Long-term morbid-
ities following self-reported mild traumatic brain injury. J Clin Exp
Neuropsychol 2007;29:585-598.
91. Guskiewicz KM, Marshall SW, Bailes J, et al. Recurrent concussion
and risk of depression in retired professional football players. Med Sci
Sports Exerc 2007;39:903-909.
92. Kashluba S, Casey JE, Paniak C. Evaluating the utility of ICD-10
diagnostic criteria for postconcussion syndrome following mild
traumatic brain injury. J Int Neuropsychol Soc 2006;12:111-118.
93. Iverson GL. Misdiagnosis of the persistent postconcussion syndrome
in patients with depression. Arch Clin Neuropsychol 2006;21:303-
310.
94. Chamelian L, Feinstein A. The effect of major depression on subjective
and objective cognitive deﬁcits in mild to moderate traumatic brain
injury. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 2006;18:33-38.
95. Mooney G, Speed J, Sheppard S. Factors related to recovery after mild
traumatic brain injury. Brain Inj 2005;19:975-987.
96. Broshek DK, Freeman JR. Psychiatric and neuropsychological issues
in sport medicine. Clin Sports Med 2005;24:663-679,x.
97. Pellman EJ. Background on the National Football League’s research
on concussion in professional football. Neurosurgery 2003;53:
797-798.
98. Purcell L, Carson J. Sport-related concussion in pediatric athletes.
Clin Pediatr (Phila) 2008;47:106-113.
99. Lee LK. Controversies in the sequelae of pediatric mild traumatic
brain injury. Pediatr Emerg Care 2007;23:580-583; quiz 4-6.
100. Schnadower D, Vazquez H, Lee J, Dayan P, Roskind CG. Controver-
sies in the evaluation and management of minor blunt head trauma in
children. Curr Opin Pediatr 2007;19:258-264.
101. Wozniak JR, Krach L, Ward E, et al. Neurocognitive and neuroim-
aging correlates of pediatric traumatic brain injury: A diffusion
tensor imaging (DTI) study. Arch Clin Neuropsychol 2007;22:
555-568.
102. Hayden MG, Jandial R, Duenas HA, Mahajan R, Levy M. Pediatric
concussions in sports; a simple and rapid assessment tool for
concussive injury in children and adults. Childs Nerv Syst 2007;
23:431-435.
103. Lee MA. Adolescent concussions—Management recommendations: A
practical approach. Conn Med 2006;70:377-380.
104. Kirkwood MW, Yeates KO, Wilson PE. Pediatric sport-related con-
cussion: A review of the clinical management of an oft-neglected
population. Pediatrics 2006;117:1359-1371.
105. Guskiewicz KM, Marshall SW, Bailes J, et al. Association between
recurrent concussion and late-life cognitive impairment in retired
professional football players. Neurosurgery 2005;57:719-726; dis-
cussion 726.
106. Nandoe RD, Scheltens P, Eikelenboom P. Head trauma and Alzhei-
mer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis 2002;4:303-308.
107. Stern MB. Head trauma as a risk factor for Parkinson’s disease. Mov
Disord 1991;6:95-97.
108. Omalu BI, DeKosky ST, Hamilton RL, et al. Chronic traumatic en-
cephalopathy in a national football league player: Part II. Neurosur-
gery 2006;59:1086-1092; discussion 92-3.
109. Omalu BI, DeKosky ST, Minster RL, Kamboh MI, Hamilton RL,
Wecht CH. Chronic traumatic encephalopathy in a National Foot-
ball League player. Neurosurgery 2005;57:128-134; discussion
134.
267
PM&R
Vol. 5, Iss. 4, 2013

----- Page 14 (native) -----
110. McKee AC, Cantu RC, Nowinski CJ, et al. Chronic traumatic enceph-
alopathy in athletes: Progressive tauopathy after repetitive head in-
jury. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2009;68:709-735.
111. McKee AC, Gavett BE, Stern RA, et al. TDP-43 Proteinopathy and
motor neuron disease in chronic traumatic encephalopathy. J Neuro-
pathol Exp Neurol 2010;69;918-929.
112. McKee AC, Stein TD, Nowinski CJ, et al. The spectrum of disease in
chronic traumatic encephalopathy. Brain 2013;136:43-64.
113. McCrory P. Sports concussion and the risk of chronic neurological
impairment. Clin J Sport Med 2011;21:6-12.
114. McCrory P. Future advances and areas of future focus in the treatment
of sport-related concussion. Clin Sports Med 2011;30:201-208, xi-ii.
115. Hagel BE, Pless IB, Goulet C, Platt RW, Robitaille Y. Effectiveness of
helmets in skiers and snowboarders: Case-control and case crossover
study. BMJ 2005;330:281.
116. McCrory P. The role of helmets in skiing and snowboarding. Br J
Sports Med 2002;36:314.
117. Mueller BA, Cummings P, Rivara FP, Brooks MA, Terasaki RD.
Injuries of the head, face, and neck in relation to ski helmet use.
Epidemiology 2008;19:270-276.
118. Sulheim S, Holme I, Ekeland A, Bahr R. Helmet use and risk of head
injuries in alpine skiers and snowboarders. JAMA 2006;295:919-924.
119. DelaneyJS,Al-KashmiriA,DrummondR,CorreaJA.Theeffectofprotective
headgear on head injuries and concussions in adolescent football (soccer)
players. Br J Sports Med 2008;42:110-115; discussion 5.
120. Viano DC, Pellman EJ, Withnall C, Shewchenko N. Concussion in
professional football: Performance of newer helmets in reconstructed
game impacts—Part 13. Neurosurgery 2006;59:591-606; discussion
591-606.
121. Finch C, Braham R, McIntosh A, McCrory P, Wolfe R. Should football
players wear custom ﬁtted mouthguards? Results from a group ran-
domised controlled trial. Inj Prev 2005;11:242-246.
122. McIntoshA,McCroryP.Thedynamicsofconcussiveheadimpactsinrugby
and Australian rules football. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2000;32:1980-1985.
123. McIntosh A, McCrory P. Impact energy attenuation performance of
football headgear. Br J Sports Med 2000;34:337-342.
124. McIntosh A, McCrory P. Effectiveness of headgear in a pilot study of
under 15 rugby union football. Br J Sports Med 2001;35:167-170.
125. McIntosh A, McCrory P, FInch C, Best J, Chalmers D. Rugby Head-
gear Study. J Sci Med Sport 2003;6:355-358.
126. Finch C, Newstead S, Cameron M, Vulcan A. Head injury reductions
in Victoria two years after the introduction of mandatory bicycle
helmet use. Report no. 51, July, 1993. Melbourne, Australia: Monash
University Accident Research Centre; 1993.
127. Curnow WJ. Bicycle helmets and public health in Australia. Health
Promot J Austr 2008;19:10-15.
128. Hewson PJ. Cycle helmets and road casualties in the UK. Trafﬁc Inj
Prev 2005;6:127-134.
129. Davidson JA. Epidemiology and outcome of bicycle injuries present-
ing to an emergency department in the United Kingdom. Eur J Emerg
Med 2005;12:24-29.
130. Hansen KS, Engesaeter LB, Viste A. Protective effect of different types
of bicycle helmets. Trafﬁc Inj Prev 2003;4:285-290.
131. Andersen T, Arnason A, Engebretsen L, Bahr R. Mechanism of head
injuries in elite football. Br J Sports Med 2004;38:690-696.
132. Hagel B, Meewisse W. Editorial: Risk compensation: A “Side effect” of
sport injury prevention? Clin J Sport Med. 2004;14:193-196.
133. Finch C, Mcintosh AS, McCrory P, Zazryn T. A pilot study of the
attitudes of Australian Rules footballers towards protective headgear.
J Sci Med Sport 2003;6:505-511.
134. Finch CF, McIntosh AS, McCrory P. What do under 15 year old
schoolboy rugby union players think about protective headgear? Br J
Sports Med 2001;35:89-94.
135. Finch C, Mcintosh AS, McCrory P. What is the evidence base for the
use of protective headgear and mouthguards in Australian football.
Sport Health 2000;18:35-38.
136. Reece RM, Sege R. Childhood head injuries: Accidental or inﬂicted?
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2000;154:11-15.
137. Shaw NH. Bodychecking in hockey. CMAJ 2004;170:15-16; author
reply 6, 8.
138. Denke NJ. Brain injury in sports. J Emerg Nurs 2008;34:363-
364.
139. Gianotti S, Hume PA. Concussion sideline management intervention
for rugby union leads to reduced concussion claims. NeuroRehabili-
tation 2007;22:181-189.
140. Guilmette TJ, Malia LA, McQuiggan MD. Concussion understanding
and management among New England high school football coaches.
Brain Inj 2007;21:1039-1047.
141. Hootman JM, Dick R, Agel J. Epidemiology of collegiate injuries for 15
sports: Summary and recommendations for injury prevention initia-
tives. J Athl Train 2007;42:311-319.
142. Valovich McLeod TC, Schwartz C, Bay RC. Sport-related concussion
misunderstandings among youth coaches. Clin J Sport Med 2007;17:
140-142.
143. Sye G, Sullivan SJ, McCrory P. High school rugby players’ under-
standing of concussion and return to play guidelines. Br J Sports Med
2006;40:1003-1005.
144. Theye F, Mueller KA. “Heads up”: Concussions in high school sports.
Clin Med Res 2004;2:165-171.
145. Kashluba S, Paniak C, Blake T, Reynolds S, Toller-Lobe G, Nagy J. A
longitudinal, controlled study of patient complaints following treated
mild traumatic brain injury. Arch Clin Neuropsychol 2004;19:805-
816.
146. Gabbe B, Finch CF, Wajswelner H, Bennell K. Does community-level
Australian football support injury prevention research? J Sci Med
Sport 2003;6:231-236.
147. Kaut KP, DePompei R, Kerr J, Congeni J. Reports of head injury and
symptom knowledge among college athletes: Implications for assess-
ment and educational intervention. Clin J Sport Med 2003;13:213-
221.
148. Davidhizar R, Cramer C. “The best thing about the hospitalization was
that the nurses kept me well informed” Issues and strategies of client
education. Accid Emerg Nurs 2002;10:149-154.
149. McCrory P. What advice should we give to athletes postconcussion?
Br J Sports Med 2002;36:316-318.
150. Bazarian JJ, Veenema T, Brayer AF, Lee E. Knowledge of concussion
guidelines among practitioners caring for children. Clin Pediatr
(Phila) 2001;40:207-212.
151. Guskiewicz KM, Weaver NL, Padua DA, Garrett WE Jr. Epidemiology
of concussion in collegiate and high school football players. Am J
Sports Med 2000;28:643-650.
152. McCrea M, Guskiewicz KM, Marshall SW, et al. Acute effects and
recovery time following concussion in collegiate football players: The
NCAA Concussion Study. JAMA 2003;290:2556-2563.
153. Macciocchi SN, Barth JT, Alves W, Rimel RW, Jane JA. Neuropsycho-
logical functioning and recovery after mild head injury in collegiate
athletes. Neurosurgery 1996;39:510-514.
154. Meehan WP III, d’Hemecourt P, Comstock RD. High school concus-
sions in the 2008-2009 academic year: Mechanism, symptoms, and
management. Am J Sports Med 2010;38:2405-2409.
155. Eckner JT, Kutcher JS, Richardson JK. Between-seasons test-retest reliability
of clinically measured reaction time in National Collegiate Athletic Associa-
tion Division I athletes. J Athl Train 2011;46:409-414.
156. Eckner JT, Richardson JK, Kim H, Lipps DB, Ashton-Miller JA. A
novel clinical test of recognition reaction time in healthy adults.
Psychol Assess 2012;24:249-254.
268
McCrory et al
ZURICH CONSENSUS STATEMENT ON CONCUSSION IN SPORT

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Footnotes Continued From Page 255.
Writing Group
P.M. Associate Professor, The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Heidel-
berg, Australia. Address correspondence to: P.M.; e-mail:
Author afﬁliations can be found on page 269.
Disclosure: co-investigator, collaborator, consultant on grants relating to mild TBI
funded by several governmental organizations; co-chair, Australian Centre for Research
into Sports Injury and its Prevention, one of the International Research Centres for
Prevention of Injury and Protection of Athlete Health supported by the International
Olympic Committee; clinical and consulting practice in general and sports neurology;
receives book royalties, McGraw-Hill; employed in an editorial capacity, British Medical
Journal Publishing Group, 2001-2008; reimbursed by the government, professional
scientiﬁc bodies, and sporting bodies for presenting research relating to mild TBI and
sport-related concussion at meetings, scientiﬁc conferences, and symposiums; received
consultancy fees, 2010, Axon Sports (US) for development of educational material
(which was not renewed); received research funding since 2005, CogState Inc.;
cofounder and shareholder in 2 biomedical companies (involved in eHealth and
Compression garment technologies) but does not hold any individual shares in any
company related to concussion or brain injury assessment or technology. He did not
receive any form of ﬁnancial support directly related to this manuscript.
W.H.M. Professor and Co-chair, Sport Injury Prevention Research Centre, Faculty of
Kinesiology and Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
Disclosure: received research grant support, University of Calgary from the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research, Alberta Innovates Health Solutions, the International
Football Association (FIFA), Alberta Children’s Hospital Research Institute, and the
Hotchkiss Brain Institute; co-chair, Sport Injury Prevention Research Centre, one of the
International Research Centres for Prevention of Injury and Protection of Athlete Health
supported by the International Olympic Committee; clinical and consulting practice in
sport medicine, University of Calgary Sport Medicine Centre, focus on sport related
concussion; received travel funding, FIFA and the Medical Commission of the IOC;
editor-in-chief, 1998-2012, Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine and received editorial
support funding, Lippincott-Wolters Kluwer; receives compensation as a medical
consultant, National Hockey League; may receive royalty, BKIN Technologies; share-
holder, Safebrain Canada and PrivIT Healthcare. He did not receive any form of ﬁnancial
support directly related to this manuscript.
M.A. Chief Medical Ofﬁcer, International Ice Hockey Federation, Switzerland; Member of the IOC
Medical Commission Games Group; Co-director, Ottawa Sport Medicine Centre, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada
Disclosure: receives travel funding, IIHF and IOC Medical Commission Games Group for
meetings, IIHF Championships, and Olympic Games. He did not receive any form of
ﬁnancial support directly related to this manuscript.
R.C.C. Clinical Professor, Neurosurgery and Co-director, Center for the Study of
Traumatic Encephalopathy, Boston University Medical Center, Boston, MA
Disclosure: vice president, National Operating Committee on Standards for Athletic
Equipment; co-founder and chairman medical director, Sports Legacy , Waltham, MA,
USA; senior advisor, NFL’s Head, Neck and Spine Committee; expert witness, trial
testimony. He did not receive any form of ﬁnancial support directly related to this
manuscript.
J.D. Professor of Neurology, University of Zurich; Senior Consultant, Schulthess Clinic Zurich,
Switzerland; Chairman F-MARC (FIFA Medical Assessment and Research Center) Zurich Switzer-
land
Disclosure: received compensation, chief medical ofﬁcer, FIFA. No other compensations
or grants have been received. He did not receive any form of ﬁnancial support directly
related to this manuscript.
R.J.E. Psychological and Neurobehavioral Associates, Inc, State College, PA, USA;
Adjunct Associate Professor of Psychology, University of Missouri, Kansas City, MO, USA
Disclosure: receives ﬁnancial compensation, consultant, National Hockey League,
Major League Soccer, and the U.S. Soccer Federation; receives ﬁnancial compensation,
consultant, Princeton University; served as PI or co-PI on grants, NOCSAE, AMSSM, and
the New Jersey Commission on Brain Injury Research; maintains a private practice
focused on clinical neuropsychology, sports neuropsychology, and forensic applica-
tions of neuropsychology. He did not receive any form of ﬁnancial support directly related
to this manuscript.
L.E. Professor, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Oslo University Hospital and Faculty
of Medicine, University of Oslo, Norway; Co-chair, Oslo Sports Trauma Research Center,
Oslo, Norway; Head, Scientiﬁc Activities, International Olympic Committee (IOC),
Lausanne Switzerland
Disclosure: received research grant support, University of Oslo from the Norwegian
Institutes of Health Research, The Health South East, the International Football
Association; co-chair, Sport Injury Prevention Research Centre, one of the International
Research Centres for Prevention of Injury and Protection of Athlete Health supported by
the International Olympic Committeel; professor and chair, Oslo University Orthopedic
department; 2008-present, editor-in-chief, BJSM IPHP; January 2012-present, co-
editor, The Journal of Bone and Joints. He did not receive any form of ﬁnancial support
directly related to this manuscript.
K.M.J. Neurosurgeon, Division of Neurosurgery, University of Toronto; Concussion
Management Program, Athletic Edge Sports Medicine, Toronto, Canada
Disclosure: neurosurgeon subspecialized in brain trauma; clinical and research focus in
sport concussion; received research funding through the CIHR, ONF, and Innovation
Fund, American College of Surgeons, McGill University, Pashby Sport Safety Fund, and
Think First Canada; independent consultant, many sport organizations. She has never
had a formal reimbursed afﬁliation with any sport team or sport governing body. She did
not receive any form of ﬁnancial support directly related to this manuscript.
J.S.K. Associate Professor and Director, Michigan NeuroSport, Department of Neurol-
ogy, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Disclosure: director, Michigan NeuroSport, University of Michigan’s academic sports
neurology program; received research grant support, National Collegiate Athletic
Association and ElMindA, Ltd.; director, National Basketball Association’s Concussion
Program; paid consultant, National Hockey League Players’ Association; current
member, National Football League Players’ Association’s Mackey-White TBI Committee;
consulting neurologist, United States Ski and Snowboard Association; founding member
and the ﬁrst chairperson, Sports Neurology Section of the American Academy of
Neurology. He did not receive any form of ﬁnancial support directly related to this
manuscript.
M.R. Chief Medical Ofﬁcer, International Rugby Board, Dublin, Ireland
Disclosure: nothing to disclose
A.S. Associate Professor, Neurosurgery, Orthopaedic Surgery and Rehabilitation; Van-
derbilt Sports Concussion Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN,
USA
Disclosure: medical board, received travel funding, Federation Equestrian Internationale;
unpaid neurosurgical consultant, US Equestrian Foundation, the Southeastern Confer-
ence Working Group on Concussion, and Nashville Predators (NHL) hockey team;
clinical practice in neurosurgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, with a focus on
neurological problems in athletes. He did not receive any form of ﬁnancial support
directly related to this manuscript.
B.W.B. Adjunct Research Assistant Professor, Department of Clinical Neurosciences,
Faculty of Medicine; Clinical Assistant Professor, Department of Family Medicine, Sport
Medicine Centre, Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada
Disclosure: clinical and consulting practice, sport medicine, University of Calgary Sport
Medicine Centre with a focus on sport-related concussion; director, Sport Concussion
Clinic at the University of Calgary Sport Medicine Centre; may receive royalty from BKIN
Technologies. He did not receive any form of ﬁnancial support directly related to this
manuscript.
G.A.D. Department of Neurosurgery, Austin and Cabrini Hospitals and The Florey
Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
Disclosure: received travel funding, FIFA. He did not receive any form of ﬁnancial support
directly related to this manuscript.
R.E. Professor and Chairman, Theodore S. Roberts Endowed Chair, Department of
Neurological Surgery, University of Washington Seattle, WA. USA; Cochair, NFL Head,
Neck and Spine Medical Committee
Disclosure: nothing to disclose
K.M.G. Kenan Distinguished Professor and Chair, Department of Exercise and Sport
Science; Co-director, Matthew Gfeller Sport-Related Traumatic Brain Injury Research
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
Disclosure: serves on NCAA’s Health and Safety Advisory Committee for Concussion,
NFL’s Head Neck and Spine Committee, and NFLPA’s Mackey-White Committee;
received funding for travel and honoraria for lectures on sports concussion for
professional organizations, including the IOC and FIFA; expert testimony, traumatic brain
269
PM&R
Vol. 5, Iss. 4, 2013

----- Page 16 (native) -----
injury/concussion cases; received research funding, National Institutes of Health,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Operating Committee for Standards
in Athletic Equipment, National Collegiate Athletic Association, NFL Charities, NFL
Players’ Association, USA Hockey, and National Athletic Trainers’ Association. He did not
receive any form of ﬁnancial support directly related to this manuscript.
S.A.H. Clinical Professor, Departments of Rehabilitation Medicine, Orthopaedics, and
Sports Medicine and Neurological Surgery, University of Washington; Co-Medical
Director, Seattle Sports Concussion Program; Team Physician, Seattle Seahawks and
Seattle Mariners, Seattle, WA, USA
Disclosure: member, National Football League Head, Neck and Spine Committee;
member, Football and Wellness Committee USA Football; member, Medical Advisory
Board Pop Warner Football; chair, Medical Advisory Board X2IMPACT, a non-ﬁnancial
position; clinical and consulting practice, Harborview Medical Center focusing on the
diagnosis and management of neurological and musculoskeletal injuries with particular
interest in spinal disorders in active people and athletes and sports-related concussions.
No form of ﬁnancial support directly related to this manuscript was received.
G.L.I. Neuropsychology Outcome Assessment Laboratory; Professor, Department of
Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Disclosure: reimbursed by government, professional scientiﬁc bodies, and commercial
organizations for discussing or presenting research relating to mild TBI and sport-related
concussion at meetings, scientiﬁc conferences, and symposiums; clinical and consult-
ing practice in forensic neuropsychology involving individuals who have sustained mild
TBIs (including professional athletes); received research funding from several test
publishing companies, including ImPACT Applications, Inc., CNS Vital Signs, and
Psychological Assessment Resources (PAR, Inc.). He did not receive any form of
ﬁnancial support directly related to this manuscript.
B.D.J. Associate Professor, Clinical Neurology at Weill Medical College of Cornell
University. New York, NY, USA; Assistant Medical Director, Burke Rehabilitation Hospital,
White Plains, NY, USA; Chief Medical Ofﬁcer, New York State Athletic Commission, New
York, NY, USA
Disclosure: ﬁnancial compensation, National Football League (NFL) Beneﬁts Associa-
tion for the establishment of Neurocognitive Disability Beneﬁt for retired players; ﬁnancial
compensation, Innovative CEUs, developing a medical-based high school coaching
education program; as the CMO of New York State Athletic Commission, is a governor’s
appointed public ofﬁcer of the State of New York; maintains an inpatient and outpatient
clinical practice, Burke Rehabilitation Hospital specializing in traumatic brain injury,
dementia, and sports neurology; National Football League Players Association Mackey-
White Traumatic Brain Injury Committee. Dr. Jordan did not receive any ﬁnancial support
related to this manuscript.
J.K. Sport Medicine Physician, Ottawa Sport Medicine Centre, Ottawa, Canada; Clinical
Lecturer, Department of Family Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada; Team
Physician, Canadian National Men’s Sledge Hockey Team
Disclosure: clinical and consulting practice in sport and exercise medicine, Ottawa Sport
Medicine Centre. He did not receive any form of ﬁnancial support directly related to this
manuscript.
M. McCrea Professor and Director, Brain Injury Research, Departments of Neurosurgery
and Neurology, Medical College of Wisconsin, WI, USA
Disclosure: funded, United States Department of Defense, U.S. Defense Veterans Brain
Injury Center, NFL Charities, National Collegiate Athletic Association, National Operating
Committee on Standards for Athletic Equipment, National Federation of High School
Associations, and other funding organizations (past decade); member, NFL Head, Neck
and Spine Committee; served on several U.S. national panels for scientiﬁc review and
policy making relevant to sport-related concussion; funded by BrainScope, Inc. for prior
studies, but receives no direct compensation from BrainScope or other industry
entities/sports organizations; co-author, Standardized Assessment of Concussion (re-
ceives no ﬁnancial compensation or support from publication or distribution of the SAC);
PI on a study by the U.S. Department of Defense comparing several computerized
neurocognitive assessment tools for the assessment of sport-related concussion. He did
not receive any form of ﬁnancial support directly related to this manuscript.
A.S.M. Adjunct Associate Professor, Australian Centre for Research into Injury in Sports
and its Prevention, Monash Injury Research Institute, Monash University; Adjunct
Associate Professor, Transport and Road Safety Research, Faculty of Science, the
University of New South Wales; Director, McIntosh Consultancy and Research Pty Ltd.,
Sydney, Australia
Disclosure: self-employed consultant; has received grant support through UNSW from
the Australian Research Council, NSW Racing, the IRB, the ARU, and the AFL; consultant,
sport and sports injury, including the Australian Racing Board, McLaren F1, the IRB, and
Albion; received travel funding, International Rugby Board, IIHF, FIFA, the Medical
Commission of the IOC. He did not receive any form of ﬁnancial support directly related
to this manuscript.
D.L.M. Barrister and Solicitor, Perry Maddocks Trollope Lawyers, Melbourne, Australia.
Neuropsychologist in private practice
Disclosure: received research grant support, Australian Football League (AFL); provides
consultancy medico-legal advice, AFL; received travel funding, FIFA. He did not receive
any form of ﬁnancial support directly related to this manuscript.
M. Makdissi Research Fellow, The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health,
Melbourne Brain Centre, Austin Campus, Melbourne, Australia; Research Fellow, Centre
for Health Exercise and Sports Medicine, Melbourne Physiotherapy Department, Univer-
sity of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
Disclosure: received research grant support, The Florey Institute of Neurosciences and
Mental Health from the National Health and Medical Research Council, the Australian
Football League, and AFL Medical Ofﬁcers Association; received travel funding, FIFA;
clinical and consulting practice in sports medicine. He did not receive any form of
ﬁnancial support directly related to this manuscript.
L.P. Associate Clinical Professor, Department of Pediatrics, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada; Pediatric Sport Medicine Physician, David Braley Sport
Medicine and Rehabilitation Centre, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada;
President, Paediatric Sport and Exercise Medicine Section, CPS
Disclosure: nothing to disclose
M.P. Director of Athletic Medicine, Head Team Physician, Princeton University; Associ-
ate Clinical Professor, Robert Wood Johnson, University of Medicine and Dentistry of
New Jersey (UMDNJ), NJ, USA
Disclosure: received research grant support, New Jersey Commission on Brain Injury,
the American Medical Society for Sports Medicine, and the National Operating Committee
on Standards for Athletic Equipment; chair, US Lacrosse Sports Science & Safety
Committee; serves on the National Football League Head Neck and Spine Committee,
chairing the Return to Play subcommittee, NFL; team physician, Princeton University;
team physician, US Men’s National Lacrosse Team and US Soccer; consultant,
concussion, Center for Disease Controls and National Collegiate Athletic Association;
past president, AMSSM; president, AMSSM Foundation. Dr. Putukian does not receive
any ﬁnancial compensation for her work with the AMSSM, NFL, US Lacrosse, CDC or
NCAA. She did not receive any form of ﬁnancial support directly related to this
manuscript.
K.S. Sport Injury Prevention Research Centre, Faculty of Kinesiology, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada
Disclosure: research grant support, University of Calgary from the Alberta Centre for
Child, Family and Community Research; clinical and consulting practice in physiother-
apy, Evidence Sport and Spinal and Centric Health with a focus on sport related
concussion. She did not receive any form of ﬁnancial support directly related to this
manuscript.
C.H.T. Professor of Neurosurgery, Toronto Western Hospital and University of Toronto,
Canada; Senior Scientist, Krembil Neuroscience Centre, Toronto, Canada; Founder,
ThinkFirst Canada; Board Member, Parachute Canada
Disclosure: consultant, ImpaKt Protective; co-chair, Concussion Awareness and Rec-
ognition Committee of the Ontario Neurotrauma Foundation, chair, ThinkFirst’s Concus-
sion Education and Awareness Committee; project director, Canadian Sports Concus-
sion Project, Krembil Neuroscience Centre; director, Ontario Concussion Centres
Consortium; received research grants, public sources including Canadian Institute for
Health Research, and Ontario Brain Institute. He did not receive any ﬁnancial support
related to this manuscript.
M.T. Chief Medical Adviser, British Horseracing Authority, London, United Kingdom
Disclosure: chief medical advisor, British Horseracing Authority, Lawn Tennis Associa-
tion; travel funding, FIFA, the IOC, the ACSM, and Gruppoforte (Physiomind), for
attending conferences and lecturing; most conferences also provided free registration
and support for accommodations. He did not receive any form of ﬁnancial support
directly related to this manuscript.
270
McCrory et al
ZURICH CONSENSUS STATEMENT ON CONCUSSION IN SPORT

----- Page 17 (native) -----
APPENDIX
271
PM&R
Vol. 5, Iss. 4, 2013

----- Page 18 (native) -----
272
McCrory et al
ZURICH CONSENSUS STATEMENT ON CONCUSSION IN SPORT

----- Page 19 (native) -----
273
PM&R
Vol. 5, Iss. 4, 2013

----- Page 20 (native) -----
274
McCrory et al
ZURICH CONSENSUS STATEMENT ON CONCUSSION IN SPORT

----- Page 21 (native) -----
275
PM&R
Vol. 5, Iss. 4, 2013

----- Page 22 (native) -----
276
McCrory et al
ZURICH CONSENSUS STATEMENT ON CONCUSSION IN SPORT

----- Page 23 (native) -----
277
PM&R
Vol. 5, Iss. 4, 2013

----- Page 24 (native) -----
278
McCrory et al
ZURICH CONSENSUS STATEMENT ON CONCUSSION IN SPORT

----- Page 25 (native) -----
279
PM&R
Vol. 5, Iss. 4, 2013